VILLAGE OF NEW RICHMOND, OHIO
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Local legislation current through Ord. 2024-11, passed 12-10-2024
State legislation current through December 31, 2024
 
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street, Ste. 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Short titles
   
10.02   Definitions
   
10.03   Rules of construction
   
10.04   Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal
   
10.05   Construction of section references
   
10.06   Conflicting provisions
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to offices
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Ordinances repealed
   
10.11   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.12   Ordinances saved
   
10.13   Application to future ordinances
   
10.14   Interpretation
   
10.15   Amendments to code; amendatory language
   
10.16   Statutory references
   
10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
   
10.18   Determination of legislative intent
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 SHORT TITLES.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the Village of New
Richmond, as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into
component codes, titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and designated
as the “Village of New Richmond Code”, for which designation “code of
ordinances”, “codified ordinances” or “code” may be substituted. Title, chapter
and section headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the
code.
(R.C. § 1.01)
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to such
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the “traffic code”. Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§
10.01". Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AND / OR. The word “and” may be read as “or”, and the word “or” may be read
as “and”, if the sense requires it.
   ANOTHER. When used to designate the owner of property which is the subject
of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other owner of
property.
   BOND. Includes an undertaking.
   CERTIFIED MAIL. Includes registered mail.
   CHILD. Includes child by adoption.
   COUNCIL. The Legislative Authority of the Village of New Richmond, Ohio.
   COUNTY. Clermont County, Ohio.
   FIRE CHIEF. Shall include the Chief of the Fire Department if a Fire
Department has been established in the municipality, and shall include the Fire
Prevention Officer if no Fire Department has been established in the
municipality.
   IMPRISONED. Shall have the same meaning as in R.C. § 1.05.
   INTERNET. The international computer network of both federal and non-federal
interoperable packet switched data networks, including the graphical subnetwork
known as the World Wide Web.
   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves or
as a servant, agent or employee.
   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes rights and easements of incorporeal nature.
   LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY. The Legislative Authority of the municipality.
   MAY. Is permissive.
   MUNICIPALITY, CITY, TOWN, VILLAGE or MUNICIPAL CORPORATION. When used in
this code, shall denote the Village of New Richmond, Ohio irrespective of its
population or legal classification.
   O.A.C. Refers to the Ohio Administrative Code.
   OATH. Includes affirmation.
   OF UNSOUND MIND. The person lacks the relevant mental capacity.
   OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner or
tenant in common of the whole or part of that property.
   PERSON. Includes an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership and association.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property except real property.
   PLAN OF SEWERAGE, SYSTEM OF SEWERAGE, SEWER, and SEWERS. Includes sewers,
sewage disposal works and treatment plants, and sewage pumping stations,
together with facilities and appurtenances necessary and proper therefor.
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates, and interests.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes boards of education; the municipal, county, state
or federal government, its officers or an agency thereof; or any duly
authorized public official.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for the
sale of merchandise, public accommodation or amusement.
   R.C. Refers to the Ohio Revised Code.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   REGISTERED MAIL. Includes certified mail.
   SHALL. Is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of the street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   STATE. The State of Ohio.
   STREET. Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways,
viaducts and all other public thoroughfares within the municipality.
   SWEAR. Includes affirm.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of the
premises, alone or with others.
   UNDERTAKING. Includes a bond.
   WEEK. Seven consecutive days.
   WHOEVER. Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners; principals,
agents and employees; and all officials, public or private.
   WRITING. Includes printing.
   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. The terms include any representation of words,
letters, symbols or figures; this provision does not affect any law relating to
signatures.
   YEAR. Twelve consecutive months.
(R.C. §§ 1.02, 1.05, 1.44, 1.59, 701.01)
§ 10.03 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Common and technical usage. Words and phrases shall be read in context
and construed according to the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and
phrases that have acquired a technical or particular meaning, whether by
legislative definition or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
(R.C. § 1.42)
   (B)   Singular and plural; gender; tenses. As used in this code, unless the
context otherwise requires:
      (1)   The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the
singular.
      (2)   Words of one gender include the other genders.
      (3)   Words in the present tense include the future tense.
(R.C. § 1.43)
   (C)   Calendar; computation of time.
      (1)   The time within which an act is required by law to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day; except that when
the last day falls on Sunday or a legal holiday, then the act may be done on
the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal holiday.
      (2)   When a public office, in which an act required by law is to be
performed, is closed to the public for the entire day that constitutes the last
day for doing the act or before its usual closing time on that day, the act may
be performed on the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal
holiday.
      (3)   As used in divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) of this section, LEGAL
HOLIDAY means the following days:
         (a)   The first day of January, known as New Year’s Day;
         (b)   The third Monday in January, known as Martin Luther King, Jr.
Day;
         (c)   The third Monday in February, known as Washington-Lincoln Day;
         (d)   The day designated in the “Act of June 28, 1968”, 82 Stat. 250,
5 U.S.C. § 6103, as amended, for the commemoration of Memorial Day;
         (e)   The nineteenth day of June, known as Juneteenth day;
         (f)   The fourth day of July, known as Independence Day;
         (g)   The first Monday in September, known as Labor Day;
         (h)   The second Monday in October, known as Columbus Day;
         (i)   The eleventh day of November, known as Veteran’s Day;
         (j)   The fourth Thursday in November, known as Thanksgiving Day;
         (k)   The twenty-fifth day of December, known as Christmas Day; and
         (l)   Any day appointed and recommended by the Governor of this state
or the President of the United States as a holiday.
      (4)   If any day designated in this section as a legal holiday falls on a
Sunday, the next succeeding day is a legal holiday.
(R.C. § 1.14)
      (5)   When an act is to take effect or become operative from and after a
day named, no part of that day shall be included. If priority of legal rights
depends upon the order of events on the same day, the priority shall be
determined by the times in the day at which they respectively occurred.
(R.C. § 1.15)
      (6)   If a number of months is to be computed by counting the months from
a particular day, the period ends on the same numerical day in the concluding
month as the day of the month from which the computation is begun, unless there
are not that many days in the concluding month, in which case the period ends
on the last day of that month.
(R.C. § 1.45)
      (7)   In all cases where the law shall require any act to be done in a
reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or notice
shall mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the
duty or compliance with the notice.
   (D)   Numbers. If there is a conflict between figures and words in
expressing a number, the words govern.
(R.C. § 1.46)
   (E)   Authority. When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as
well be done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be
construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.
   (F)   Joint authority. All words purporting to give joint authority to three
or more municipal officers or other persons shall be construed as giving that
authority to a majority of the officers or other persons, unless it shall be
otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority, or it is
inconsistent with state law or municipal charter provisions.
   (G)   Exceptions. The rules of construction shall not apply to any law which
contains any express provision excluding the construction, or when the subject
matter or context of the law is repugnant thereto.
§ 10.04 REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
   (A)   The repeal of a repealing statute does not revive the ordinance
originally repealed nor impair the effect of any saving clause therein.
(R.C. § 1.57)
   (B)   The re-enactment, amendment, or repeal of an ordinance does not,
except as provided in division (C) of this section:
      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior action
taken thereunder;
      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation or
liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded or incurred thereunder;
      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture or punishment
incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal; or
      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding or remedy in respect of any
privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment; and the
investigation, proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced,
and the penalty, forfeiture or punishment imposed, as if the ordinance had not
been repealed or amended.
   (C)   If the penalty, forfeiture or punishment for any offense is reduced by
a re-enactment or amendment of an ordinance, the penalty, forfeiture or
punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according to the ordinance
as amended.
(R.C. § 1.58)
   (D)   An ordinance which is re-enacted or amended is intended to be a
continuation of the prior ordinance and not a new enactment, so far as it is
the same as the prior ordinance.
(R.C. § 1.54)
§ 10.05 CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.
   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, or of divisions or subdivisions of a
section, the reference shall be construed to mean a violation of any provision
of the section, sections, divisions or subdivisions included in the reference.
   (B)   References in the code to action taken or authorized under designated
sections of the code include, in every case, action taken or authorized under
the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by this code.
(R.C. § 1.23)
   (C)   A reference to any portion of a provision of this code applies to all
re-enactments or amendments thereof.
(R.C. § 1.55)
   (D)   If a section refers to a series of numbers or letters, the first and
the last numbers or letters are included.
(R.C. § 1.56)
   (E)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered, unless the subject matter has been
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.06 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   (A)   If a general provision conflicts with a special or local provision,
they shall be construed, if possible, so that effect is given to both. If the
conflict between the provisions is irreconcilable, the special or local
provision prevails as an exception to the general provision, unless the general
provision is the later adoption and the manifest intent is that the general
provision prevail.
(R.C. § 1.51)
   (B)   (1)   If ordinances enacted at different meetings of the Legislative
Authority are irreconcilable, the ordinance latest in date of enactment
prevails.
      (2)   If amendments to the same ordinance are enacted at different
meetings of the Legislative Authority, one amendment without reference to
another, the amendments are to be harmonized, if possible, so that effect may
be given to each. If the amendments are substantively irreconcilable, the
latest in date of enactment prevails. The fact that a later amendment restates
language deleted by an earlier amendment, or fails to include language inserted
by an earlier amendment, does not of itself make the amendments irreconcilable.
Amendments are irreconcilable only when changes made by each cannot reasonably
be put into simultaneous operation.
(R.C. § 1.52)
   (C)   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of this code,
or between any of the provisions of this code and any standard code adopted by
the municipality pursuant to R.C. § 731.231, the provision that establishes the
higher or stricter standard shall control.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provisions of a section of this code or the application thereof to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions or applications of the section or related sections which can
be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end
the provisions are severable.
(R.C. § 1.50)
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the municipality exercising the powers, duties
or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any
words, the omission of any words necessary to express the intention of the
provisions affected, the use of words to which no meaning can be attached, or
the use of a word when another word was clearly intended to express the
intention, the spelling shall be corrected, and the words supplied, omitted or
substituted shall conform with the manifest intention, and the provision shall
have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as
originally published. No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question
exists regarding the nature or extent of the error.
§ 10.10 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   With the exception of any ordinances specifically saved by the municipality,
this code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code of
ordinances.
§ 10.11 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature, all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this code of ordinances,
and all ordinances specifically saved by the municipality shall remain in full
force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES SAVED.
   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the
legislative body, or a certain municipal officer or employee, to make
additional ordinances or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the
intention of the ordinance, all ordinances and regulations of a similar nature
serving the purpose, effected prior to the codification and not inconsistent
thereto, shall remain in effect and are saved.
§ 10.13 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.14 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.15 AMENDMENTS TO CODE; AMENDATORY LANGUAGE.
   (A)   Any chapter, section or division amended or added to this code by
ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this code may be numbered in
accordance with the numbering system of this code and need not be inserted in
this code, but shall be treated as if printed for inclusion herein.
   (B)   The following language may be used by the municipality to amend, add,
or repeal a chapter, section, or division:
      (1)   To amend a section: “Section                 of the New Richmond
Code of Ordinances is amended to read as follows: ....”
      (2)   To add a section: “Section                 of the New Richmond Code
of Ordinances, which is to be added to and amends the New Richmond Code of
Ordinances, reads as follows: ....”
      (3)   To repeal a section: “Section                 of the New Richmond
Code of Ordinances, which reads as follows, is repealed: ....”
§ 10.16 STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, located in parentheses
immediately following a division or section of this code, this indicates that
the text of the division or section is substantially equivalent to the
statutory provision.
  Example: (R.C. § 4511.02)
   (B)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference” following
the text of a section, this indicates that the reader should refer to that
statute for further information.
  Example:
§ 30.08 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
   Unless otherwise exempted by state law, all public records shall be promptly
prepared and made available for inspection to any person.
   Statutory reference:
    Public records, see R.C. § 149.43
§ 10.17 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties incurred
or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The liabilities,
proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or forfeitures
shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In
particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-way,
contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or
vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate officers shall remain
valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.
§ 10.18 DETERMINATION OF LEGISLATIVE INTENT.
   (A)   In enacting an ordinance, it is presumed that:
      (1)   Compliance with the constitutions of the State and of the United
States is intended;
      (2)   The entire ordinance is intended to be effective;
      (3)   A just and reasonable result is intended; and
      (4)   A result feasible of execution is intended.
(R.C. § 1.47)
   (B)   An ordinance is presumed to be prospective in its operation unless
expressly made retrospective.
(R.C. § 1.48)
   (C)   If an ordinance is ambiguous, the court, in determining the intention
of the Legislative Authority, may consider among other matters:
      (1)   The object sought to be attained;
      (2)   The circumstances under which the ordinance was enacted;
      (3)   The legislative history;
      (4)   The common law or former legislative provisions, including laws
upon the same or similar subjects;
      (5)   The consequences of a particular construction; and
      (6)   The administrative construction of the ordinance.
(R.C. § 1.49)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Whenever, in this municipal code or in any ordinance of the Village of
New Richmond, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an
offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the
failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is
otherwise provided, whoever violates any such provision shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding $500, a term of imprisonment not exceeding six months, or
both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which
a violation continues or occurs.
   (B)   The failure of any officer or employee of the Village of New Richmond
to perform any official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer
or employee to the penalty imposed for a violation unless a penalty is
specifically provided for the failure.
Statutory reference:
   Ordinance violations and penalties, see R.C. § 715.67
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
31.   EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY
      
32.   LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY
      
33.   JUDICIAL AUTHORITY
      
34.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
      
35.   FIRE AND EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT
      
36.   CIVIL ACTIONS AGAINST THE MUNICIPALITY
      
37.   DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
      
38.   GENERAL MUNICIPAL POLICIES
      
39.   TAXATION
      
40.   FEES AND FUNDS
CHAPTER 30: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
30.01   Application of Title III
   
30.02   Qualifications; oaths
   
30.03   Bonds of officers and employees; amount
   
30.04   Additional bond; where bonds recorded and kept
   
30.05   Approval of bonds
   
30.06   Sufficiency of form of bond
   
30.07   Filling vacancies in offices
   
30.08   Public records available
   
30.09   Records Commission
   
30.10   Meetings of public bodies to be open; exceptions; notice
   
30.11   Municipal officers may attend conference or convention; expenses
   
30.12   Residency requirements prohibited; exceptions
   
30.13   Council meetings
   
30.14   Procedures for handling public complaints
Statutory reference:
   Village accounting and financial reporting, State Auditor regulations, see
O.A.C. Chapter 117-9
§ 30.01 APPLICATION OF TITLE III.
   (A)   Title III of this code of ordinances is designed to include and
incorporate, insofar as is practical, all legislation concerning the
organization, qualifications, appointment or election, terms of office,
compensation and the powers and duties of the officials, boards and bodies of
the village. Pertinent sections of the Ohio Revised Code relative to these
village offices and boards have been assembled and adopted as a part of this
Title III. No material changes of the Ohio Revised Code sections referred to in
the legislative histories have been made. The purpose of including these
sections is to afford easy reference to the statutory provisions.
   (B)   In the interest of uniformity and consistency, all references to
“village”, as the term appears in the Ohio Revised Code, have been changed to
read “municipality” throughout this Title III. However, the provisions of this
chapter shall only apply to the administration of village local government.
§ 30.02 QUALIFICATIONS; OATHS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this section or in
another section of the Ohio Revised Code, each officer of the municipality or
of any department or board of the municipality, whether elected or appointed as
a substitute for a regular officer, shall be an elector of the municipality
and, before entering upon official duties, shall take an oath to support the
Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State and an oath
that the officer will faithfully, honestly and impartially discharge the duties
of the office to which elected or appointed. These provisions as to official
oaths shall extend to deputies, but they need not be electors.
   (B)   Neither this section nor any section of the Ohio Revised Code
requires, or shall be construed to require, that a Fire Chief be an elector of
the municipality.
(R.C. § 733.68)
§ 30.03 BONDS OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES; AMOUNT.
   Before entering upon the discharge of his or her duties, each officer and
employee, where it is required by the Legislative Authority, shall execute a
bond approved according to law in the amount set forth for his or her
respective office or position.
§ 30.04 ADDITIONAL BOND; WHERE BONDS RECORDED AND KEPT.
   Except as otherwise provided in the municipal charter or in R.C. § 3.061,
each officer required by law or ordinance to give bond shall do so before
entering upon the duties of the office. Except as otherwise provided in the
municipal charter or in R.C. § 3.061, the Legislative Authority may at any time
require each officer to give a new or additional bond. Each bond, except that
of the Auditor or Clerk, upon its approval, shall be delivered to the Auditor
or Clerk, who shall immediately record it in a record provided for that purpose
and file and carefully preserve it in the Auditor’s or Clerk’s office. The bond
of the Auditor or Clerk shall be delivered to the Treasurer, who shall in like
manner record and preserve it.
(R.C. § 733.69)
§ 30.05 APPROVAL OF BONDS.
   The official bonds of all municipal officers shall be prepared by the
Solicitor or Director of Law. Except as otherwise provided in state law, the
bonds shall be in a sum as the Legislative Authority prescribes by general or
special ordinance, and be subject to the approval of the Mayor, except that the
Mayor’s bond shall be approved by the Legislative Authority, or, if it is not
legally organized, by the Clerk of the Court of Common Pleas of the county in
which the municipality or the larger part thereof is situated.
(R.C. § 733.70)
§ 30.06 SUFFICIENCY OF FORM OF BOND.
   In each bond mentioned in §
30.05, the condition that the person elected or appointed shall faithfully
perform the duties of the office shall be sufficient. The fact that the
instrument is without a seal, that blanks for the date or amount have been
filled subsequent to its execution but before its acceptance, without the
consent of the sureties, that all the obligees named in the instrument have not
signed it, that new duties have been imposed on the officers or that any merely
formal objection exists shall not be available in any suit on the instrument.
(R.C. § 733.71)
§ 30.07 FILLING VACANCIES IN OFFICES.
   Unless otherwise provided by law, vacancies arising in appointive and
elective offices of the municipality shall be filled by appointment by the
Mayor for the remainder of the unexpired term, provided that:
   (A)   Vacancies in the office of the Mayor shall be filled in the manner
provided by R.C. § 733.25, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
   (B)   Vacancies in the membership of the Legislative Authority shall be
filled in the manner provided by R.C. § 731.43, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance;
   (C)   Vacancies in the office of President Pro Tempore of the Legislative
Authority shall be filled in the manner provided by R.C. § 731.11, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance; and
   (D)   Vacancies in the Office of Clerk or Treasurer may be filled in the
following manner: The Mayor may appoint a person to serve as acting officer to
perform the duties of the office until a permanent officer is appointed to fill
the vacancy.
(R.C. § 733.31(A))
§ 30.08 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
   (A)   Upon request by any person and subject to division (H) of this
section, all public records responsive to the request shall be promptly
prepared and made available for inspection to the requester at all reasonable
times during regular business hours. Subject to division (H) of this section,
upon request by any person, a public office or person responsible for public
records shall make copies of the requested public record available to the
requestor at cost and within a reasonable period of time. If a public record
contains information that is exempt from the duty to permit public inspection
or to copy the public record, the public office or the person responsible for
the public record shall make available all of the information within the public
record that is not exempt. When making that public record available for public
inspection or copying that public record, the public office or the person
responsible for the public record shall notify the requester of any redaction
or make the redaction plainly visible. A redaction shall be deemed a denial of
a request to inspect or copy the redacted information, except if federal or
state law authorizes or requires a public office to make the redaction.
   (B)   To facilitate broader access to public records, a public office or the
person responsible for public records shall organize and maintain public
records in a manner that they can be made available for inspection or copying
in accordance with this section. A public office also shall have available a
copy of its current records retention schedule at a location readily available
to the public. If a requester makes an ambiguous or overly broad request or has
difficulty in making a request for copies or inspection of public records under
this section, such that the public office or the person responsible for the
requested public record cannot reasonably identify what public records are
being requested, the public office or the person responsible for the requested
public record may deny the request but shall provide the requester with an
opportunity to revise the request by informing the requester of the manner in
which records are maintained by the public office and accessed in the ordinary
course of the public office’s or person’s duties.
   (C)   If a request is ultimately denied, in part or in whole, the public
office or the person responsible for the requested public record shall provide
the requester with an explanation, including legal authority, setting forth why
the request was denied. If the initial request was provided in writing, the
explanation also shall be provided to the requester in writing. The explanation
shall not preclude the public office or the person responsible for the
requested public record from relying upon additional reasons or legal authority
in defending an action commenced under R.C. § 149.43(C).
   (D)   Unless specifically required or authorized by state or federal law or
in accordance this section, no public office or person responsible for public
records may limit or condition the availability of public records by requiring
disclosure of the requester’s identity or the intended use of the requested
public record. Any requirement that the requester disclose the requester’s
identity or the intended use of the requested public record constitutes a
denial of the request.
   (E)   A public office or person responsible for public records may ask a
requester to make the request in writing, may ask for the requester’s identity,
and may inquire about the intended use of the information requested, but may do
so only after disclosing to the requester that a written request is not
mandatory and that the requester may decline to reveal the requester’s identity
or the intended use and when a written request or disclosure of the identity or
intended use would benefit the requester by enhancing the ability of the public
office or person responsible for public records to identify, locate or deliver
the public records sought by the requester.
   (F)   If any person requests a copy of a public record in accordance with
this section, the public office or person responsible for the public record may
require the requester to pay in advance the cost involved in providing the copy
of the public record in accordance with the choice made by the requester under
this division. The public office or the person responsible for the public
record shall permit the requester to choose to have the public record
duplicated upon paper, upon the same medium upon which the public office or
person responsible for the public record keeps it, or upon any other medium
upon which the public office or person responsible for the public record
determines that it reasonably can be duplicated as an integral part of the
normal operations of the public office or person responsible for the public
record. When the requester makes a choice under this division, the public
office or person responsible for the public record shall provide a copy of it
in accordance with the choice made by the requester. Nothing in this section
requires a public office or person responsible for the public record to allow
the requester of a copy of the public record to make the copies of the public
record.
   (G)   (1)   Upon a request made in accordance with this section and subject
to division (F) of this section, a public office or person responsible for
public records shall transmit a copy of a public record to any person by United
States mail or by any other means of delivery or transmission within a
reasonable period of time after receiving the request for the copy. The public
office or person responsible for the public record may require the person
making the request to pay in advance the cost of postage if the copy is
transmitted by United States mail or the cost of delivery if the copy is
transmitted other than by United States mail, and to pay in advance the costs
incurred for other supplies used in the mailing, delivery or transmission.
      (2)   Any public office may adopt a policy and procedures that it will
follow in transmitting, within a reasonable period of time after receiving a
request, copies of public records by United States mail or by any other means
of delivery or transmission pursuant to division (G) of this section. A public
office that adopts a policy and procedures under division (G) of this section
shall comply with them in performing its duties under that division.
      (3)   In any policy and procedures adopted under division (G) of this
section:
         (a)   A public office may limit the number of records requested by a
person that the office will physically deliver by United States mail or by
another delivery service to ten per month, unless the person certifies to the
office in writing that the person does not intend to use or forward the
requested records, or the information contained in them, for commercial
purposes.
         (b)   A public office that chooses to provide some or all of its
public records on a web site that is fully accessible to and searchable by
members of the public at all times, other than during acts of God outside the
public office’s control or maintenance, and that charges no fee to search,
access, download, or otherwise receive records provided on the web site, may
limit to ten per month the number of records requested by a person that the
office will deliver in a digital format, unless the requested records are not
provided on the web site and unless the person certifies to the office in
writing that the person does not intend to use or forward the requested
records, or the information contained in them, for commercial purposes.
         (c)   For purposes of division (G) of this section, COMMERCIAL shall
be narrowly construed and does not include reporting or gathering news,
reporting or gathering information to assist citizen oversight or understanding
the operation or activities of government, or nonprofit educational research.
   (H)   A public office or person responsible for public records is not
required to permit a person who is incarcerated pursuant to a criminal
conviction or a juvenile adjudication to inspect or to obtain a copy of any
public record concerning a criminal investigation or prosecution or concerning
what would be a criminal investigation or prosecution if the subject of the
investigation or prosecution were an adult, unless the request to inspect or to
obtain a copy of the record is for the purpose of acquiring information that is
subject to release as a public record under this section and the judge who
imposed the sentence or made the adjudication with respect to the person, or
the judge’s successor in office, finds that the information sought in the
public record is necessary to support what appears to be a justiciable claim of
the person.
   (I)   (1)   Upon written request made and signed by a journalist, a public
office, or person responsible for public records, having custody of the records
of the agency employing a specified designated public service worker, as
defined in R.C. § 149.43, shall disclose to the journalist the address of the
actual personal residence of the designated public service worker and, if the
designated public service worker’s spouse, former spouse or child is employed
by a public office, the name and address of the employer of the designated
public service worker’s spouse, former spouse or child. The request shall
include the journalist’s name and title and the name and address of the
journalist’s employer and shall state that disclosure of the information sought
would be in the public interest.
      (2)   Division (I)(1) of this section also applies to journalist requests
for:
         (a)   Customer information maintained by a municipally owned or
operated public utility, other than social security numbers and any private
financial information such as credit reports, payment methods, credit card
numbers, and bank account information.
         (b)    Information about minors involved in a school vehicle accident
as provided in division R.C. § 149.43(A)(1)(gg), other than personal
information as defined in R.C. § 149.45.
      (3)   As used in this division (I), JOURNALIST means a person engaged in,
connected with or employed by any news medium, including a newspaper, magazine,
press association, news agency or wire service, a radio or television station,
or a similar medium, for the purpose of gathering, processing, transmitting,
compiling, editing or disseminating information for the general public.
   (J)   Upon a request made by a victim, victim’s attorney, or victim’s
representative, as that term is used in R.C. § 2930.02, a public office or
person responsible for public records shall transmit a copy of a depiction of
the victim as described in R.C. § 149.43(A)(1)(ii) to the victim, victim’s
attorney, or victim’s representative.
   (K)   (1)   To ensure that all employees of public offices are appropriately
educated about a public office’s obligations under this section, all elected
officials or their appropriate designees shall attend training approved by the
Attorney General as provided in R.C. § 109.43. A future official may satisfy
the requirements of this division by attending the training before taking
office, provided that the future official may not send a designee in the future
official’s place.
      (2)   All public offices shall adopt a public records policy in
compliance with this section for responding to public records requests. In
adopting a public records policy under this division, a public office may
obtain guidance from the model public records policy developed and provided to
the public office by the Attorney General under R.C. § 109.43. Except as
otherwise provided in this section or R.C. § 149.43, the policy may not limit
the number of public records that the public office will make available to a
single person, may not limit the number of public records that it will make
available during a fixed period of time, and may not establish a fixed period
of time before it will respond to a request for inspection or copying of public
records, unless that period is less than eight hours.
      (3)   The public office shall distribute the public records policy
adopted by the public office under this division (K) to the employee of the
public office who is the records custodian or records manager or otherwise has
custody of the records of that office. The public office shall require that
employee to acknowledge receipt of the copy of the public records policy. The
public office shall create a poster that describes its public records policy
and shall post the poster in a conspicuous place in the public office and in
all locations where the public office has branch offices. The public office may
post its public records policy on the internet web site of the public office if
the public office maintains an internet web site. A public office that has
established a manual or handbook of its general policies and procedures for all
employees of the public office shall include the public records policy of the
public office in the manual or handbook.
(R.C. § 149.43(B), (E))
Statutory reference:
   Availability and scope of public records; mandamus action to compel
disclosure, see R.C. § 149.43
   Competitive bidding, public inspection and copying prohibited, see R.C. §
125.071
§ 30.09 RECORDS COMMISSION.
   (A)   There is hereby established in and for the municipality a Records
Commission, composed of the Chief Executive of the municipality, or the Chief
Executive’s appointed representative, as Chairperson, and the Chief Fiscal
Officer, the Chief Legal Officer and a citizen appointed by the Chief
Executive. The Commission shall appoint a Secretary, who may or may not be a
member of the Commission and who shall serve at the pleasure of the Commission.
The Commission may employ an archivist or records manager to serve under its
direction. The Commission shall meet at least once every six months and upon
the call of the Chairperson.
   (B)   The functions of the Commission shall be to provide rules for
retention and disposal of records of the municipality and to review
applications for one-time disposal of obsolete records and schedules of records
retention and disposition submitted by municipal offices. The Commission may
dispose of records pursuant to the procedure outlined in R.C. § 149.381. The
Commission, at any time, may review any schedule it has previously approved
and, for good cause shown, may revise that schedule under the procedure
outlined in that section.
(R.C. § 149.39)
Statutory reference:
   Review of records by Ohio Historical Society, see R.C. § 149.381
§ 30.10 MEETINGS OF PUBLIC BODIES TO BE OPEN; EXCEPTIONS; NOTICE.
   (A)   This section shall be liberally construed to require public officials
to take official action and to conduct all deliberations upon official business
only in open meetings, unless the subject matter is specifically excepted by
law.
   (B)   As used in this section:
      MEETING. Any prearranged discussion of the public business of the public
body by a majority of its members.
      PUBLIC BODY. Any of the following:
         (a)   Any board, commission, committee, council or similar decision-
making body of a state agency, institution or authority, and any legislative
authority or board, commission, committee, council, agency, authority or
similar decision-making body of any county, township, municipal corporation,
school district, or other political subdivision or local public institution;
         (b)   Any committee or subcommittee of a body described in division
(a) of this definition; or
         (c)   A court of jurisdiction of a sanitary district organized wholly
for the purpose of providing a water supply for domestic municipal and public
use when meeting for the purpose of the appointment, removal or reappointment
of a member of the board of directors of such a district pursuant to R.C. §
6115.10, if applicable, or for any other matter related to such a district
other than litigation involving the district. As used in this division (c),
COURT OF JURISDICTION has the same meaning as “court” in R.C. § 6115.01.
      PUBLIC OFFICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 149.011.
      REGULATED INDIVIDUAL. Either of the following:
         (a)   A student in a state or local public educational institution; or
         (b)   A person who is, voluntarily or involuntarily, an inmate,
patient or resident of a state or local institution because of criminal
behavior, mental illness, an intellectual disability, disease, disability, age
or other condition requiring custodial care.
   (C)   (1)   All meetings of any public body are declared to be public
meetings open to the public at all times. A member of a public body shall be
present in person at a meeting open to the public to be considered present or
to vote at the meeting and for purposes of determining whether a quorum is
present at the meeting.
      (2)   The minutes of a regular or special meeting of any public body
shall be promptly prepared, filed and maintained and shall be open to public
inspection. The minutes need only reflect the general subject matter of
discussions in executive sessions authorized under division (F) of this
section.
   (D)   This section does not apply to any of the following: a grand jury; an
audit conference conducted by the auditor of state or independent certified
public accountants with officials of the public office that is the subject of
the audit; or to other entities as set forth in R.C. § 121.22(D) and (E).
   (E)   (1)   Every public body, by rule, shall establish a reasonable method
whereby any person may determine the time and place of all regularly scheduled
meetings and the time, place and purpose of all special meetings. A public body
shall not hold a special meeting unless it gives at least 24 hours advance
notice to the news media that have requested notification, except in the event
of an emergency requiring immediate official action. In the event of an
emergency, the member or members calling the meeting shall notify the news
media that have requested notification immediately of the time, place and
purpose of the meeting.
      (2)   The rule shall provide that any person, upon request and payment of
a reasonable fee, may obtain reasonable advance notification of all meetings at
which any specific type of public business is to be discussed. Provisions for
advance notification may include but are not limited to mailing the agenda of
meetings to all subscribers on a mailing list or mailing notices in self-
addressed, stamped envelopes provided by the person.
   (F)   Except as provided division (F)(8) of this section, the members of a
public body may hold an executive session only after a majority of a quorum of
the public body determines, by a roll call vote, to hold an executive session
and only at a regular or special meeting for the sole purpose of the
consideration of any of the following matters:
      (1)   To consider the appointment, employment, dismissal, discipline,
promotion, demotion, or compensation of a public employee or official, or the
investigation of charges or complaints against a public employee, official,
licensee or regulated individual, unless the public employee, official,
licensee or regulated individual requests a public hearing. Except as otherwise
provided by law, no public body shall hold an executive session for the
discipline of an elected official for conduct related to the performance of the
elected official’s official duties or for the elected official’s removal from
office. If a public body holds an executive session pursuant to division (F)(1)
of this section, the motion and vote to hold that executive session shall state
which one or more of the approved purposes listed in division (F)(1) of this
section are the purposes for which the executive session is to be held, but
need not include the name of any person to be considered at the meeting;
      (2)   (a)   To consider the purchase of property for public purposes, the
sale of property at competitive bidding, or the sale or other disposition of
unneeded, obsolete, or unfit-for-use property in accordance with R.C. § 505.10,
if premature disclosure of information would give an unfair competitive or
bargaining advantage to a person whose personal, private interest is adverse to
the general public interest. No member of a public body shall use this division
(F)(2) as a subterfuge for providing covert information to prospective buyers
or sellers. A purchase or sale of public property is void if the seller or
buyer of the public property has received covert information from a member of a
public body that has not been disclosed to the general public in sufficient
time for other prospective buyers and sellers to prepare and submit offers.
         (b)   If the minutes of the public body show that all meetings and
deliberations of the public body have been conducted in compliance with this
section, any instrument executed by the public body purporting to convey,
lease, or otherwise dispose of any right, title or interest in any public
property shall be conclusively presumed to have been executed in compliance
with this section insofar as title or other interest of any bona fide
purchasers, lessees, or transferees of the property is concerned.
      (3)   Conferences with an attorney for the public body concerning
disputes involving the public body that are the subject of pending or imminent
court action;
      (4)   Preparing for, conducting or reviewing negotiations or bargaining
sessions with public employees concerning their compensation or other terms and
conditions of their employment;
      (5)   Matters required to be kept confidential by federal law or
regulations or state statutes;
      (6)   Details relative to the security arrangements and emergency
response protocols for a public body or a public office, if disclosure of the
matters discussed could reasonably be expected to jeopardize the security of
the public body or public office;
      (7)    In the case of a county hospital operated pursuant to R.C. Chapter
339, a joint township hospital operated pursuant to R.C. Chapter 513, or a
municipal hospital operated pursuant to R.C. Chapter 749, to consider trade
secrets, as defined in R.C. § 1333.61;
      (8)   To consider confidential information related to the marketing
plans, specific business strategy, production techniques, trade secrets, or
personal financial statements of an applicant for economic development
assistance, or to negotiations with other political subdivisions respecting
requests for economic development assistance, provided that both of the
following conditions apply:
         (a)   The information is directly related to a request for economic
development assistance that is to be provided or administered under any
provision of R.C. Chapter 715, 725, 1724, or 1728 or R.C. §§ 701.07, 3735.67 to
3735.70, 5709.40 to 5709.43, 5709.61 to 5709.69, 5709.73 to 5709.75, or 5709.77
to 5709.81, or that involves public infrastructure improvements or the
extension of utility services that are directly related to an economic
development project.
         (b)   A unanimous quorum of the public body determines, by a roll call
vote, that the executive session is necessary to protect the interests of the
applicant or the possible investment or expenditure of public funds to be made
in connection with the economic development project.
      (9)   If a public body holds an executive session to consider any of the
matters listed in divisions (F)(2) through (F)(8) of this section, the motion
and vote to hold that executive session shall state which one or more of the
approved matters listed in those divisions are to be considered at the
executive session; or
      (10)   A public body specified in division (c) of the definition of
“public body” in this section shall not hold an executive session when meeting
for the purposes specified in that division (c).
   (G)   A resolution, rule or formal action of any kind is invalid unless
adopted in an open meeting of the public body. A resolution, rule or formal
action adopted in an open meeting that results from deliberations in a meeting
not open to the public is invalid unless the deliberations were for a purpose
specifically authorized in division (F) of this section and conducted at an
executive session held in compliance with this section. A resolution, rule or
formal action adopted in an open meeting is invalid if the public body that
adopted the resolution, rule or formal action violated division (E) of this
section.
   (H)   (1)   Any person may bring an action to enforce this section. An
action under this division (H)(1) shall be brought within two years after the
date of the alleged violation or threatened violation. Upon proof of a
violation or threatened violation of this section in an action brought by any
person, the court of common pleas shall issue an injunction to compel the
members of the public body to comply with its provisions.
      (2)   (a)   If the court of common pleas issues an injunction pursuant to
division (H)(1) of this section, the court shall order the public body that it
enjoins to pay a civil forfeiture of $500 to the party that sought the
injunction and shall award to that party all court costs and, subject to
reduction as described in this division (H)(2), reasonable attorney’s fees. The
court, in its discretion, may reduce an award of attorney’s fees to the party
that sought the injunction or not award attorney’s fees to that party if the
court determines both of the following:
            1.   That, based on the ordinary application of statutory law and
case law as it existed at the time of violation or threatened violation that
was the basis of the injunction, a well-informed public body reasonably would
believe that the public body was not violating or threatening to violate this
section;
            2.   That a well-informed public body reasonably would believe that
the conduct or threatened conduct that was the basis of the injunction would
serve the public policy that underlies the authority that is asserted as
permitting that conduct or threatened conduct.
         (b)   If the court of common pleas does not issue an injunction
pursuant to division (H)(1) of this section and the court determines at that
time that the bringing of the action was frivolous conduct, as defined in R.C.
§ 2323.51(A), the court shall award to the public body all court costs and
reasonable attorney’s fees, as determined by the court.
      (3)   Irreparable harm and prejudice to the party that sought the
injunction shall be conclusively and irrefutably presumed upon proof of a
violation or threatened violation of this section.
      (4)   A member of a public body who knowingly violates an injunction
issued pursuant to division (H)(1) of this section may be removed from office
by an action brought in the court of common pleas for that purpose by the
prosecuting attorney or the attorney general.
(R.C. § 121.22)
Statutory reference:
   Application of open meetings and exceptions to specific entities, see R.C. §
121.22(D), (E) and (J)
§ 30.11 MUNICIPAL OFFICERS MAY ATTEND CONFERENCE OR CONVENTION; EXPENSES.
   (A)   Any elected or appointed officer, deputy, assistant or employee of the
municipality may attend, at the expense of the municipality, any conference or
convention relating to municipal affairs, if authorized by the Mayor, the
President of the Legislative Authority or the Administrator. If the fiscal
officer of the municipality certifies that funds are appropriated and available
for that purpose, the person shall be reimbursed for his or her expense so
incurred.
   (B)   A request for this allowance shall be made in writing to the Mayor,
the President of the Legislative Authority or the Administrator, showing the
necessity for the attendance and an estimate of the costs thereof to the
municipality.
(R.C. § 733.79)
§ 30.12 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2743.01.
      VOLUNTEER. Means a person who is not paid for service or who is employed
on less than a permanent full-time basis.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C) of this section, no
political subdivision shall require any of its employees, as a condition of
employment, to reside in any specific area of the state.
   (C)   (1)   Division (B) of this section does not apply to a volunteer.
      (2)   To ensure adequate response times by certain employees of political
subdivisions to emergencies or disasters while ensuring that those employees
generally are free to reside throughout the state, the electors of any
political subdivision may file an initiative petition to submit a local law to
the electorate, or the Legislative Authority may adopt an ordinance or
resolution, that requires any individual employed by that political
subdivision, as a condition of employment, to reside either in the county where
the political subdivision is located or in any adjacent county in this state.
For purposes of this section, an initiative petition shall be filed and
considered as provided in R.C. §§ 731.28 and 731.31, except that the Fiscal
Officer of the political subdivision shall take the actions prescribed for the
Auditor or Clerk if the political subdivision has no Auditor or Clerk, and
except that references to a municipal corporation shall be considered to be
references to the applicable political subdivision.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C), employees of political
subdivisions of this state have the right to reside any place they desire.
(R.C. § 9.481)
§ 30.13 COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   The Village Council will meet in regular sessions on the second and fourth
Tuesdays of the month in Council chambers at 7:00 p.m. in Village Hall, 102
Willow Street, New Richmond, Ohio.
(Prior Code, § 30.50) (Ord. 1991-34, passed 11-12-1991)
§ 30.14 PROCEDURES FOR HANDLING PUBLIC COMPLAINTS.
   The Council adopts the procedures for handling public complaints, a copy of
which is attached to the ordinance codified herein and incorporated as if set
forth herein.
(Prior Code, § 30.51) (Ord. 1991-10, passed 4-9-1991)
CHAPTER 31: EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY
Section
General Provisions
   
31.001   Executive power; where vested
Mayor
   
31.015   Term of Mayor; power and duties
   
31.016   General duties of the Mayor
   
31.017   Communications to the Legislative Authority
   
31.018   Protest against excess of expenditures
   
31.019   Supervision of conduct of officers
   
31.020   Annual report to the Legislative Authority
   
31.021   Mayor to file charges against delinquent officers
   
31.022   Vacancies in office of Mayor
   
31.023   Disposition of fines and other moneys
Clerk
   
31.040   Election, term, qualifications of the Clerk
   
31.041   Powers and duties of Clerk
   
31.042   Books and accounts; merger of offices
   
31.043   Seal of Clerk
   
31.044   Combined offices of Clerk and Treasurer; Fiscal Officer
   
31.045   Clerk of Board of Public Affairs
   
31.046   Investments
   
31.047   Deputy Clerk
Treasurer
   
31.060   Election, term, qualifications of the Treasurer
   
31.061   Accounts of Treasurer
   
31.062   Powers and duties
   
31.063   Quarterly account; annual report
   
31.064   Receipt and disbursement of funds
   
31.065   Duty of delivering money and property
   
31.066   Liability for loss of public funds
Street Commissioner
   
31.080   Qualifications
   
31.081   General duties
   
31.082   Assistants
Other Officials
   
31.095   Legal counsel
   
31.096   Administrator
   
31.097   Board of Trustees of Public Affairs
   
31.098   Fire Engineer, Engineer and Superintendent of Markets
   
31.099   Interim administrator
   
31.100   Public Work Superintendent
   
31.101   Life Squad Assistant Chief
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.001 EXECUTIVE POWER; WHERE VESTED.
   The executive power and authority of the municipality shall be vested in the
Mayor, Clerk, Treasurer, Marshal, Street Commissioner and such other officers
and departments as are created by law.
(R.C. § 733.23)
MAYOR
§ 31.015 TERM OF MAYOR; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Mayor shall be elected for a term of four years commencing on the first
day of January next after his or her election. He or she shall be an elector of
the municipality, and shall have resided in the municipality for at least one
year immediately preceding his or her election. He or she shall be the chief
conservator of the peace within the municipality, and shall have the powers and
duties provided by law. He or she shall be the President of the Legislative
Authority, and shall preside at all regular and special meetings thereof, but
shall have no vote except in case of a tie.
(R.C. § 733.24)
§ 31.016 GENERAL DUTIES OF THE MAYOR.
   The Mayor shall perform all the duties prescribed by the bylaws and
ordinances of the municipality. He or she shall see that all ordinances,
bylaws, and resolutions of the Legislative Authority are faithfully obeyed and
enforced. He or she shall sign all commissions, licenses, and permits granted
by the Legislative Authority, or authorized by Title VII of the Ohio Revised
Code, and such other instruments as by law or ordinance require his or her
certificate.
(R.C. § 733.30)
§ 31.017 COMMUNICATIONS TO THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY.
   The Mayor shall communicate to the Legislative Authority from time to time a
statement of the finances of the municipality, and other information relating
thereto, and the general condition of the affairs of the municipality as he or
she deems proper, or as is required by the Legislative Authority.
(R.C. § 733.32)
§ 31.018 PROTEST AGAINST EXCESS OF EXPENDITURES.
   If, in the opinion of the Mayor, an expenditure authorized by the
Legislative Authority exceeds the revenues of the municipality for the current
year, he or she shall protest against the expenditure and enter the protest,
and the reason therefor, on the journal of the Legislative Authority.
(R.C. § 733.33)
§ 31.019 SUPERVISION OF CONDUCT OF OFFICERS.
   The Mayor shall supervise the conduct of all the officers of the
municipality, inquire into and examine the grounds of all reasonable complaints
against any officers, and cause their violations or neglect of duty to be
punished promptly or reported to the proper authority for correction.
(R.C. § 733.34)
§ 31.020 ANNUAL REPORT TO THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY.
   At the first regular meeting in January of each year, and at other times as
the Mayor deems expedient, he or she shall report to the Legislative Authority
concerning the affairs of the municipality, and recommend such measures as seem
proper to him or her.
(R.C. § 733.41)
§ 31.021 MAYOR TO FILE CHARGES AGAINST DELINQUENT OFFICERS.
   (A)   Generally. The Mayor shall have general supervision over each
department and the officers provided for in Title VII of the Ohio Revised Code.
When the Mayor has reason to believe that the head of a department or an
officer has been guilty, in the performance of his or her official duty, of
bribery, misfeasance, malfeasance, nonfeasance, misconduct in office, gross
neglect of duty, gross immorality, or habitual drunkenness, he or she shall
immediately file with the Legislative Authority, except when the removal of the
head of the department or officer is otherwise provided for, written charges
against the person, setting forth in detail a statement of alleged guilt, and,
at the same time, or as soon thereafter as possible, serve a true copy of the
charges upon the person against whom they are made. Service may be made on the
person or by leaving a copy of the charges at the office of the person. Return
thereof shall be made to the Legislative Authority, as is provided for the
return of the service of summons in a civil action.
(R.C. § 733.35)
   (B)   Hearing of charges; action of the Legislative Authority. Charges filed
with the Legislative Authority under division (A) of this section shall be
heard at the next regular meeting thereof, unless the Legislative Authority
extends the time for the hearing, which shall be done only on the application
of the accused. The accused may appear in person and by counsel, examine all
witnesses, and answer all charges against him or her. The judgment or action of
the Legislative Authority shall be final, but to remove the officer the votes
of two-thirds of all members elected thereto shall be required.
(R.C. § 733.36)
   (C)   Suspension of accused pending hearing. Pending any proceedings under
division (A) and (B) of this section, an accused person may be suspended by a
majority vote of all members elected to the Legislative Authority, but the
suspension shall not be for a longer period than 15 days, unless the hearing of
the charges is extended upon the application of the accused, in which event the
suspension shall not exceed 30 days.
(R.C. § 733.37)
   (D)   Power of the Legislative Authority as to process. For the purpose of
investigating charges filed pursuant to division (A) of this section against
the head of any department or officer, the Legislative Authority may issue
subpoenas or compulsory process to compel the attendance of persons and the
production of books and papers before it, and the Legislative Authority may
provide by ordinance for exercising and enforcing this section.
(R.C. § 733.38)
   (E)   Oaths; compulsory testimony; costs. In all cases in which the
attendance of witnesses may be compelled for an investigation under division
(D) of this section, any member of the Legislative Authority may administer the
requisite oaths, and the Legislative Authority has the same power to compel the
giving of testimony by attending witnesses as is conferred upon courts. In all
these cases, witnesses shall be entitled to the same privileges and immunities
as are allowed witnesses in civil cases. Witnesses shall be paid the same fees
and mileage provided for under R.C. § 1901.26, and the costs of all such
proceedings shall be payable from the General Fund of the municipality.
(R.C. § 733.39)
§ 31.022 VACANCIES IN OFFICE OF MAYOR.
   When the Mayor is absent from the municipality, or is unable for any cause
to perform his or her duties, the President Pro Tempore of the Legislative
Authority shall be acting Mayor. In case of the death, resignation, or removal
of the Mayor, the President Pro Tempore shall become the Mayor and shall hold
office until his or her successor is elected and qualified. Such successor
shall be elected to the office for the unexpired term at the first regular
municipal election that occurs more than 40 days after the vacancy has
occurred, except that when the unexpired term ends within one year immediately
following the date of the election, an election to fill the unexpired term
shall not be held and the President of the Legislative Authority shall hold the
office for the unexpired term.
(R.C. § 733.25)
§ 31.023 DISPOSITION OF FINES AND OTHER MONEYS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4511.193, all fines,
forfeitures and costs in ordinance cases and all fees that are collected by the
Mayor, that in any manner come into the Mayor’s hands, or that are due the
Mayor or the Chief of Police or other officer of the municipality, any other
fees and expenses that have been advanced out of the treasury of the
municipality, and all money received by the Mayor for the use of the
municipality shall be paid by the Mayor into the treasury of the municipality
on the first Monday of each month. At the first regular meeting of the
Legislative Authority each month, the Mayor shall submit a full statement of
all money received, from whom and for what purposes received, and when paid
into the treasury. Except as otherwise provided by R.C. § 307.515 or R.C. §
4511.19, all fines and forfeitures collected by the Mayor in state cases,
together with all fees and expenses collected that have been advanced out of
the county treasury, shall be paid by the Mayor to the county treasury on the
first business day of each month. Except as otherwise provided by R.C. §
307.515 or R.C. § 4511.19, the Mayor shall pay all court costs and fees
collected by the Mayor in state cases into the municipal treasury on the first
business day of each month.
   (B)   This section does not apply to fines collected by the Mayor’s Court
for violations of R.C. § 4513.263(B), or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, all of which shall be forwarded to the Treasurer of State as
provided in R.C. § 4513.263(E).
(R.C. § 733.40)
CLERK
§ 31.040 ELECTION, TERM, QUALIFICATIONS OF THE CLERK.
   The Clerk shall be elected for a term of four years, commencing on April 1
next after his or her election. He or she shall be an elector of the
municipality.
(R.C. § 733.26)
Statutory reference:
   Continuing education programs for fiscal officer, see R.C. § 733.81
§ 31.041 POWERS AND DUTIES OF CLERK.
   (A)   The Clerk shall attend all meetings of the Legislative Authority and
keep a record of its proceedings and of all rules, bylaws, resolutions, and
ordinances passed or adopted, which shall be subject to the inspection of all
persons interested. In case of the absence of the Clerk, the Legislative
Authority shall appoint one of its members to perform his or her duties.
   (B)   The Clerk shall attend training programs for new clerks and annual
training programs of continuing education for clerks that are provided by the
Auditor of State pursuant to R.C. § 117.44.
(R.C. § 733.27)
§ 31.042 BOOKS AND ACCOUNTS; MERGER OF OFFICES.
   The Clerk shall keep the books of the municipality, exhibit accurate
statements of all moneys received and expended, of all the property owned by
the municipality and the income derived therefrom, and of all taxes and
assessments. The Legislative Authority may, by majority vote, merge the duties
of the Clerk of the Board of Trustees of Public Affairs with those of the
Clerk, allowing the Clerk such additional assistance and compensation in
performing the additional duties as the Legislative Authority determines.
(R.C. § 733.28)
§ 31.043 SEAL OF CLERK.
   The Legislative Authority shall provide a seal for the Clerk, in the center
of which shall be the name of the municipality, and around the margin “Village
Clerk”, an impression of which seal shall be affixed to all transcripts,
orders, certificates, or other papers requiring authentication.
(R.C. § 733.29)
§ 31.044 COMBINED OFFICES OF CLERK AND TREASURER; FISCAL OFFICER.
   (A)   Office of Clerk-Treasurer.
      (1)   (a)   The Legislative Authority may, by ordinance or resolution
passed by at least a majority vote, combine the duties of the Clerk and the
Treasurer into one office, to be known as the Clerk-Treasurer. The combination
shall be effective on January 1 following the next regular municipal election
at which the Clerk is to be elected, provided that a Clerk-Treasurer shall be
elected at such election pursuant to this section and shall be elected for a
term of four years, commencing on the first day of April following his or her
election. Between the first day of January and the first day of April following
such an election, the Clerk shall perform the duties of Clerk-Treasurer.
Council shall file certification of the action with the Board of Elections not
less than 120 days before the day of the next municipal primary election at
which the Clerk is to be elected, provided that in villages under 2,000
population in which no petition for a primary election was filed pursuant to
R.C. § 3513.01, or in villages in which no primary is held pursuant to R.C. §
3513.02, the action shall be certified to the Board of Elections not less than
120 days before the next general election at which the Clerk is to be elected.
         (b)   At the succeeding regular municipal election and thereafter, the
Clerk-Treasurer shall be elected for a term of four years, commencing on the
first day of April following the Clerk-Treasurer’s election. The Clerk-
Treasurer shall be an elector of the municipality.
      (2)   In addition to the circumstances described in division (A)(1) of
this section, when a vacancy exists in the office of Treasurer or Clerk, the
Legislative Authority may, by ordinance or resolution passed by at least a
majority vote, combine the duties of the Clerk and the Treasurer into one
office, to be known as the Clerk-Treasurer. The combination shall be effective
on the effective date of the ordinance or resolution combining the duties of
the offices of Clerk and Treasurer. At the next regular municipal election at
which the Clerk would have been elected and each four years thereafter, the
Clerk-Treasurer shall be elected for a term of four years, commencing on the
first day of April following the Clerk-Treasurer’s election. The Clerk-
Treasurer shall be an elector of the municipality.
      (3)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall perform the duties provided by law for
the Clerk and the Treasurer. All laws pertaining to the Clerk and to the
Treasurer shall be construed to apply to the Clerk-Treasurer, provided that the
initial compensation for the office of Clerk-Treasurer shall be established by
the Legislative Authority and that action shall not be subject to R.C. § 731.13
relating to the time when the compensation of elected officials shall be fixed
and pertaining to changes in compensation of officials during the term of
office.
      (4)   If and when the municipality has a Clerk-Treasurer, the Legislative
Authority may separate the offices by ordinance or resolution passed by at
least a majority vote. The action to separate the offices may be taken in
either of the following circumstances:
         (a)   When a vacancy exists in the office of Clerk-Treasurer, in which
case the separation shall be effective upon the effective date of the ordinance
or resolution.
         (b)   When the action of the Legislative Authority is certified to and
filed with the Board of Elections not less than 120 days before the day of the
next primary election at which the Clerk and Treasurer are to be elected,
provided that in villages under 2,000 population in which no petition for a
primary election was filed pursuant to R.C. § 3513.01, or in villages in which
no primary is held pursuant to R.C. § 3513.02, the action shall be certified to
the Board of Elections not less than 120 days before the next general election
at which the Clerk and Treasurer are to be elected.
(R.C. § 733.261)
   (B)   Office of Fiscal Officer.
      (1)   (a)   In lieu of having the elected office of Clerk and the office
of Treasurer, or the combined elected office of Clerk-Treasurer, the
municipality may combine the duties of the Clerk and Treasurer into one
appointed office, to be known as the Fiscal Officer. To make this change, the
Legislative Authority shall pass, by a two-thirds vote, an ordinance or
resolution proposing to make the change effective on the first day of January
following the next regular municipal election at which the Clerk or Clerk-
Treasurer is to be elected.
         (b)   So that no election for the office of Clerk or Clerk-Treasurer
is held after the passage of the ordinance or resolution, the Legislative
Authority shall file a certified copy of the ordinance or resolution with the
Board of Elections not less than 120 days before the day of the next succeeding
municipal primary election at which candidates for the office of Clerk or
Clerk-Treasurer are to be nominated, or, in villages with a population of under
2,000 in which no petition for a primary election is filed under R.C. § 3513.01
or in villages in which no primary is held under R.C. § 3513.02, not less than
120 days before the next succeeding regular municipal election at which the
Clerk or Clerk-Treasurer is to be elected.
      (2)   In addition to the circumstances described in division (B)(1) of
this section, when a vacancy exists in the office of Clerk or Clerk-Treasurer,
the Legislative Authority may pass, by a two-thirds vote, an ordinance or
resolution to combine the duties of the Clerk and the Treasurer into the
appointed office of Fiscal Officer. That change shall take effect on the
effective date of the ordinance or resolution.
      (3)   A Fiscal Officer appointed under this section shall perform the
duties provided by law for the Clerk and Treasurer and any other duties
consistent with the nature of the office that are provided for by municipal
ordinance.
      (4)   (a)   A Fiscal Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor, but that
appointment does not become effective until it is approved by a majority vote
of the Legislative Authority. The Fiscal Officer need not be an elector of the
village or reside in the village at the time of appointment; however, the
Fiscal Officer shall become a resident of the village within six months after
the appointment takes effect, unless an ordinance is passed approving the
Fiscal Officer’s residence outside of the village.
         (b)   The Fiscal Officer may be removed without cause either by the
Mayor with the consent of a majority of the members of the Legislative
Authority or by a three-fourths vote of the Legislative Authority with or
without the consent of the Mayor.
      (5)   (a)   The Legislative Authority of a village that has a Fiscal
Officer may abolish that appointed office and return to an elected office of
Clerk-Treasurer by passing an ordinance or resolution by a two-thirds vote.
         (b)   If a vacancy exists in the office of Fiscal Officer when this
ordinance or resolution is passed, the abolition shall take effect on the
effective date of the ordinance or resolution, and the Mayor shall appoint a
Clerk-Treasurer to serve until the first day of April following the next
regular municipal election at which a Clerk-Treasurer can be elected. So an
election can be held, the Legislative Authority shall file a certified copy of
the ordinance or resolution with the Board of Elections not less than 120 days
before the day of the next succeeding municipal primary election.
         (c)   If a vacancy does not exist in the office of Fiscal Officer when
the abolishing ordinance or resolution is passed, the Legislative Authority
shall certify a copy of the ordinance or resolution to the Board of Elections
not less than 120 days before the day of the next succeeding municipal primary
election.
         (d)   The person elected at the next regular municipal election as
Clerk-Treasurer under the circumstances described in this division shall serve
a four-year term commencing on the first day of April following that election.
(R.C. § 733.262)
Statutory reference:
   Continuing education programs for fiscal officer, see R.C. § 733.81
§ 31.045 CLERK OF BOARD OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS.
   Pursuant to R.C. § 733.58, the duties and offices of the Clerk of the Board
of Trustees of Public Affairs and those of the Village Clerk-Treasurer are
merged.
(Ord. 1985-21, passed 10-8-1985)
§ 31.046 INVESTMENTS.
   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer is given authority to make investments for the
village.
   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall make Council aware of the investments and
the due dates.
(Ord. 1985-15, passed 7-9-1985)
§ 31.047 DEPUTY CLERK.
   The position of part-time Deputy Clerk is created to serve under the
supervision of the Clerk-Treasurer. The job description for this position is as
follows.
   (A)   The supervisor is the Clerk-Treasurer.
   (B)   This is a part-time position.
   (C)   Duties are to assist Clerk-Treasurer in all areas for the efficient
operation of that office. These include, but are not limited to, the following,
performed in conjunction with the Clerk-Treasurer:
      (1)   Payroll and related reports and records;
      (2)   Accounts payable and related reports and records;
      (3)   Accounts receivable and related reports and records;
      (4)   Preparing Council minutes;
      (5)   Attending Council meetings to take minutes when required;
      (6)   Monthly financial reports;
      (7)   Budget and appropriations;
      (8)   Annual reports;
      (9)   Correspondence;
      (10)   Purchase orders;
      (11)   Provide access to village records;
      (12)   Availability during emergency and/or disaster situations; and
      (13)   Any other tasks necessary to the office as directed by the Clerk-
Treasurer.
(Ord. 2000-52, passed 12-12-2000)
TREASURER
§ 31.060 ELECTION, TERM, QUALIFICATIONS OF THE TREASURER.
   The Treasurer shall be elected for a term of four years, commencing on
January 1 next after his or her election. He or she shall be an elector of the
municipality.
(R.C. § 733.42)
Statutory reference:
   Continuing education programs for Treasurers, see R.C. §§ 135.22 and 733.81
§ 31.061 ACCOUNTS OF TREASURER.
   (A)   The Treasurer shall keep an accurate account of:
      (1)   All moneys received by him or her, showing the amount thereof, the
time received, from whom, and on what account received;
      (2)   All disbursements made by him or her, showing the amount thereof,
the time made, to whom, and on what account paid.
   (B)   He or she shall so arrange his or her books so that the amount
received and paid on account of separate Funds, or specified appropriations,
shall be exhibited in separate accounts. In addition to the ordinary duties of
the Treasurer, he or she shall have such powers and perform such duties as are
required by any ordinance of the municipality, not inconsistent with Title VII
of the Ohio Revised Code, and not incompatible with the nature of the office.
(R.C. § 733.43)
§ 31.062 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Treasurer shall demand and receive from the County Treasurer taxes
levied and assessments made and certified to the County Auditor by the
Legislative Authority, and placed on the tax list by the Auditor for
collection, moneys from persons authorized to collect or required to pay them,
accruing to the municipality from any judgments, fines, penalties, forfeitures,
licenses, and costs taxed in Mayor’s Court, and debts due the municipality.
These funds shall be disbursed by the Treasurer and County Auditor on the order
of any person authorized by law or ordinance to issue orders therefor.
   (B)   The Treasurer of a village that does not have a charter form of
government shall not disburse any funds except upon an order signed by at least
one member of the Legislative Authority or the Village Clerk and countersigned
by the Treasurer. The Clerk-Treasurer or fiscal officer of a village that does
not have a charter form of government shall not disburse any funds except upon
an order signed by at least one member of the Legislative Authority and
countersigned by the Clerk-Treasurer or village fiscal officer.
(R.C. § 733.44)
§ 31.063 QUARTERLY ACCOUNT; ANNUAL REPORT.
   The Treasurer shall settle and account with the Legislative Authority,
quarterly, and at any other time which it by resolution or ordinance requires.
At the first regular meeting of the Legislative Authority in January of each
year, the Treasurer shall report to it the condition of the finances of the
municipality, the amount received by the Treasurer, the sources of the
receipts, the disbursements made by him or her, and on what account, during the
year preceding. This account shall exhibit the balance due on each fund which
has come into the Treasurer’s hands during the year.
(R.C. § 733.45)
§ 31.064 RECEIPT AND DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS.
   (A)   The Treasurer shall receive and disburse all funds of the municipality
and such other funds as arise in or belong to any department or part of the
municipality, except as provided in division (B) of this section.
   (B)   The Treasurer of a village that does not have a charter form of
government shall not disburse any funds except upon an order signed by at least
one member of the Legislative Authority or the Village Clerk and countersigned
by the Treasurer. The Clerk-Treasurer or fiscal officer of a village that does
not have a charter form of government shall not disburse any funds except upon
an order signed by at least one member of the Legislative Authority and
countersigned by the Clerk-Treasurer or village fiscal officer.
(R.C. § 733.46)
§ 31.065 DUTY OF DELIVERING MONEY AND PROPERTY.
   The Treasurer, at the expiration of his or her term of office, or on his or
her resignation or removal, shall deliver to his or her successor, all moneys,
books, papers, and other property in his or her possession as Treasurer. In the
case of the death or incapacity of the Treasurer, his or her legal
representatives shall, in like manner, deliver the money and property which
were in the Treasurer’s hands to the person entitled thereto.
(R.C. § 733.47)
§ 31.066 LIABILITY FOR LOSS OF PUBLIC FUNDS.
   The Treasurer, or other officer of the municipality having the duties of a
treasurer or of a city auditor, shall not be held liable for a loss of public
funds when the officer has performed all official duties required of the
officer with reasonable care, but shall be liable only when a loss of public
funds results from the officer’s negligence or other wrongful act.
(R.C. § 733.82)
STREET COMMISSIONER
§ 31.080 QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   So long as the municipality has not provided for the appointment of an
Administrator under R.C. § 735.271 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, a Street Commissioner shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed
by the Legislative Authority for a term of one year. He or she need not be a
resident of the municipality at the time of his or her appointment, but shall
become a resident thereof within six months after his or her appointment and
confirmation, unless the residence requirement is waived by ordinance.
Vacancies in the office of Street Commissioner shall be filled by the Mayor for
the unexpired term.
   (B)   The appointment of a Street Commissioner shall include a probationary
period of six months. If an appointment is made for an unexpired term, and if
the same Street Commissioner is reappointed at the end of that term, the
probationary period shall continue into his or her next term. No appointment is
final until the appointee has satisfactorily completed his or her probationary
period. If the service of the appointee is unsatisfactory during the
probationary period, he or she may be removed by the Mayor and the reasons for
the removal shall be communicated to the Legislative Authority. If a person is
appointed to successive terms as Street Commissioner, he or she shall serve
only one six month probationary period during those successive terms.
   (C)   The Marshal shall be eligible to appointment as Street Commissioner.
(R.C. § 735.31)
§ 31.081 GENERAL DUTIES.
   Under the direction of the Mayor or other chief executive officer, the
Street Commissioner, or an engineer, when one is provided by the Legislative
Authority, shall supervise the improvement and repair of streets, avenues,
alleys, lands, lanes, squares, wards, landings, market houses, bridges,
viaducts, sidewalks, sewers, drains, ditches, culverts, ship channels, streams,
and water courses. The Street Commissioner or engineer shall also supervise the
lighting, sprinkling, and cleaning of all public places, and shall perform such
other duties, consistent with the nature of his or her office, as the Mayor or
other chief executive officer requires.
(R.C. § 735.32)
§ 31.082 ASSISTANTS.
   The Street Commissioner or engineer mentioned in §
31.081 shall have such assistants as the Legislative Authority provides, who
shall be employed by the Street Commissioner, and serve for such time and
compensation as is fixed by the Legislative Authority.
(R.C. § 735.33)
OTHER OFFICIALS
§ 31.095 LEGAL COUNSEL.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, when it considers
it necessary, the Legislative Authority may provide legal counsel for the
municipality, or for any department or official of the municipality, for a
period not to exceed two years and shall provide compensation for the legal
counsel.
   (B)   (1)   A petition may be filed with the Clerk, signed by registered
electors residing in the municipality equal in number to not less than 10% of
the total vote cast for all candidates for Governor in the municipality at the
most recent general election at which a Governor was elected, requesting that
the question be placed before the electors whether, instead of the Legislative
Authority appointing legal counsel for the municipality or for any department
or official of the municipality, the Mayor shall appoint an attorney or law
firm as the legal counsel with the advice and consent of the Legislative
Authority. Within two weeks after receipt of the petition, the Clerk shall
certify it to the Board of Elections, which shall determine its sufficiency and
validity. The petition shall be certified to the Board of Elections not less
than 90 days prior to the election at which the question is to be voted upon.
      (2)   At the election, if a majority of the electors of the municipality
approves the question, then effective immediately when the Mayor considers it
necessary, the Mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the
Legislative Authority, an attorney or law firm as legal counsel for the
municipality, or for any department or official of the municipality, for a
period not to exceed two years. The appointment of legal counsel under this
division shall be pursuant to a contract approved by the Mayor and a majority
vote of the Legislative Authority. The contract shall provide for the
compensation and other terms of the engagement of the legal counsel, and the
Legislative Authority shall provide that compensation for the legal counsel.
   (C)   When acting under this section, the Legislative Authority acts in its
administrative capacity.
(R.C. § 733.48)
§ 31.096 ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Appointment, powers, term and removal. The Legislative Authority may
establish the position of Administrator by ordinance. The Administrator
established under this section shall have those powers provided by division (B)
of this section. The Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor, but shall
not take office unless his or her appointment has been approved by a majority
vote of the members elected to the Legislative Authority. The Administrator
need not be an elector or reside in the municipality at the time of his or her
appointment; however, he or she shall become a resident of the municipality
within six months after his or her appointment by the Mayor and confirmation by
the Legislative Authority, unless his or her residence outside the municipality
is approved by ordinance. The Administrator shall not be an elected official of
the municipality at the time of his or her appointment or during his or her
tenure in office. The Administrator shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor
and Legislative Authority and may be removed without cause by the Mayor with
the consent of a majority of the members elected to the Legislative Authority,
or he or she may be removed without cause by the affirmative vote of three-
fourths of the members elected to the Legislative Authority, without the
consent of the Mayor. The Legislative Authority may abolish the position of
Administrator by ordinance.
(R.C. § 735.271)
   (B)   Abolishment and re-establishment of Board of Public Affairs.
      (1)   Upon the establishment of the position of Administrator, his or her
appointment by the Mayor and confirmation by the Legislative Authority, as
provided by division (A) of this section, the Board of Trustees of Public
Affairs, if such a Board has been created in accordance with R.C. § 735.28,
shall be abolished and the term of office of members of the Board shall
terminate. All contracts entered into by the Board and rules and regulations
promulgated and other action taken by the Board shall continue in effect until
they have terminated of their own accord or until they have been modified,
changed, revised, amended or repealed in the manner provided by law.
      (2)   If the Legislative Authority abolishes the position of
Administrator, as provided by division (A) of this section, a Board of Trustees
of Public Affairs shall be established by operation of law and the Mayor shall
appoint three members of this Board, subject to the confirmation of the
Legislative Authority, who shall serve until the successors of the appointed
members have been elected at the next regular election of municipal officers
held in the municipality occurring more than 100 days after the appointment of
such members by the Mayor, as provided by R.C. § 735.28. The Board shall have
those powers and duties provided by R.C. §§ 735.28 and 735.29 and as otherwise
provided by law.
(R.C. § 735.272)
   (C)   Powers and duties of the Administrator.
      (1)   The Administrator shall manage, conduct, and control the water
works, electric light plants, artificial or natural gas plants, or other
similar public utilities, furnish supplies of water, electricity, or gas, and
collect all water, electric and gas rents.
      (2)   The Administrator may make such bylaws and regulations as it deems
necessary for the safe, economical, and efficient management and protection of
the works, plants, and public utilities. These bylaws and regulations, when not
repugnant to municipal ordinances and resolutions or to the Ohio Constitution,
shall have the same validity of ordinances.
      (3)   The rates for service and charges for municipally owned utilities
shall be determined by the Legislative Authority.
      (4)   The Administrator shall have the same powers or perform the same
duties as are provided in R.C. §§ 743.05 through 743.07, 743.10, 743.11,
743.18, and 743.24, and all the powers and duties relating to water works in
any such sections shall extend to and include electric light, power, gas
plants, and other similar public utilities.
      (5)   The Administrator shall supervise the improvement and repair of
streets, avenues, alleys, lands, lanes, squares, landings, market houses,
bridges, viaducts, sidewalks, sewers, drains, ditches, culverts, streams, and
water courses as well as lighting, sprinkling, and cleaning of all streets,
alleys, and public buildings and places.
      (6)   The Administrator shall appoint officers, employees, agents,
clerks, and assistants, provided the positions are first authorized by the
Legislative Authority, but the appointments shall be subject to approval by the
Mayor. Such appointments and the Mayor’s approval shall be in writing, and
shall be filed with the Clerk.
      (7)   The Administrator shall be under the general supervision and
control of the Mayor, and shall have such other powers and duties as are
prescribed by ordinance or by law and which are not inconsistent herewith. The
Administrator shall perform all duties and shall have all powers of Boards of
Public Affairs and Street Commissioners as prescribed by law, except as
otherwise provided by R.C. §§ 735.271 and 735.272.
(R.C. § 735.273)
Cross-reference:
   Administrator to operate village cemetery, see §
97.20
Editor’s note:
   Per Ord. 1994-19, the residency requirements of the Village Administrator
include the area within the New Richmond School District.
§ 31.097 BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS.
   (A)   Appointment; election; organization.
      (1)   If a water works, electric light plant, artificial or natural gas
plant or other similar public utility is situated in the municipality, or when
the Legislative Authority orders a water works, electric light plant,
artificial or natural gas plant or other similar public utility to be
constructed, or to be leased or purchased from any individual, company or
corporation, or when the Legislative Authority determines to establish a
schedule of rates or charges of rents for use of the sewerage system and sewage
pumping, treatment and disposal works of the municipality, The Legislative
Authority shall establish a Board of Trustees of Public Affairs, which shall
consist of three members who are residents of the municipality.
      (2)   All members shall have four-year terms, except that members of
boards established after July 26, 1967, shall be elected as follows: at the
next regular election of municipal officials occurring more than 100 days after
the appointment of the first members of the Board as provided in this section,
one member shall be elected for a term of two years and two members shall be
elected for terms of four years each. Thereafter, all such members shall be
elected for terms of four years.
      (3)   When the Legislative Authority establishes such Board, the Mayor
shall appoint the members thereof, subject to the confirmation of the
Legislative Authority. The successors of such appointed members shall be
elected at the next regular election of municipal officers held in the
municipality which occurs more than 100 days after the appointment.
      (4)   In case of a vacancy in the Board from death, resignation or
otherwise, it shall be filled for the unexpired term by appointment by the
Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Legislative Authority.
      (5)   The Board shall organize by electing one of its members President.
Unless the office of Clerk of the Board has been consolidated with the office
of Clerk of the municipality, as authorized by R.C. § 733.28, it may elect a
Clerk, who shall be known as the Clerk of the Board of Trustees of Public
Affairs.
(R.C. § 735.28)
   (B)   General powers and duties.
      (1)   The Board of Trustees of Public Affairs appointed under division
(A) of this section shall manage, conduct and control the waterworks, electric
light plants, artificial or natural gas plants or other similar public
utilities, furnish supplies of water, electricity or gas, collect all water,
electric and gas rents or charges and appoint necessary officers, employees and
agents.
      (2)   The Board may make such bylaws and rules as it determines to be
necessary for the safe, economical and efficient management and protection of
the works, plants and public utilities. These bylaws and rules, when not
repugnant to local ordinances or to the Constitution or laws of the state,
shall have the same validity as ordinances.
      (3)   For the purpose of paying the expenses of conducting and managing
the waterworks, plants and public utilities or of making necessary additions
thereto and extensions and repairs thereon, the Board may assess a water rent
or charge, or a light, power, gas or utility rent, of sufficient amount and in
such manner as it determines to be most equitable, upon all tenements and
premises supplied therewith. When the rents, except water rents and charges,
are not paid when due, the Board may certify them to the County Auditor to be
placed on the duplicate and collected as other municipal taxes, or it may
collect them by actions at law in the name of the municipality. When water
rents or charges are not paid when due, the Board may do either or both of the
following:
         (a)   Certify them, together with any penalties, to the County
Auditor. The County Auditor shall place the certified amount on the real
property tax list and duplicate against the property served by the connection
if he or she also receives from the Board additional certification that the
unpaid rents or charges have arisen pursuant to a service contract made
directly with an owner who occupies the property served. The amount placed on
the tax list and duplicate shall be a lien on the property served from the date
placed on the list and duplicate and shall be collected in the same manner as
other taxes, except that, notwithstanding R.C. § 323.15, the County Treasurer
shall accept a payment in such amount when separately tendered as payment for
the full amount of the unpaid water rents or charges and associated penalties.
The lien shall be released immediately upon payment in full of the certified
amount. Any amounts collected by the County Treasurer under this division shall
be placed for immediate distribution to the municipality, in the appropriate
distinct fund established for water rents and charges.
         (b)   Collect them by action at law in the name of the municipality
from an owner, tenant or other person who is liable to pay the rents or
charges.
      (4)   The Board shall have the same powers and perform the same duties as
are provided in R.C. §§ 743.01, 743.05 through 743.07, 743.10, 743.11, 743.18,
743.24 and 735.05 through 735.09, which powers and duties relating to
waterworks in any of these sections shall extend to and include electric light,
power and gas plants, and such other duties as are prescribed by law or
ordinance not inconsistent herewith.
      (5)   If the Board assesses water rents or charges, it shall determine
the actual amount of rents due, based upon an actual reading of each customer’s
meter at least once in each three-month period, and at least quarterly the
Board shall render a bill for the actual amount shown by the meter reading to
be due, except that estimated bills may be rendered if access to a customer’s
meter was unobtainable for a timely reading. If the Board assesses water rents
or charges, it shall establish procedures providing fair and reasonable
opportunity for resolution of billing disputes.
      (6)   When property to which water service is provided is about to be
sold, any party to the sale or his or her agent may request the Board to read
the meter at that property and to render, within ten days following the date on
which the request is made, a final bill for all outstanding rents and charges
for water service. Such a request shall be made at least 14 days prior to the
transfer of the title of the property.
      (7)   At any time prior to a certification under division (B)(3)(a) of
this section, the Board shall accept any partial payment of unpaid water rents
or charges, in the amount of $10 or more.
(R.C. § 735.29)
§ 31.098 FIRE ENGINEER, ENGINEER AND SUPERINTENDENT OF MARKETS.
   If the municipality has a Fire Engineer, Engineer or Superintendent of
Markets, each such officer shall perform the duties prescribed by Title VII of
the Ohio Revised Code and such other duties, not incompatible with the nature
of his or her office, as the Legislative Authority by ordinance requires, and
shall receive for his or her services such compensation by fees or salary, or
both, as is provided by ordinance.
(R.C. § 733.80)
§ 31.099 INTERIM ADMINISTRATOR.
   The position of interim Village Administrator is created and the salary set
at $10 per hour.
(Ord. 1988-32, passed 11-8-1988)
§ 31.100 PUBLIC WORK SUPERINTENDENT.
   (A)   The position of Public Work Superintendent is established with the
responsibilities outlined in the job descriptions adopted by the Council and as
revised.
   (B)   The salary for the Public Work Superintendent shall be a minimum of
$9,350 and a maximum of $18,700.
(Ord. 1987-08, passed 1-27-1987)
§ 31.101 LIFE SQUAD ASSISTANT CHIEF.
   (A)   There is established a position of Assistant Chief of the Village Life
Squad.
   (B)   The salary of the Assistant Chief of the Life Squad shall be $1,000
per year, payable in accordance with all other Life Squad positions.
(Ord. 1990-46, passed 12-11-1990)
CHAPTER 32: LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY
Section
General Provisions
   
32.001   Members of the Legislative Authority; election; terms of office
   
32.002   President Pro Tempore; employees
   
32.003   Vacancy when President Pro Tempore becomes Mayor
   
32.004   Qualifications of members of the Legislative Authority
   
32.005   Compensation and bonds of municipal officers and employees
   
32.006   Vacancy
   
32.007   Judge of election and qualification of members; quorum and special
meetings
   
32.008   Rules; journal; expulsion of members
   
32.009   Meetings
   
32.010   General powers
   
32.011   Failure to take oath or give bond
   
32.012   Notice when new bond required
   
32.013   Care, supervision and management of public institutions
Contracts, Bids and Proceedings
   
32.025   Contracts by the Legislative Authority or Administrator
   
32.026   Bids and proceedings
   
32.027   Alterations or modifications of contract
   
32.028   Contract restrictions
   
32.029   Award to lowest responsive and responsible bidder
Ordinances and Resolutions
   
32.040   Ordinances and resolutions as evidence
   
32.041   Passage procedure
   
32.042   Style of ordinances
   
32.043   Subject and amendment of ordinances and resolutions
   
32.044   Authentication and recording of ordinances and resolutions
   
32.045   Publication of ordinances and resolutions; proof of publication and
circulation
   
32.046   Notice for proposed amendments to the municipal Charter
   
32.047   Times of publication required
   
32.048   Publication and certification of ordinances in book form
   
32.049   Adoption of technical ordinances and codes
   
32.050   Certificate of Clerk as to publication
   
32.051   Effect of not making publication
   
32.052   Ordinances providing for appropriations or street improvements;
emergency ordinances
   
32.053   Posting of ordinances, resolutions and the like
Initiative and Referendum
   
32.070   Initiative petitions
   
32.071   Referendum petitions
   
32.072   More than one ordinance required; application of subchapter
   
32.073   Presentation of petitions
   
32.074   Copy of proposed ordinance or measure to be filed with Clerk
   
32.075   Words to be printed in red
   
32.076   Designation of committee filing petition; public inspection of
petitions; ordinances passed or repealed prior to election
   
32.077   Itemized statement by circulator of petition
   
32.078   Prohibited practices relative to petitions
   
32.079   Accepting premiums for signing
   
32.080   Threats in securing signatures
   
32.081   Application of subchapter if Charter adopted
Statutory reference:
   Village accounting and financial reporting, State Auditor regulations, see
O.A.C. Chapter 117-9
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.001 MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY; ELECTION; TERMS OF OFFICE.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) or (C) of this section,
the legislative power of each municipality shall be vested in, and exercised
by, a Legislative Authority, composed of six members, who shall be elected by
the electors of the municipality at large, for terms of four years.
   (B)   The Legislative Authority may adopt an ordinance or resolution that,
if approved by a majority of the electors voting on the issue, would reduce the
number of members of the Legislative Authority to five. A certified copy of the
ordinance or resolution shall be filed with the Board of Elections no later
than 4:00 p.m. of the ninetieth day before the day of the next election at
which members of the Legislative Authority are to be elected.
   (C)   The electors may propose a reduction in the number of members of the
Legislative Authority from six to five by initiative petition in accordance
with the procedure set forth in R.C. § 731.28.
   (D)   If a majority of the votes cast on the question proposed under
division (B) or (C) of this section is in the affirmative, the Legislative
Authority shall be composed of five members, who shall be elected at large, for
terms of four years. If members of the Legislative Authority have staggered
terms of office as required by this section, the decrease in number of members
shall be implemented as necessary over the next two municipal elections at
which members of the Legislative Authority would be elected. If the Legislative
Authority has adopted an ordinance or resolution to eliminate staggered terms
of office under division (E) of this section, the five members shall be elected
as set forth in division (E)(2)(b) of this section.
(R.C. § 731.09)
   (E)   (1)   The Legislative Authority may, by the adoption of an ordinance
or resolution to eliminate staggered terms of office, determine that all
members of the Legislative Authority shall be elected at the same municipal
election as provided for in this section.
      (2)   At the regular municipal election occurring not less than 90 days
after the certification of the ordinance or resolution to the Board of
Elections eliminating staggered terms of office, the following apply:
         (a)   If there are six members of the Legislative Authority, the
number of members eligible for election at that regular municipal election
shall be elected to two-year nonstaggered terms, and all members of the
Legislative Authority shall be elected to four-year nonstaggered terms at all
following municipal elections.
         (b)   If there are five members of the Legislative Authority, a number
of members that is one less than the number of members that would otherwise be
eligible for election at that regular municipal election but for the first-time
implementation of the new membership of five, or, in the case of a village that
has previously reduced its number of members to five, then the number of
members eligible for election at that regular municipal election shall be
elected to two-year nonstaggered terms, and all members shall be elected to
four-year nonstaggered terms at all following municipal elections.
(R.C. § 731.091)
§ 32.002 PRESIDENT PRO TEMPORE; EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   At the first meeting in January of each year, the Legislative
Authority shall immediately proceed to elect a President Pro Tempore from its
own number, who shall serve until the first meeting in January next after his
or her election. The Legislative Authority may provide employees for the
municipality as it determines, and employees may be removed at any regular
meeting by a majority of the members elected to the Legislative Authority.
   (B)   When the Mayor is absent from the municipality, or is unable, for any
cause, to perform his or her duties, the President Pro Tempore shall be the
acting Mayor, and shall have the same powers and perform the same duties as the
Mayor.
(R.C. § 731.10)
§ 32.003 VACANCY WHEN PRESIDENT PRO TEMPORE BECOMES MAYOR.
   When the President Pro Tempore of the Legislative Authority becomes the
Mayor, the vacancy thus created shall be filled as provided in §
32.006, and the Legislative Authority shall elect another President Pro Tempore
from its own number, who shall have the same rights, powers, and duties as his
or her predecessor.
(R.C. § 731.11)
§ 32.004 QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Each member of the Legislative Authority shall have resided in the
municipality for at least one year immediately preceding the member’s election,
and shall be an elector of the municipality. No member of the Legislative
Authority shall hold any other public office, be interested in any contract
with the municipality, or hold employment with the municipality, except that
the member may be a notary public, a member of the state militia, or a
volunteer firefighter of the village; provided that the member shall not
receive any compensation for his or her services as a volunteer firefighter of
the village in addition to his or her regular compensation as a member of the
Legislative Authority. Any member who ceases to possess any of these
qualifications, or who moves from the municipality, shall forfeit his or her
office.
   (B)   The purpose of establishing a one-year residency requirement in this
section is to recognize that the municipality has a substantial and compelling
interest in encouraging qualified candidacies for election to the office of
member of the Legislative Authority by ensuring that a candidate for the office
has every opportunity to become knowledgeable with and concerned about the
problems and needs of the area the candidate seeks to represent. In enacting
this requirement, the municipality finds that the one-year period is reasonably
related to this purpose, while leaving unimpaired a person’s right to travel,
to vote, and to be a candidate for public office.
(R.C. § 731.12)
§ 32.005 COMPENSATION AND BONDS OF MUNICIPAL OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   The Legislative Authority shall fix the compensation and bonds of all
officers, clerks, and employees of the municipality, except as otherwise
provided by law. The Legislative Authority shall, in the case of elective
officers, fix their compensation for the ensuing term of office at a meeting
held not later than five days prior to the last day fixed by law for filing as
a candidate for that office. All bonds shall be made with sureties subject to
the approval of the Mayor. The compensation so fixed shall not be increased or
diminished during the term for which any officer is elected or appointed. This
section does not prohibit the payment of any increased costs of continuing to
provide the identical benefits provided to an officer at the commencement of
his or her term of office.
(R.C. § 731.13)
§ 32.006 VACANCY.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this section, when the
office of a member of the Legislative Authority becomes vacant, the vacancy
shall be filled by election by the Legislative Authority for the unexpired
term. If the Legislative Authority fails within 30 days to fill the vacancy,
the Mayor shall fill it by appointment, except that subject to division (B) of
this section, when the vacancy occurs because of the operation of R.C. §
733.25, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the successor shall
hold office only for the period the President Pro Tempore of the Legislative
Authority holds the office of Mayor.
   (B)   When a vacancy occurs in the office of a member of the Legislative
Authority of a village with a population of less than 2,000 because of the
operation of R.C. § 733.25, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
at the time the President Pro Tempore becomes Mayor, the President Pro Tempore
shall decide whether he or she wishes to serve the remainder of his or her
unexpired term as a member of the Legislative Authority when the Mayor’s
successor is elected and qualified in accordance with R.C. § 733.25, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance. If the President Pro Tempore
decides to serve the remainder of his or her unexpired term as a member of the
Legislative Authority, the vacancy on the Legislative Authority shall not be
filled and the President Pro Tempore shall resume serving his or her unexpired
term on the Legislative Authority as soon as the Mayor’s successor is elected
and qualified. If the President Pro Tempore decides not to resume serving the
remainder of his or her unexpired term as a member of the Legislative Authority
as soon as the Mayor’s successor is elected and qualified, then the vacancy in
the office of the member of the Legislative Authority shall be filled in
accordance with this section.
(R.C. § 731.43(A))
§ 32.007 JUDGE OF ELECTION AND QUALIFICATION OF MEMBERS; QUORUM AND SPECIAL
MEETINGS.
   The Legislative Authority shall be the judge of the election and
qualification of its members. A majority of all the members elected shall be a
quorum, but a less number may adjourn from day to day and compel attendance of
absent members in a manner and under penalties as are prescribed by ordinance.
The Legislative Authority shall provide rules for the manner of calling special
meetings.
(R.C. § 731.44)
§ 32.008 RULES; JOURNAL; EXPULSION OF MEMBERS.
   The Legislative Authority shall determine its own rules, and keep a journal
of its proceedings. It may punish or expel any member for disorderly conduct or
violation of its rules, and declare his or her seat vacant for absence without
valid excuse, where the absence has continued for two months. No expulsion
shall take place without the concurrence of two-thirds of all the members
elected, and until the delinquent member has been notified of the charge
against him or her, and has had an opportunity to be heard.
(R.C. § 731.45)
§ 32.009 MEETINGS.
   The Legislative Authority shall not be required to hold more than one
regular meeting in each week. The meetings may be held at a time and place as
is prescribed by ordinance, and shall, at all times, be open to the public. The
Mayor, or any three members of the Legislative Authority, may call special
meetings upon at least 12 hours’ notice to each member, served personally or
left at his or her usual place of residence.
(R.C. § 731.46)
§ 32.010 GENERAL POWERS.
   The Legislative Authority shall have the management and control of the
finances and property of the municipality, except as otherwise provided.
(R.C. § 731.47)
§ 32.011 FAILURE TO TAKE OATH OR GIVE BOND.
   The Legislative Authority may declare vacant the office of any person
elected or appointed to the office who, within ten days after he or she has
been notified of his or her appointment or election, or obligation to give a
new or additional bond, fails to take the required official oath or to give any
bond required of him or her.
(R.C. § 731.49)
§ 32.012 NOTICE WHEN NEW BOND REQUIRED.
   (A)   When the Legislative Authority declares by resolution that an officer
shall give a new bond, written notice shall be served by the Clerk upon the
officer designated, and a copy of the notice, with a statement of the time and
place of service, shall be recorded in the proceedings of the Legislative
Authority.
   (B)   If the officer fails to give the new bond, with sureties, to the
satisfaction of the Mayor, within ten days after such service, the Legislative
Authority shall declare the office vacant, and the vacancy shall be filled in
the manner provided in Title VII of the Ohio Revised Code.
   (C)   When a new bond is accepted or the Legislative Authority declares the
office vacant, the sureties of the original bond shall cease to be liable for
the acts of that officer done thereafter, but shall continue to be liable for
his or her acts then already done.
(R.C. § 731.50)
§ 32.013 CARE, SUPERVISION AND MANAGEMENT OF PUBLIC INSTITUTIONS.
   The Legislative Authority shall provide by resolution or ordinance for the
care, supervision, and management of all public parks, baths, libraries, market
houses, crematories, sewage disposal plants, houses of refuge and correction,
workhouses, infirmaries, hospitals, pesthouses or any of the institutions
owned, maintained or established by the municipality. When the Legislative
Authority determines to plat any of the streets, it shall provide for the
platting thereof.
(R.C. § 735.27)
CONTRACTS, BIDS AND PROCEEDINGS
§ 32.025 CONTRACTS BY THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY OR ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Contracts by the Legislative Authority.
      (1)   All contracts made by the Legislative Authority shall be executed
in the name of the municipality and signed on its behalf by the Mayor and
Clerk. Except where the contract is for equipment, services, materials or
supplies to be purchased under R.C. § 125.04, 713.23(D), or 5513.01, or
available from a qualified nonprofit agency pursuant to R.C. §§ 4115.31 through
4115.35, or required to be purchased from a qualified nonprofit agency under
R.C. §§ 125.60 through 125.6012, when any expenditure, other than the
compensation of persons employed in the municipality, exceeds the amount
specified in R.C. § 9.17, such contracts shall be in writing and made to the
lowest and best bidder after advertising once a week for not less than two
consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within the
municipality. The Legislative Authority may also cause notice to be inserted in
trade papers or other publications designated by it or to be distributed by
electronic means, including posting the notice on the Legislative Authority’s
internet web site. If the Legislative Authority posts the notice on its web
site, it may eliminate the second notice otherwise required to be published in
a newspaper of general circulation within the municipality, provided that the
first notice published in such newspaper meets all of the following
requirements:
         (a)   It is published at least two weeks before the opening of bids.
         (b)   It includes a statement that the notice is posted on the
Legislative Authority’s internet web site.
         (c)   It includes the internet address of the Legislative Authority’s
internet web site.
         (d)   It includes instructions describing how the notice may be
accessed on the Legislative Authority’s internet web site.
      (2)   The bids shall be opened and shall be publicly read by the Clerk or
a person designated by the Clerk at the time, date and place specified in the
advertisement to bidders or specifications. The time, date and place of bid
openings may be extended to a late date by the Legislative Authority, provided
that written or oral notice of the change shall be given to all persons who
have received or requested specifications no later than 96 hours prior to the
original time and date fixed for the opening. This division does not apply to
the municipality if an Administrator has been appointed pursuant to the
provisions of R.C. § 735.271, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
(R.C. § 731.14)
   (B)   Contract by Administrator; central purchasing.
      (1)   In those municipalities that have established the position of
Administrator as provided by R.C. § 735.271, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the Administrator shall make contracts, purchase supplies
and materials, and provide labor for any work under the Administrator’s
supervision involving the amount specified in R.C. § 9.17. When an expenditure,
other than the compensation of persons employed by the municipality, exceeds
the amount specified in R.C. § 9.17, the expenditure shall first be authorized
and directed by ordinance of the Legislative Authority. When so authorized and
directed, except where the contract is for equipment, services, materials, or
supplies to be purchased under R.C. § 125.04, 713.23(D), or 5513.01 or
available from a qualified nonprofit agency pursuant to R.C. §§ 4115.31 through
4115.35, or required to be purchased from a qualified nonprofit agency under
R.C. §§ 125.60 through 125.6012, the Administrator shall make a written
contract with the lowest and best bidder after advertisement for not less than
two nor more than four consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation
within the municipality or as provided in R.C. § 7.16. The bids shall be opened
and shall be publicly read by the Administrator or a person designated by the
Administrator at the time, date and place specified in the advertisement to
bidders or specifications. The time, date and place of bid openings may be
extended to a later date by the Administrator, provided that written or oral
notice of the change shall be given to all persons who have received or
requested specifications no later than 96 hours prior to the original time and
date fixed for the opening. All contracts shall be executed in the name of the
municipality and signed on its behalf by the Administrator and the Clerk. No
expenditure subject to this division (B) shall be divided into component parts,
separate projects, or separate items of work in order to avoid the requirements
of this division (B).
      (2)   The Legislative Authority may provide, by ordinance, for central
purchasing for all offices, departments, divisions, boards, and commissions of
the municipality, under the direction of the Administrator who shall make
contracts, purchase supplies or materials, and provide labor for any work of
the municipality in the manner provided by this division (B).
(R.C. § 731.141)
§ 32.026 BIDS AND PROCEEDINGS.
   Each bid on any contract under §
32.025 shall contain the full name of every person interested in the bid. If
the bid is for the construction, demolition, alteration, repair, or
reconstruction of an improvement, it shall meet the requirements of R.C. §
153.54. If the bid is for any other contract authorized by §
32.025, it shall be accompanied by a sufficient bond or certified check,
cashiers check, or money order on a solvent bank or savings and loan
association that, if the bid is accepted, a contract will be entered into and
the performance of it properly secured. If the bid for work embraces both labor
and materials, it shall be separately stated, with the price thereof. The
Legislative Authority or Administrator, in the event an Administrator has been
appointed as provided by R.C. § 735.271, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, may reject any and all bids. The contract shall be between
the municipality and the bidder, and the municipality shall pay the contract
price in cash. When a bonus is offered for completion of a contract prior to a
specified date, the Legislative Authority or Administrator, in the event an
Administrator has been appointed as provided in R.C. § 735.271, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, may exact a prorated penalty in
like sum for each day or delay beyond the specified date. When there is reason
to believe there is collusion or combination among bidders, the bids of those
concerned therein shall be rejected.
(R.C. § 731.15)
§ 32.027 ALTERATIONS OR MODIFICATIONS OF CONTRACT.
   When it becomes necessary in the opinion of the Legislative Authority or
Administrator, in the event an Administrator has been appointed as provided in
R.C. § 735.271, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, in the
prosecution of any work under contract, to make alterations or modifications in
the contract, the alterations or modifications shall be made only by the
Legislative Authority by resolution or by the Administrator in writing, in the
event an Administrator had been appointed as provided in R.C. § 735.271, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, but the resolution or written
modification shall be of no effect until the price to be paid for the work and
material, or both, under the altered or modified contract has been agreed upon
in writing and signed by the contractor, and by the Mayor or Administrator in
the event an Administrator has been appointed as provided in R.C. § 735.271, or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, on behalf of the municipality.
No contractor shall recover anything for work or material because of any
alteration or modification unless the contract is made as provided in this
section, nor shall the contractor recover for the work or material, or either,
more than the agreed price. The law relating to requiring bids and the awarding
of contracts for public buildings, so far as they apply, shall remain in
effect. A duplicate copy of each contract shall be filed in the office of the
Treasurer.
(R.C. § 731.16)
§ 32.028 CONTRACT RESTRICTIONS.
   The Legislative Authority shall not enter into any contract which is not to
go into full operation during the term for which all the members of the
Legislative Authority are elected.
(R.C. § 731.48)
§ 32.029 AWARD TO LOWEST RESPONSIVE AND RESPONSIBLE BIDDER.
   (A)   (1)   If the municipality is required by law or by an ordinance or
resolution adopted under division (C) of this section to award a contract to
the lowest responsive and responsible bidder, a bidder on the contract shall be
considered responsive if the bidder’s proposal responds to bid specifications
in all material respects and contains no irregularities or deviations from the
specifications which would affect the amount of the bid or otherwise give the
bidder a competitive advantage. The factors that the municipality shall
consider in determining whether a bidder on the contract is responsible include
the experience of the bidder, the bidder’s financial condition, conduct and
performance on previous contracts, facilities, management skills, and ability
to execute the contract properly.
      (2)   For purposes of this division, the provision of a bid guaranty in
accordance with R.C. § 153.54(A)(1) and (B) issued by a surety licensed to do
business in this state is evidence of financial responsibility, but the
municipality may request additional financial information for review from an
apparent low bidder after it opens all submitted bids. The municipality shall
keep additional financial information it receives pursuant to a request under
this division confidential, except under proper order of a court. The
additional financial information is not a public record under R.C. § 149.43.
      (3)   An apparent low bidder found not to be responsive and responsible
shall be notified by the municipality of that finding and the reasons for it.
The notification shall be given in writing and either by certified mail or, if
the municipality has record of an internet identifier of record associated with
the bidder, by ordinary mail and by that internet identifier of record.
   (B)   Where the municipality has adopted an ordinance or resolution under
division (C) of this section and determines to award a contract to a bidder
other than the apparent low bidder or bidders for the construction,
reconstruction, improvement, enlargement, alteration, repair, painting or
decoration of a public improvement, it shall meet with the apparent low bidder
or bidders upon a filing of a timely written protest. The protest must be
received within five days of the notification required in division (A) of this
section. No final award shall be made until the municipality either affirms or
reverses its earlier determination. Notwithstanding any other provision of the
Ohio Revised Code, the procedure described in this division is not subject to
R.C. Chapter 119.
   (C)   The municipality may, by ordinance or resolution, adopt a policy of
requiring each competitively bid contract it awards to be awarded to the lowest
responsive and responsible bidder in accordance with this section.
   (D)   As used in this section, INTERNET IDENTIFIER OF RECORD means an
electronic mail address, or any other designation used for self-identification
or routing in internet communication or posting, provided for the purpose of
receiving communication.
(R.C. § 9.312)
ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
§ 32.040 ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS AS EVIDENCE.
   Printed copies of the ordinances and resolutions of the municipality,
published under its authority, and transcripts of any resolutions or
ordinances, or of any act or proceeding of the municipality, recorded in any
book or entered on any minutes or journal kept under the direction of the
municipality, and certified by the Clerk, shall be received in evidence
throughout the state for any purpose for which the original books, ordinances,
minutes or journals would be received.
(R.C. § 731.42)
§ 32.041 PASSAGE PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The following procedures shall apply to the passage of ordinances and
resolutions of the municipality:
      (1)   Each ordinance and resolution shall be read by title only, provided
that the Legislative Authority may, by a majority vote of its members, require
any reading to be in full.
      (2)   Each ordinance or resolution shall be read on three different days,
provided that the Legislative Authority may dispense with this rule by a vote
of at least three-fourths of its members.
      (3)   The vote on the passage of each ordinance or resolution shall be
taken by yeas and nays and entered upon the journal.
      (4)   Each ordinance or resolution shall be passed, except as otherwise
provided by law, by a vote of at least a majority of all the members of the
Legislative Authority.
   (B)   Action by the Legislative Authority, not required by law to be by
ordinance or resolution, may be taken by motion approved by at least a majority
vote of the members present at the meeting when the action is taken.
(R.C. § 731.17)
§ 32.042 STYLE OF ORDINANCES.
   The style of all ordinances shall be: “Be it ordained by the Village Council
of New Richmond, State of Ohio.”
(R.C. § 731.18)
§ 32.043 SUBJECT AND AMENDMENT OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   No ordinance or resolution shall contain more than one subject, which shall
be clearly expressed in its title. No ordinance or section thereof shall be
revived or amended unless the new ordinance contains the entire ordinance or
section revived or amended and unless the ordinance or section so amended is
repealed. Each such resolution and ordinance shall be adopted or passed by a
separate vote of the Legislative Authority and the yeas and nays shall be
entered upon the journal.
(R.C. § 731.19)
§ 32.044 AUTHENTICATION AND RECORDING OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   Ordinances and resolutions shall be authenticated by the signature of the
Presiding Officer and Clerk of Council of the municipality. A succinct summary
of ordinances of a general nature or providing for improvements shall be
published as provided by §§
32.045 and
32.047 before going into operation. No ordinance shall take effect until the
expiration of ten days after the first publication of the notice. As soon as a
resolution or ordinance is passed and signed, it shall be recorded by the Clerk
in a book furnished by the Legislative Authority for that purpose.
(R.C. § 731.20)
§ 32.045 PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS; PROOF OF PUBLICATION AND
CIRCULATION.
   (A)   (1)   A succinct summary of each municipal ordinance or resolution and
all statements, orders, proclamations, notices and reports required by law or
ordinance to be published, shall be published using at least one of the
following methods:
         (a)   In a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality;
         (b)   On the official public notice web site established under R.C. §
125.182;
         (c)   On the web site and social media account of the municipality.
      (2)   Proof of the publication shall be made by affidavit of the
proprietor of the newspaper or the operator of the official public notice web
site, as applicable, and shall be filed with the Clerk of the Legislative
Authority.
   (B)   The publication shall contain notice that the complete text of each
such ordinance or resolution may be obtained or viewed at the office of the
Clerk of the Legislative Authority and may be viewed at any other location
designated by the Legislative Authority. The Legal Counsel of the municipality
shall review the summary of an ordinance or resolution published under this
section before forwarding it to the Clerk for publication, to ensure that the
summary is legally accurate and sufficient.
   (C)   Upon publication of a summary of an ordinance or resolution in
accordance with this section, the Clerk of the Legislative Authority shall
supply a copy of the complete text of each such ordinance or resolution to any
person, upon request, and may charge a reasonable fee, set by the Legislative
Authority, for each copy supplied. The Clerk shall post a copy of the text at
the Clerk’s office and at every other location designated by the Legislative
Authority.
(R.C. § 731.21)
§ 32.046 NOTICE FOR PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE MUNICIPAL CHARTER.
   In accordance with Section 9 of Article XVIII of the Ohio Constitution,
notice of proposed amendments to the municipal Charter, if and when one is
adopted by and for the municipality, shall be given in one of the following
ways:
   (A)   Not less than 30 days prior to the election at which the amendment is
to be submitted to the electors, the Clerk of the municipality shall mail a
copy of the proposed Charter amendment to each elector whose name appears upon
the poll or registration books of the last regular or general election held
therein.
   (B)   The full text of the proposed Charter amendment shall be published
once a week for not less than two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general
circulation in the municipality or as provided in R.C. § 7.16, with the first
publication being at least 15 days prior to the election at which the amendment
is to be submitted to the electors.
(R.C. § 731.211)
§ 32.047 TIMES OF PUBLICATION REQUIRED.
   The publication required in §
32.045 shall be for the following times:
   (A)   Summaries of ordinances or resolutions, and proclamations of
elections, once a week for two consecutive weeks;
   (B)   Notices, not less than two nor more than four consecutive weeks;
   (C)   All other matters shall be published once.
(R.C. § 731.22)
§ 32.048 PUBLICATION AND CERTIFICATION OF ORDINANCES IN BOOK FORM.
   (A)   When ordinances are revised, codified, rearranged, published in book
form and certified as correct by the Clerk of the Legislative Authority and the
Mayor, such publication shall be a sufficient publication, and the ordinances
so published, under appropriate titles, chapters and sections, shall be held
the same in law as though they had been published in accordance with §
32.045. A new ordinance so published in book form, a summary of which has not
been published as required by §§
32.045 and
32.047 and which contains entirely new matter, shall be published as required
by those sections. If the revision or codification is made by the municipality
and contains new matter, it shall be a sufficient publication of the
codification, including the new matter, to publish, in the manner required by
such sections, a notice of the enactment of the codifying ordinance, containing
the title of the ordinance and a summary of the new matters covered by it. This
revision and codification may be made under appropriate titles, chapters and
sections and in one ordinance containing one or more subjects.
   (B)   Except as provided by this section, a succinct summary of all
ordinances, including emergency ordinances, shall be published in accordance
with §
32.045.
(R.C. § 731.23)
§ 32.049 ADOPTION OF TECHNICAL ORDINANCES AND CODES.
   (A)   The Legislative Authority may adopt standard ordinances and codes,
prepared and promulgated by the state, or any department, board or other agency
thereof, or any code prepared and promulgated by a public or private
organization which publishes a model or standard code, including but not
limited to codes and regulations pertaining to fire, fire hazards, fire
prevention, plumbing, electricity, buildings, refrigeration machinery, piping,
boilers, heating or air conditioning, by incorporation by reference.
   (B)   The publication required by §§
32.045 through
32.050 shall clearly identify the code, shall state the purpose of the code,
shall state that a complete copy of the code is on file with the Clerk of the
Legislative Authority for inspection by the public and also on file in the
County Law Library and that the Clerk has copies available for distribution to
the public at cost. If the Legislative Authority amends or deletes any
provision of the code, the publication shall contain a brief summary of the
deletion or amendment.
   (C)   If the agency which originally promulgated or published the code
thereafter amends the code, the Legislative Authority may adopt such amendment
or change by incorporation by reference in an amending ordinance by the same
procedure as required for the adoption of the original code, without the
necessity of setting forth in full in the amending ordinance the provisions of
the original ordinance or code.
   (D)   Ordinances or codes adopted by the municipality under this section
shall be deemed to be a full and complete compliance with §§
32.045 through
32.051, and no other publication is necessary.
(R.C. § 731.231)
§ 32.050 CERTIFICATE OF CLERK AS TO PUBLICATION.
   Immediately after the expiration of the period of publication of summaries
of ordinances required by §
32.047, the Clerk of the Legislative Authority shall enter on the record of
ordinances, in a blank to be left for that purpose under the recorded
ordinance, a certificate stating in which manner and on what dates the
publication was made, and shall sign the Clerk’s name thereto officially.
Such certificate shall be prima facie evidence that legal publication of the
summary of the ordinance was made.
(R.C. § 731.24)
§ 32.051 EFFECT OF NOT MAKING PUBLICATION.
   It is a sufficient defense to any suit or prosecution under an ordinance, to
show that no publication or posting was made as required by §§
32.045 through
32.050.
(R.C. § 731.25)
§ 32.052 ORDINANCES PROVIDING FOR APPROPRIATIONS OR STREET IMPROVEMENTS;
EMERGENCY ORDINANCES.
   Ordinances or other measures providing for appropriations for the current
expenses of the municipality, or for street improvements petitioned for by the
owners of a majority of the feet front of the property benefitted and to be
especially assessed for the cost thereof, and emergency ordinances or measures
necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety
in the municipality, shall go into immediate effect. Such emergency ordinances
or measures must, upon a yea and nay vote, receive a two-thirds vote of all the
members elected to the Legislative Authority, and the reasons for the necessity
shall be set forth in one section of the ordinance or other measure.
(R.C. § 731.30)
§ 32.053 POSTING OF ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   All ordinances, resolutions, statements, orders, proclamations,
notices and reports shall hereafter be published by posting copies thereof in
not less than five of the most public places in the village for a period of not
less than 15 days prior to the taking effect thereof, as set forth in R.C. §
731.25(A).
   (B)   The public places for said posting, as determined by the Council,
shall be as follows:
      (1)   The Light-Ashburn Building;
      (2)   The Village Fire Department Building;
      (3)   The Village Street Department Building;
      (4)   The Village Life Squad Building; and
      (5)   The Village Water Treatment Plant.
(Ord. 1983-11, passed 5-24-1983)
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
§ 32.070 INITIATIVE PETITIONS.
   (A)   Ordinances and other measures providing for the exercise of any powers
of government granted by the Constitution or delegated to the municipality by
the General Assembly may be proposed by initiative petition. Such initiative
petition must contain the signatures of not less than 10% of the number of
electors who voted for Governor at the most recent general election for the
office of Governor in the municipality.
   (B)   When a petition is filed with the Clerk, signed by the required number
of electors proposing an ordinance or other measure, the Clerk shall, after ten
days, transmit a certified copy of the text of the proposed ordinance or
measure to the Board of Elections. The Clerk shall transmit the petition to the
Board, together with the certified copy of the proposed ordinance or other
measure. The Board shall examine all signatures on the petition to determine
the number of electors of the municipality who signed the petition. The Board
shall return the petition to the Clerk within ten days after receiving it,
together with a statement attesting to the number of such electors who signed
the petition.
   (C)   The Board shall submit the proposed ordinance or measure for the
approval or rejection of the electors of the municipality at the next general
election occurring subsequent to 90 days after the Clerk certifies the
sufficiency and validity of the initiative petition to the Board. No ordinance
or other measure proposed by initiative petition and approved by a majority of
the electors voting upon the measure in the municipality shall be subject to
the veto of the Mayor.
   (D)   As used in this section, CERTIFIED COPY means a copy containing a
written statement attesting that it is a true and exact reproduction of the
original proposed ordinance or other measure.
(R.C. § 731.28)
§ 32.071 REFERENDUM PETITIONS.
   (A)   Any ordinance or other measure passed by the Legislative Authority
shall be subject to the referendum except as provided in §
32.072. No ordinance or other measure shall go into effect until 30 days after
it is passed by the Legislative Authority, except as provided in §
32.072.
   (B)   When a petition, signed by 10% of the number of electors who voted for
Governor at the most recent general election for the office of Governor in the
municipality, is filed with the Clerk within 30 days after any ordinance or
other measure is filed with the Mayor or passed by the Legislative Authority,
or, if the Mayor has vetoed the ordinance or any measure and returned it to the
Legislative Authority, the petition may be filed within 30 days after the
Legislative Authority has passed the ordinance or measure over the veto,
ordering that the ordinance or measure be submitted to the electors of the
municipality for their approval or rejection, the Clerk shall, after ten days,
and not later than 4:00 p.m. of the 90th day before the day of election,
transmit a certified copy of the text of the ordinance or measure to the Board
of Elections. The Clerk shall transmit the petition to the Board, together with
the certified copy of the ordinance or measure. The Board shall examine all
signatures on the petition to determine the number of electors of the
municipality who signed the petition. The Board shall return the petition to
the Clerk within ten days after receiving it, together with a statement
attesting to the number of such electors who signed the petition. The Board
shall submit the ordinance or measure to the electors of the municipality, for
their approval or rejection, at the next general election occurring subsequent
to 90 days after the Clerk certifies the sufficiency and validity of the
petition to the Board.
   (C)   No such ordinance or measure shall go into effect until approved by
the majority of those voting upon it. The provisions of this subchapter do not
prevent the municipality, after the passage of any ordinance or other measure,
from proceeding at once to give any notice or make any publication required by
the ordinance or other measure.
   (D)   As used in this section, CERTIFIED COPY means a copy containing a
written statement attesting that it is a true and exact reproduction of the
original ordinance or other measure.
(R.C. § 731.29)
§ 32.072 MORE THAN ONE ORDINANCE REQUIRED; APPLICATION OF SUBCHAPTER.
   Whenever the Legislative Authority is required to pass more than one
ordinance or other measure to complete the legislation necessary to make and
pay for any public improvement, this subchapter shall apply only to the first
ordinance or other measure required to be passed and not to any subsequent
ordinances and other measures relating thereto. Ordinances or other measures
providing for appropriations for the current expenses of the municipality, or
for street improvements petitioned for by the owners of a majority of the feet
front of the property benefitted and to be especially assessed for the cost
thereof, and emergency ordinances or measures necessary for the immediate
preservation of the public peace, health, or safety in the municipality, shall
go into immediate effect. Such emergency ordinances or measures must, upon a
yea and nay vote, receive a two-thirds vote of all the members elected to the
Legislative Authority, and the reasons for the necessity shall be set forth in
one section of the ordinance or other measure.
(R.C. § 731.30)
§ 32.073 PRESENTATION OF PETITIONS.
   (A)   Any initiative or referendum petition may be presented in separate
parts, but each part of any initiative petition shall contain a full and
correct copy of the title and text of the proposed ordinance or other measure,
and each part of any referendum petition shall contain the number and a full
and correct copy of the title of the ordinance or other measure sought to be
referred. Each signer of any such petition must be an elector of the
municipality in which the election, upon the ordinance or measure proposed by
the initiative petition, or the ordinance or measure referred to by the
referendum petition, is to be held. Petitions shall be governed in all other
respects by the rules set forth in R.C. § 3501.38. In determining the validity
of any such petition, all signatures which are found to be irregular shall be
rejected, but no petition shall be declared invalid in its entirety when one or
more signatures are found to be invalid, except when the number of valid
signatures is found to be less than the total number required by this section.
   (B)   The petitions and signatures upon such petitions shall be prima facie
presumed to be in all respects sufficient. No ordinance or other measure
submitted to the electors of the municipality, and receiving an affirmative
majority of the votes cast thereon, shall be held ineffective or void on
account of the insufficiency of the petitions by which the submission of the
ordinance or measure was procured, nor shall the rejection, by a majority of
the votes cast thereon, of any ordinance or other measure submitted to the
electors of the municipality, be held invalid for the insufficiency.
   (C)   Ordinances proposed by initiative petition and referendums receiving
an affirmative majority of the votes cast thereon, shall become effective on
the fifth day after the day on which the Board of Elections certifies the
official vote on that question.
(R.C. § 731.31)
§ 32.074 COPY OF PROPOSED ORDINANCE OR MEASURE TO BE FILED WITH CLERK.
   (A)   Whoever seeks to propose an ordinance or measure in the municipality
by initiative petition or files a referendum petition against any ordinance or
measure shall, before circulating the petition, file a certified copy of the
proposed ordinance or measure with the Clerk.
   (B)   As used in this section, CERTIFIED COPY means a copy containing a
written statement attesting that it is a true and exact reproduction of the
original proposed ordinance or measure or of the original ordinance or measure.
(R.C. § 731.32)
§ 32.075 WORDS TO BE PRINTED IN RED.
   At the top of each part of the petition mentioned in §
32.074, the following words shall be printed in red:
   NOTICE
   Whoever knowingly signs this petition more than once, signs a name other
than his or her own, or signs when not a legal voter is liable to prosecution.
(R.C. § 731.33)
§ 32.076 DESIGNATION OF COMMITTEE FILING PETITION; PUBLIC INSPECTION OF
PETITIONS; ORDINANCES PASSED OR REPEALED PRIOR TO ELECTION.
   (A)   The petitioners may designate in any initiative or referendum petition
a committee of not less than three of their number, who shall be regarded as
filing the petition.
   (B)   After a petition has been filed with the Clerk, it shall be kept open
for public inspection for ten days.
   (C)   If, after a petition proposing an ordinance or other measure has been
filed with the Clerk, the proposed ordinance or other measure, or a substitute
for the proposed ordinance or measure approved by the committee, is passed by
the Legislative Authority, the majority of the committee shall notify the Board
of Elections in writing and the proposed ordinance or measure shall not be
submitted to a vote of the electors.
   (D)   If, after a verified referendum petition has been filed against any
ordinance or measure, the Legislative Authority repeals the ordinance or
measure, or it is held to be invalid, the Board shall not submit the ordinance
or measure to a vote of the electors.
(R.C. § 731.34)
§ 32.077 ITEMIZED STATEMENT BY CIRCULATOR OF PETITION.
   (A)   The circulator of an initiative or referendum petition, or his or her
agent, shall, within five days after the petition is filed with the Clerk, file
an itemized statement, made under penalty of election falsification, showing in
detail:
      (1)   All moneys or things of value paid, given or promised for
circulating the petition;
      (2)   Full names and addresses of all persons to whom the payments or
promises were made;
      (3)   Full names and addresses of all persons who contributed anything of
value to be used in circulating such petitions; and
      (4)   Time spent and salaries earned while circulating or soliciting
signatures to petitions by persons who were regular salaried employees of some
person who authorized them to solicit signatures for or circulate the petition
as a part of their regular duties.
   (B)   The statement provided for in division (A) of this section shall not
be required from persons who take no other part in circulating a petition than
signing declarations to parts of the petition and soliciting signatures to
them.
   (C)   The statement shall be open to public inspection for a period of one
year.
(R.C. 731.35)
§ 32.078 PROHIBITED PRACTICES RELATIVE TO PETITIONS.
   No person shall, directly or indirectly:
   (A)   Willfully misrepresent the contents of any initiative or referendum
petition;
   (B)   Pay or offer to pay any elector anything of value for signing an
initiative or referendum petition;
   (C)   Promise to help another person to obtain appointment to any office
provided for by the Constitution or laws of the state or by the ordinances of
any municipal corporation, or to any position or employment in the service of
the state or any political subdivision thereof, as a consideration for
obtaining signatures to an initiative or referendum petition;
   (D)   Obtain signatures to any initiative or referendum petition as a
consideration for the assistance or promise of assistance of another person in
securing an appointment to any office or position provided for by the
Constitution or laws of the state or by the ordinances of any municipal
corporation therein, or employment in the service of the state or any
subdivision thereof;
   (E)   Alter, add to or erase any signature or name on the parts of a
petition after the parts have been filed with the Clerk of the municipality; or
   (F)   Fail to file the sworn itemized statement required by §
32.077.
(R.C. § 731.36)
   (G)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $100 nor
more than $500.
(R.C. § 731.99(A))
§ 32.079 ACCEPTING PREMIUMS FOR SIGNING.
   (A)   No person shall accept anything of value for signing an initiative or
referendum petition.
(R.C. § 731.38)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $25.
(R.C. § 731.99(C))
§ 32.080 THREATS IN SECURING SIGNATURES.
   (A)   No person shall, directly or indirectly, by intimidation or threats,
influence or seek to influence any person to sign or abstain from signing, or
to solicit signatures to or abstain from soliciting signatures to, an
initiative or referendum petition.
(R.C. § 731.40)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 731.99(B))
§ 32.081 APPLICATION OF SUBCHAPTER IF CHARTER ADOPTED.
   This subchapter will not apply to the municipality if and when it adopts its
own Charter containing an initiative and referendum provision for its own
ordinances and other legislative measures.
(R.C. § 731.41)
CHAPTER 33: JUDICIAL AUTHORITY
Section
General Provisions
   
33.01   Jurisdiction in ordinance cases and traffic violations
   
33.02   Powers of Mayor and Mayor’s Court Magistrate in criminal matters
   
33.03   Duties of Mayor and Mayor’s Court Magistrate; fees; office; seal
   
33.04   Mayor’s Court Magistrate
   
33.05   Powers to suspend driver’s license in OVI cases
Contempt of Court
   
33.20   Summary punishment for contempt
   
33.21   Acts in contempt of court
   
33.22   Hearing
   
33.23   Contempt action for failure to pay support, failure to comply or
interference with a visitation order; summons
   
33.24   Right of accused to bail
   
33.25   Hearing on contempt; penalties; support orders; failure to withhold or
deduct money pursuant to support order
   
33.26   Imprisonment until order obeyed
   
33.27   Proceedings when party released on bail fails to appear
   
33.28   Release of prisoner committed for contempt
   
33.29   Judgment final
   
33.30   Alternative remedy
Statutory reference:
   Notification to Registrar of Motor Vehicles regarding arrest warrants;
effect on certificates of registration and driver’s licenses, see R.C. §§
4503.13 and 4507.091
   Registration and reports of Mayor’s Court, see R.C. § 1905.033
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.01 JURISDICTION IN ORDINANCE CASES AND TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   In all municipalities having a population of more than 200 not being
the site of a municipal court nor a place where a judge sits pursuant to R.C. §
1901.021 or by designation of the judges pursuant to R.C. § 1901.021, the Mayor
has jurisdiction, except as provided in divisions (B), (C) and (E) of this
section and subject to the limitation contained in R.C. § 1905.03 and the
limitation contained in R.C. § 1905.031, to hear and determine any prosecution
for the violation of an ordinance of the municipality, to hear and determine
any case involving a violation of a vehicle parking or standing ordinance of
the municipality unless the violation is required to be handled by a parking
violations bureau or joint parking violations bureau pursuant to R.C. Chapter
4521, and to hear and determine all criminal cases involving any moving traffic
violation occurring on a state highway located within the boundaries of the
municipality, subject to the limitations of R.C. §§ 2937.08 and 2938.04.
   (B)   (1)   In all municipalities having a population of more than 200 not
being the site of a municipal court nor a place where a judge of a court sits
as required pursuant to R.C. § 1901.021 or by designation of the judges
pursuant to R.C. § 1901.021, the Mayor has jurisdiction, subject to the
limitation contained in R.C. § 1905.03, to hear and determine prosecutions
involving a violation of an ordinance of the municipality relating to operating
a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them or relating to operating a vehicle with a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or
urine, and to hear and determine criminal causes involving a violation of R.C.
§ 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance that occur on a
state highway located within the boundaries of the municipality, subject to the
limitations of R.C. §§ 2937.08 and 2938.04, only if the person charged with the
violation, within ten years of the date of the violation charged, has not been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to any of the following:
         (a)   A violation of an ordinance of any municipality relating to
operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them or relating to operating a vehicle with a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or
urine;
         (b)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance;
         (c)   A violation of any ordinance of any municipality or of any
section of the Ohio Revised Code that regulates the operation of vehicles upon
the streets, to which all of the following apply:
            1.   The person, in the case in which the conviction was obtained
or the plea of guilty was entered, had been charged with a violation of an
ordinance of a type described in division (B)(1)(a) of this section, or with a
violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
            2.   The charge of the violation described in division (B)(1)(c)1.
of this section was dismissed or reduced;
            3.   The violation of which the person was convicted or to which he
or she pleaded guilty arose out of the same facts and circumstances and the
same act as did the charge that was dismissed or reduced;
         (d)   A violation of a statute of the United States or any other state
or a municipal ordinance of a municipality located in any other state that is
substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19.
      (2)   The Mayor does not have jurisdiction to hear and determine any
prosecution or criminal cause involving a violation described in division (B)
(1)(a) or (B)(1)(b) of this section, regardless of where the violation
occurred, if the person charged with the violation, within ten years of the
violation charged, has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation
listed in division (B)(1)(a), (B)(1)(b), (B)(1)(c), or (B)(1)(d) of this
section.
      (3)   If the Mayor, in hearing a prosecution involving a violation of an
ordinance of the municipality he or she serves relating to operating a vehicle
while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them
or relating to operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol,
a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine, or in hearing a criminal cause
involving a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, determines that the person charged, within ten years of the
violation charged, has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation
listed in division (B)(1)(a), (B)(1)(b), (B)(1)(c), or (B)(1)(d) of this
section, the Mayor immediately shall transfer the case to the county court or
municipal court with jurisdiction over the violation charged, in accordance
with R.C. § 1905.032.
   (C)   (1)   In all municipalities having a population of more than 200 not
being the site of a municipal court and not being a place where a judge of a
court listed in division (A) of this section sits as required pursuant to R.C.
§ 1901.021 or by designation of the judges pursuant to R.C. § 1901.021, the
Mayor, subject to R.C. §§ 1901.031, 2937.08, and 2938.04, has jurisdiction to
hear and determine prosecutions involving a violation of a municipal ordinance
that is substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4510.14(A) or 4510.16 and to hear
and determine criminal causes that involve a moving traffic violation, that
involve a violation of R.C. § 4510.14(A) or 4510.16, and that occur on a state
highway located within the boundaries of the municipality only if all of the
following apply regarding the violation and the person charged:
         (a)   Regarding a violation of R.C. § 4510.16 or a violation of a
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that division, the
person charged with the violation, within six years of the date of the
violation charged, has not been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any of the
following:
            1.   A violation of R.C. § 4510.16;
            2.   A violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to R.C. § 4510.16;
            3.   A violation of any municipal ordinance or section of the Ohio
Revised Code that regulates the operation of vehicles upon the highways or
streets, in a case in which, after a charge against the person of a violation
of a type described in division (C)(1)(a)1. or (C)(1)(a)2. of this section was
dismissed or reduced, the person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation that arose out of the same facts and circumstances and the same act
as did the charge that was dismissed or reduced.
         (b)   Regarding a violation of R.C. § 4510.14(A) or a violation of a
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that division, the
person charged with the violation, within six years of the date of the
violation charged, has not been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any of the
following:
            1.   A violation of R.C. § 4510.14(A);
            2.   A violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to R.C. § 4510.14(A);
            3.   A violation of any municipal ordinance or section of the Ohio
Revised Code that regulates the operation of vehicles upon the highways or
streets, in a case in which, after a charge against the person of a violation
of a type described in division (C)(1)(b)1. or (C)(1)(b)2. of this section was
dismissed or reduced, the person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation that arose out of the same facts and circumstances and the same act
as did the charge that was dismissed or reduced.
      (2)   The Mayor does not have jurisdiction to hear and determine any
prosecution or criminal cause involving a violation described in division (C)
(1)(a)1. or (C)(1)(a)2. of this section if the person charged with the
violation, within six years of the violation charged, has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to any violation listed in division (C)(1)(a)1. through (C)(1)
(a)3. of this section and does not have jurisdiction to hear and determine any
prosecution or criminal cause involving a violation described in division (C)
(1)(b)1. or (C)(1)(b)2. of this section if the person charged with the
violation, within six years of the violation charged, has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to any violation listed in division (C)(1)(b)1. through (C)(1)
(b)3. of this section.
      (3)   If the Mayor, in hearing a prosecution involving a violation of an
ordinance of the municipality he or she serves that is substantially equivalent
to R.C. § 4510.14(A) or 4510.16 or a violation of R.C. § 4510.14(A) or 4510.16,
determines that, under division (C)(2) of this section, he or she does not have
jurisdiction of the prosecution, the Mayor immediately shall transfer the case
to the county court or municipal court with jurisdiction over the violation in
accordance with R.C. § 1905.032.
   (D)   If the Mayor has jurisdiction pursuant to division (B)(1) of this
section to hear and determine a prosecution or criminal cause involving a
violation described in division (B)(1)(a) or (B)(1)(b) of this section, the
authority of the Mayor to hear or determine the prosecution or cause is subject
to the limitation contained in R.C. § 1905.03(C). If the Mayor has jurisdiction
pursuant to division (A) or (C) of this section to hear and determine a
prosecution or criminal cause involving a violation other than a violation
described in division (B)(1)(a) or (B)(1)(b) of this section, the authority of
the Mayor to hear or determine the prosecution or cause is subject to the
limitation contained in R.C. § 1905.031(C).
   (E)   (1)   The Mayor of a municipal corporation does not have the
jurisdiction to hear and determine any prosecution or criminal cause involving
any of the following:
         (a)   A violation of R.C. § 2919.25 or 2919.27;
         (b)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.211 or
2911.211 that involves a person who was a family or household member of the
defendant at the time of the violation;
         (c)   A violation a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to an offense described in division (E)(1)(a) or (E)(1)(b) of this
section and that involves a person who was a family or household member of the
defendant at the time of the violation.
      (2)   The Mayor of a municipal corporation does not have the jurisdiction
to hear and determine a motion filed pursuant to R.C. § 2919.26 or filed
pursuant to a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that
section or to issue a protection order pursuant to that section or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (3)   As used in this section, FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2919.25.
   (F)   In keeping his or her docket and files, the Mayor and a Mayor’s Court
Magistrate appointed under R.C. § 1905.05 shall be governed by the laws
pertaining to county courts.
(R.C. § 1905.01)
§ 33.02 POWERS OF MAYOR AND MAYOR’S COURT MAGISTRATE IN CRIMINAL MATTERS.
   (A)   The Mayor has, within the corporation limits, all the powers conferred
upon sheriffs to suppress disorder and keep the peace.
   (B)   The Mayor shall award and issue all writs and process that are
necessary to enforce the administration of justice throughout the municipality.
The Mayor shall subscribe his or her name and affix his or her official seal to
all writs, process, transcripts, and other official papers. A Mayor’s Court
Magistrate, in hearing and determining prosecutions and criminal causes that
are within the scope of his or her authority under R.C. § 1905.05, has the same
powers and duties as are granted to or imposed upon a Mayor under this
division.
   (C)   The Mayor shall be disqualified in any criminal case in which he or
she was the arresting officer, assisted in the arrest, or was present at the
time of arrest, and shall not hear the case.
(R.C. § 1905.20)
§ 33.03 DUTIES OF MAYOR AND MAYOR’S COURT MAGISTRATE; FEES; OFFICE; SEAL.
   (A)   The Mayor and a Mayor’s Court Magistrate shall keep a docket. Neither
the Mayor nor a Mayor’s Court Magistrate shall retain or receive for his or her
own use any of the fines, forfeitures, fees, or costs he or she collects. A
Mayor’s Court Magistrate shall account for all the fines, forfeitures, fees,
and costs he or she collects and transfer them to the Mayor. The Mayor shall
account for and dispose of all the fines, forfeitures, fees, and costs he or
she collects, including all such fines, forfeitures, fees, and costs that are
transferred to him or her by a Mayor’s Court Magistrate, as provided in R.C. §
733.40.
   (B)   The Mayor shall be paid such fixed annual salary as the Legislative
Authority provides under R.C. §§ 731.08 and 731.13, and a Mayor’s Court
Magistrate shall receive compensation as provided in R.C. § 1905.05.
   (C)   The Mayor shall keep an office, provided by the Legislative Authority,
at a convenient place in the municipality, and shall be furnished by the
Legislative Authority with the corporate seal of the municipality. In the
center of the seal shall be the words, “Mayor of the Village of New Richmond”
(R.C. § 1905.21)
§ 33.04 MAYOR’S COURT MAGISTRATE.
   (A)   A Mayor of a municipality that has a Mayor’s Court may appoint a
person as Mayor’s Court Magistrate to hear and determine prosecutions and
criminal cases in the Mayor’s Court that are within the jurisdiction of the
Mayor’s Court, as set forth in R.C. § 1905.01. No person shall be appointed as
a Mayor’s Court Magistrate unless the person has been admitted to the practice
of law in this state and, for a total of at least three years preceding his or
her appointment or the commencement of his or her service as magistrate, has
been engaged in the practice of law in this state or served as a judge of a
court of record in any jurisdiction in the United States, or both.
      (1)   A person appointed as a Mayor’s Court Magistrate under this
division is entitled to hear and determine prosecutions and criminal cases in
the Mayor’s Court that are within the jurisdiction of the Mayor’s Court, as set
forth in R.C. § 1905.01. If a Mayor is prohibited from hearing or determining a
prosecution or cause that charges a person with a violation of R.C. § 4511.19
or a municipal OVI ordinance as defined in R.C. § 4511.181 due to the operation
of R.C. § 1905.03(C), or is prohibited from hearing or determining any other
prosecution or cause due to the operation of R.C. § 1905.031(C), the
prohibition against the Mayor hearing or determining the prosecution or causes
does not affect and shall not be construed as affecting the jurisdiction or
authority of a person appointed as a Mayor’s Court Magistrate under this
division to hear and determine the prosecution or cause in accordance with this
section. In hearing and determining such prosecutions and causes, the
magistrate has the same powers, duties, and authority as does a Mayor who
conducts a Mayor’s Court to hear and determine prosecutions and causes in
general, including but not limited to the power and authority to decide the
prosecution or cause, enter judgement, and impose sentence; the powers, duties,
and authority granted to Mayors of Mayor’s Courts by this chapter, in relation
to the hearing and determination of prosecutions and causes in Mayor’s Courts;
and the powers, duties, and authority granted to Mayors of Mayor’s Courts by
any provisions of the Ohio Revised Code, in relation to the hearing and
determination of prosecutions and causes in Mayor’s Courts. A judgement entered
and a sentence imposed by a Mayor’s Court Magistrate do not have to be reviewed
or approved by the Mayor who appointed the Magistrate, and have the same force
and effect as if they had been entered or imposed by the Mayor.
      (2)   A person appointed as a Mayor’s Court Magistrate under this
division is not entitled to hear or determine any prosecution or criminal cause
other than prosecutions and causes that are within the jurisdiction of the
Mayor’s Court, as set forth in R.C. § 1905.01.
      (3)   A municipality that a Mayor’s Court Magistrate serves shall pay the
compensation for the services of the Magistrate, which shall be either a fixed
annual salary set by the Legislative Authority or a fixed annual amount or fees
for services rendered set under a contract the Magistrate and the municipality
enter into.
   (B)   The appointment of a person as a Mayor’s Court Magistrate under
division (A) of this section does not preclude the Mayor that appointed the
Magistrate, subject to the limitation contained in R.C. § 1905.03 and the
limitation contained in R.C. § 1905.031, from also hearing and determining
prosecutions and criminal causes in the Mayor’s Court that are within the
jurisdiction of the Mayor’s Court, as set forth in R.C. § 1905.01.
(R.C. § 1905.05)
§ 33.05 POWER TO SUSPEND DRIVER’S LICENSE IN OVI CASES.
   (A)   (1)   The Mayor of a municipal corporation that has a Mayor’s Court,
and a Mayor’s Court Magistrate, are entitled to suspend, and shall suspend, in
accordance with R.C. §§ 4510.02, 4510.07, and 4511.19, the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege of any
person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19
(A), of a municipal ordinance relating to operating a vehicle while under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them, or of a
municipal ordinance relating to operating a vehicle with a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or
urine that is substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A).
      (2)   The Mayor of a municipal corporation that has a Mayor’s Court, and
a Mayor’s Court Magistrate, are entitled to suspend, and shall suspend, in
accordance with R.C. §§ 4510.02, 4510.07, and 4511.19, the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege of any
person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(B)
or of a municipal ordinance relating to the operating of a vehicle with a
prohibited concentration of alcohol in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, or urine that is substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(B).
   (B)   Suspension of a commercial driver’s license under this section shall
be concurrent with any period of disqualification or suspension under R.C. §
3123.58 or 4506.16. No person who is disqualified for life from holding a
commercial driver’s license under R.C. § 4506.16 shall be issued a driver’s
license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period for which the commercial
driver’s license was suspended under this section.
(R.C. § 1905.201)
CONTEMPT OF COURT
§ 33.20 SUMMARY PUNISHMENT FOR CONTEMPT.
   A court, or judge at chambers, may summarily punish a person guilty of
misbehavior in the presence of or so near the court or judge as to obstruct the
administration of justice.
(R.C. § 2705.01)
§ 33.21 ACTS IN CONTEMPT OF COURT.
   (A)   A person guilty of any of the following acts may be punished for
contempt:
      (1)   Disobedience of, or resistance to, a lawful writ, process, order,
rule, judgment, or command of a court or officer;
      (2)   Misbehavior of an officer of the court in the performance of
official duties, or in official transactions;
      (3)   A failure to obey a subpoena duly served, or a refusal to be sworn
or to answer as a witness, when lawfully required;
      (4)   The rescue or attempted rescue of a person or of property in the
custody of an officer by virtue of an order or process of court held by the
officer;
      (5)   A failure upon the part of a person recognized to appear as a
witness in a court to appear in compliance with the terms of the person’s
recognizance;
      (6)   A failure to comply with an order issued pursuant to R.C. § 3109.19
or 3111.81;
      (7)   A failure to obey a subpoena issued by the Department of Job and
Family Services, the Department of Children and Youth, or a child support
enforcement agency pursuant to R.C. § 5101.37;
      (8)   A willful failure to submit to genetic testing, or a willful
failure to submit a child to genetic testing, as required by an order for
genetic testing issued under R.C. § 3111.41.
(R.C. § 2705.02)
   (B)   If a person summoned to appear as provided in R.C. § 2935.10(B) fails
to appear without just cause and personal service of the summons was had upon
the person, he or she may be found guilty of contempt of court, and may be
fined not to exceed $20 for such contempt. Upon failure to appear, the court or
magistrate may forthwith issue a warrant for his or her arrest.
(R.C. § 2935.11)
§ 33.22 HEARING.
   In cases under §
33.21, a charge in writing shall be filed with the Clerk of the Court, an entry
thereof made upon the journal, and an opportunity given to the accused to be
heard, by himself, herself or counsel. This section does not prevent the court
from issuing process to bring the accused into court, or from holding him or
her in custody pending such proceedings.
(R.C. § 2705.03)
§ 33.23 CONTEMPT ACTION FOR FAILURE TO PAY SUPPORT, FAILURE TO COMPLY OR
INTERFERENCE WITH A VISITATION ORDER; SUMMONS.
   (A)   As used in this section, TITLE IV-D CASE has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 3125.01.
   (B)   (1)   Any party who has a legal claim to any support ordered for a
child, spouse, or former spouse may initiate a contempt action for failure to
pay the support. In Title IV-D cases, the contempt action for failure to pay
support also may be initiated by an attorney retained by the party who has the
legal claim, the prosecuting attorney, or an attorney of the Department of Job
and Family Services or the child support enforcement agency.
      (2)   Any parent who is granted parenting time rights under a parenting
time order or decree issued pursuant to R.C. § 3109.051 or 3109.12, any person
who is granted visitation rights under a visitation order or decree issued
pursuant to R.C. § 3109.051, 3109.11 or 3109.12 or pursuant to any other
provision of the Ohio Revised Code, or any other person who is subject to any
parenting time or visitation order or decree, may initiate a contempt action
for the failure to comply with, or an interference with, the order or decree.
   (C)   In any contempt action initiated pursuant to division (B) of this
section, the accused shall appear upon the summons and order to appear that is
issued by the court. The summons shall include all of the following:
      (1)   Notice that failure to appear may result in the issuance of an
order of arrest, and in cases involving alleged failure to pay support, the
issuance of an order for the payment of support by withholding an amount from
the personal earnings of the accused or by withholding or deducting an amount
from some other asset of the accused;
      (2)   Notice that the accused has a right to counsel, and that if
indigent, the accused must apply for a public defender or court appointed
counsel within three business days after receipt of the summons;
      (3)   Notice that the court may refuse to grant a continuance at the time
of the hearing for the purposes of the accused obtaining counsel if the accused
fails to make a good faith effort to retain counsel or to obtain a public
defender;
      (4)   Notice of the potential penalties that could be imposed upon the
accused if the accused is found guilty of contempt for failure to pay support
or for a failure to comply with, or an interference with, a parenting time or
visitation order or decree;
      (5)   Notice that the court may grant limited driving privileges under
R.C. § 4510.021 pursuant to a request made by the accused, if the driver’s
license was suspended based on a notice issued pursuant to R.C. § 3123.54 by
the child support enforcement agency and if the request is accompanied by a
recent non-certified copy of a driver’s abstract from the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles.
   (D)   If the accused is served as required by the Rules of Civil Procedure
or by any special statutory proceedings that are relevant to the case, the
court may order the attachment of the person of the accused upon failure to
appear as ordered by the court.
   (E)   The imposition of any penalty under §
33.25 shall not eliminate any obligation of the accused to pay any past,
present or future support obligation or any obligation of the accused to comply
with or refrain from interfering with the parenting time or visitation order or
decree. The court shall have jurisdiction to make a finding of contempt for the
failure to pay support and to impose the penalties set forth in §
33.25 in all cases in which past due support is at issue even if the duty to
pay support has terminated, and shall have jurisdiction to make a finding of
contempt for a failure to comply with, or an interference with, a parenting
time or visitation order or decree and to impose the penalties set forth in §
33.25 in all cases in which the failure or interference is at issue even if the
parenting time or visitation order or decree is no longer in effect.
(R.C. § 2705.031)
§ 33.24 RIGHT OF ACCUSED TO BAIL.
   (A)   In proceedings under §
33.21, if the writ is not returnable forthwith, the court may fix the amount of
a bond to be given by the accused, with surety to the satisfaction of the
sheriff. Upon the return of a writ, when it is not convenient to hear the
charge without delay, the court shall fix the amount of a bond to be given,
with surety to the satisfaction of the Clerk of the Court, for the appearance
of the accused to answer the charge.
   (B)   On the execution of such bond, the accused shall be released from
custody.
(R.C. § 2705.04)
§ 33.25 HEARING ON CONTEMPT; PENALTIES; SUPPORT ORDERS; FAILURE TO WITHHOLD OR
DEDUCT MONEY PURSUANT TO SUPPORT ORDER.
   (A)   In all contempt proceedings, the court shall conduct a hearing. At the
hearing, the court shall investigate the charge and hear any answer or
testimony that the accused makes or offers and shall determine whether the
accused is guilty of the contempt charge. If the accused is found guilty, the
court may impose any of the following penalties:
      (1)   For a first offense, a fine of not more than $250, a definite term
of imprisonment of not more than 30 days in jail, or both;
      (2)   For a second offense, a fine of not more than $500, a definite term
of imprisonment of not more than 60 days in jail, or both;
      (3)   For a third or subsequent offense, a fine of not more than $1,000,
a definite term of imprisonment of not more than 90 days in jail, or both.
   (B)   In all contempt proceedings initiated pursuant to §
33.23 against an employer, the Bureau of Workers’ Compensation, an employer
that is paying workers’ compensation benefits, a board, board of trustees, or
other governing entity of a retirement system, person paying or distributing
income to an obligor under a support order, or financial institution that is
ordered to withhold or deduct an amount of money from the income or other
assets of a person required to pay support and that fails to withhold or deduct
the amount of money as ordered by the support order, the court may also require
the employer, the Bureau of Workers’ Compensation, an employer that is paying
workers’ compensation benefits, a board, board of trustees, or other governing
entity of a retirement system, person paying or distributing income to an
obligor under a support order, or financial institution to pay the accumulated
support arrearages.
(R.C. § 2705.05)
§ 33.26 IMPRISONMENT UNTIL ORDER OBEYED.
   When the contempt consists of the omission to do an act which the accused
yet can perform, he or she may be imprisoned until he or she performs it.
(R.C. § 2705.06)
§ 33.27 PROCEEDINGS WHEN PARTY RELEASED ON BAIL FAILS TO APPEAR.
   If the party released on bail under §
33.24 fails to appear upon the day named, the court may issue another order or
arrest, or order the bond for his or her appearance to be prosecuted, or both.
If the bond is prosecuted, the measure of damages in the action is the extent
of loss or injury sustained by the aggrieved party by reason of the misconduct
for which the contempt was prosecuted, and the costs of the proceeding. Such
recovery is for the benefit of the party injured.
(R.C. § 2705.07)
§ 33.28 RELEASE OF PRISONER COMMITTED FOR CONTEMPT.
   When a person is committed to jail for contempt, the court or judge who made
the order may discharge him or her from imprisonment when it appears that the
public interest will not suffer thereby.
(R.C. § 2705.08)
§ 33.29 JUDGMENT FINAL.
   The judgment and orders of a court or officer made in cases of contempt may
be reviewed on appeal. Appeal proceedings shall not suspend execution of the
order or judgment until the person in contempt files a bond in the court
rendering the judgment, or in the court or before the officer making the order,
payable to the state, with sureties to the acceptance of the clerk of that
court, in an amount fixed by the reviewing court, or a judge thereof,
conditioned that if judgment is rendered against the person, he or she will
abide by and perform the order or judgment.
(R.C. § 2705.09)
§ 33.30 ALTERNATIVE REMEDY.
   This subchapter furnishes a remedy in cases not provided for by another
section of this code or the Ohio Revised Code.
(R.C. § 2705.10)
CHAPTER 34: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
34.01   Marshal and Police Chief synonymous
   
34.02   Appointment of Marshal
   
34.03   Deputy marshals and police officers
   
34.04   Auxiliary police units
   
34.05   Offenses affecting employment of law enforcement officers; probationary
period; final appointment
   
34.06   Removal proceedings; suspension; appeals
   
34.07   General powers
   
34.08   Powers and duties of Marshal
   
34.09   Disposition of fines and penalties
   
34.10   Property recovered by police
   
34.11   Disposition to claimant
   
34.12   Sale of unclaimed property; disposition of proceeds
   
34.13   Expenses of storage and sale; notice
   
34.14   Contracts for police protection; nonresident service without contract
   
34.15   Peace officer administering oaths; acknowledging complaints, summonses,
affidavits and returns of court orders
   
34.16   Auxiliary police unit
   
34.17   Police Department Policy Manual adopted by reference
Statutory reference:
   Canine units:
    Registration, see R.C. § 955.012
    Regulations, see O.A.C. Chapter 109:2-7
   Motor vehicle pursuit policies to be adopted by municipality, see R.C. §
2935.031
   Peace officer training, see O.A.C. Chapter 109:2-1
   Power of municipality to establish a police department, see R.C. § 715.05
   Purchase of police dogs or horses by law enforcement officers, see R.C. §
9.62
§ 34.01 MARSHAL AND POLICE CHIEF SYNONYMOUS.
   The designation “Marshal”, wherever used in this code, is defined to include
the term “Police Chief”, and the designation “Police Chief”, wherever used in
this code, is defined to include the term “Marshal”.
§ 34.02 APPOINTMENT OF MARSHAL.
   (A)   Each municipality shall have a Marshal or designated Police Chief,
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Legislative
Authority, who need not be a resident of the municipality at the time of
appointment, but shall become a resident thereof within six months after
appointment by the Mayor and confirmation by the Legislative Authority, unless
the residence requirement is waived by ordinance, and who shall continue in
office until removed therefrom as provided by §
34.06.
   (B)   No person shall receive an appointment under this section unless, not
more than 60 days prior to receiving an appointment, the person has passed a
physical examination given by a licensed physician, a physician assistant, a
clinical nurse specialist, a certified nurse practitioner, or a certified
nurse-midwife, showing that the person meets the physical requirements
necessary to perform the duties of Marshal as established by the Legislative
Authority. The appointing authority shall, prior to making any appointment,
file with the Ohio Police and Fire Pension Fund a copy of the report or
findings of this licensed physician, physician assistant, clinical nurse
specialist, certified nurse practitioner, or certified nurse-midwife. The
professional fee for the physical examination shall be paid for by the
Legislative Authority.
(R.C. § 737.15)
§ 34.03 DEPUTY MARSHALS AND POLICE OFFICERS.
   (A)   The Mayor shall, when provided for by the Legislative Authority, and
subject to its confirmation, appoint all deputy marshals, police officers,
night guards, and special police officers. All officers shall continue in
office until removed therefrom for the cause and in the manner provided by §
34.08.
   (B)   No person shall receive an appointment under this section unless the
person has, not more than 60 days prior to receiving appointment, passed a
physical examination given by a licensed physician, a physician assistant, a
clinical nurse specialist, a certified nurse practitioner, or a certified
nurse-midwife, showing that the person meets the physical requirements
necessary to perform the duties of the position to which the person is to be
appointed as established by the Legislative Authority. The appointing authority
shall, prior to making any appointment, file with the Ohio Police and Fire
Pension Fund a copy of the report or findings of the licensed physician,
physician assistant, clinical nurse specialist, certified nurse practitioner,
or certified nurse-midwife. The professional fee for the physical examination
shall be paid for by the Legislative Authority.
(R.C. § 737.16)
§ 34.04 AUXILIARY POLICE UNITS.
   (A)   The Legislative Authority may establish, by ordinance, an auxiliary
police unit within the police department, and provide for the regulation of
auxiliary police officers. The Mayor shall be the executive head of the
auxiliary police unit, shall make all appointments and removals of auxiliary
police officers, subject to any general rules prescribed by the Legislative
Authority by ordinance, and shall prescribe rules for the organization,
training, administration, control, and conduct of the auxiliary police unit.
The Marshal shall have exclusive control of the stationing and transferring of
all auxiliary police officers, under such general rules as the Mayor
prescribes.
   (B)   (1)   The Legislative Authority may establish, by ordinance, a parking
enforcement unit within the police department, and provide for the regulation
of parking enforcement officers. The Mayor shall be the executive head of the
parking enforcement unit, shall make all appointments and removals of parking
enforcement officers, subject to any general rules prescribed by the
Legislative Authority by ordinance, and shall prescribe rules for the
organization, training, administration, control, and conduct of the parking
enforcement unit. The Mayor may appoint parking enforcement officers who agree
to serve for nominal compensation, and persons with physical disabilities may
receive appointments as parking enforcement officers.
      (2)   The authority of the parking enforcement officers shall be limited
to the enforcement of ordinances governing parking in accessible parking
locations and fire lanes and any other parking ordinances specified in the
ordinance creating the parking enforcement unit. Parking enforcement officers
shall have no other powers.
      (3)   The training of parking enforcement officers shall include
instruction in general administrative rules and procedures governing the
parking enforcement unit, the role of the judicial system as it relates to
parking regulations and enforcement, proper techniques and methods relating to
the enforcement of parking ordinances, human interaction skills, and first aid.
(R.C. § 737.161)
§ 34.05 OFFENSES AFFECTING EMPLOYMENT OF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS; PROBATIONARY
PERIOD; FINAL APPOINTMENT.
   (A)   Offenses affecting employment.
      (1)   As used in this section, FELONY has the same meaning as in R.C. §
109.511.
      (2)   (a)   The Mayor shall not appoint a person as a Marshal, a deputy
marshal, a police officer, a night security officer, a special police officer,
or an auxiliary police officer on a permanent basis, on a temporary basis, for
a probationary term, or on other than a permanent basis if the person
previously has been convicted of or has pleaded guilty to a felony.
         (b)   1.   The Mayor shall terminate the employment of a Marshal,
deputy marshal, police officer, night security officer, special police officer,
or auxiliary police officer who does either of the following: pleads guilty to
a felony; or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor pursuant to a negotiated plea
agreement as provided in R.C. § 2929.43(D) in which the Marshal, deputy
marshal, police officer, night security officer, special police officer, or
auxiliary police officer agrees to surrender the certificate awarded to that
person under R.C. § 109.77.
            2.   The Mayor shall suspend from employment a Marshal, deputy
marshal, police officer, night security officer, special police officer, or
auxiliary police officer who is convicted, after trial, of a felony. If the
Marshal, deputy marshal, police officer, night security officer, special police
officer, or auxiliary police officer files an appeal from that conviction and
the conviction is upheld by the highest court to which the appeal is taken or
if that person does not file a timely appeal, the Mayor shall terminate that
person’s employment. If the Marshal, deputy marshal, police officer, night
security officer, special police officer, or auxiliary police officer files an
appeal that results in that person’s acquittal of the felony or conviction of a
misdemeanor, or in the dismissal of the felony charge against that person, the
Mayor shall reinstate that person. A Marshal, deputy marshal, police officer,
night security officer, special police officer, or auxiliary police officer who
is reinstated under this division shall not receive any back pay unless that
person’s conviction of the felony was reversed on appeal, or the felony charge
was dismissed, because the court found insufficient evidence to convict that
person of the felony.
         (c)   This division (A)(2) of this section does not apply regarding an
offense that was committed prior to January 1, 1997.
         (d)   The suspension from employment, or the termination of the
employment, of a Marshal, deputy marshal, police officer, night security
officer, special police officer, or auxiliary police officer under division (A)
(2)(b) of this section shall be in accordance with R.C. Chapter 119.
(R.C. § 737.162)
   (B)   Probationary period; final appointment. Any appointments made shall be
for a probationary period of six months continuous service, and no appointments
shall be deemed finally made until the appointee has satisfactorily served his
or her probationary period. At the end of the probationary period the Mayor
shall transmit to the Legislative Authority a record of the employee’s service
with his or her recommendations thereon; and with the concurrence of the
Legislative Authority, the Mayor may remove or finally appoint the employee.
(R.C. § 737.17)
§ 34.06 REMOVAL PROCEEDINGS; SUSPENSION; APPEALS.
   (A)   Except as provided in §
34.05(A), if the Mayor has reason to believe that a duly appointed Marshal of
the municipality has been guilty of incompetency, inefficiency, dishonesty,
drunkenness, immoral conduct, insubordination, discourteous treatment of the
public, neglect of duty, or any other acts of misfeasance, malfeasance, or
nonfeasance in the performance of his or her official duty, the Mayor shall
file with the Legislative Authority written charges against the person, setting
forth in detail the reason therefor and immediately shall serve a true copy
thereof upon the person against whom they are made.
   (B)   Charges filed under this section shall be heard at the next regular
meeting of the Legislative Authority occurring not less than five days after
the date the charges have been served on the person against whom they are made.
The person against whom charges are filed may appear in person and by counsel
at the hearing, examine all witnesses, and answer all charges against him or
her.
   (C)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Legislative Authority may
dismiss the charges, suspend the accused from office for not more than 60 days,
or remove the accused from office.
   (D)   Action of the Legislative Authority removing or suspending the accused
from office shall require the affirmative vote of two-thirds of all elected
members.
   (E)   In the case of removal from office, the person so removed may appeal
on questions of law and fact the decision of the Legislative Authority to the
Court of Common Pleas. The person shall take the appeal within ten days from
the date of the finding of the Legislative Authority.
(R.C. § 737.171)
§ 34.07 GENERAL POWERS.
   (A)   The Marshal shall be the peace officer of the municipality and the
executive head, under the Mayor, of the police force. The Marshal, and the
deputy marshals, police officers, or night security officers under him or her
shall have the powers conferred by law upon police officers in all
municipalities of the state, and other powers not inconsistent with the nature
of their offices as are conferred by ordinance.
   (B)   A Marshal, deputy marshal, or police officer of a municipality may
participate, as the director of an organized crime task force established under
R.C. § 177.02 or as a member of the investigatory staff of such a task force,
in an investigation of organized criminal activity in any counties in this
state under R.C. §§ 177.01 through 177.03.
(R.C. § 737.18)
§ 34.08 POWERS AND DUTIES OF MARSHAL.
   (A)   The Marshal has exclusive authority over the stationing and transfer
of all deputies, officers, and employees within the police department under the
general rules that the Mayor prescribes.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in §
34.05(A), the Marshal has the exclusive right to suspend any of the deputies,
officers, or employees in the police department who are under the management
and control of the Marshal for incompetence, gross neglect of duty, gross
immorality, habitual drunkenness, failure to obey orders given them by the
proper authority, or for any other reasonable or just cause.
      (2)   If an employee is suspended under this section, the Marshal
immediately shall certify this fact in writing, together with the cause for the
suspension, to the Mayor and immediately shall serve a true copy of the charge
upon the person against whom they are made. Within five days after receiving
this certification, the Mayor shall inquire into the cause of the suspension
and shall render a judgment on it. If the Mayor sustains the charges, the
judgment of the Mayor may be for the person’s suspension, reduction in rank, or
removal from the department.
      (3)   Suspensions of more than three days, reduction in rank, or removal
from the department under this section may be appealed to the Legislative
Authority within five days from the date of the Mayor’s judgment. The
Legislative Authority shall hear the appeal at its next regularly scheduled
meeting. The person against whom the judgment has been rendered may appear in
person and by counsel at the hearing, examine all witnesses and answer all
charges against him or her.
      (4)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Legislative Authority may
dismiss the charges, uphold the Mayor’s judgment, or modify the judgment to one
of suspension for not more than 60 days, reduction in rank, or removal from the
department.
      (5)   Action of the Legislative Authority removing or suspending the
accused from the department requires the affirmative vote of two-thirds of all
members elected to it.
      (6)   In the case of removal from the department, the person so removed
may appeal on questions of law and fact the decision of the Legislative
Authority to the Court of Common Pleas of the county in which the municipality
is situated. The person shall take the appeal within ten days from the date of
the finding of the Legislative Authority.
   (C)   The Marshal shall suppress all riots, disturbances, and breaches of
the peace, and to that end may call upon the citizens to aid him or her. The
Marshal shall arrest all disorderly persons in the municipality, and pursue and
arrest any person fleeing from justice in any part of the state. The Marshal
shall arrest any person in the act of committing an offense against the laws of
the state or the ordinances of the municipality, and forthwith bring the person
before the Mayor or other competent authority for examination or trial. The
Marshal shall receive and execute proper authority for the arrest and detention
of criminals fleeing or escaping from other places or states.
   (D)   In the discharge of his or her duties, the Marshal shall have the
powers and be subject to the responsibilities of constables, and for services
performed by the Marshal or his or her deputies the same fees and expenses
shall be taxed as are allowed constables.
(R.C. § 737.19)
§ 34.09 DISPOSITION OF FINES AND PENALTIES.
   All fees, costs, fines, and penalties collected by the Marshal shall
immediately be paid to the Mayor, who shall report to the Legislative Authority
monthly the amount thereof, from whom and for what purpose collected, and when
paid to the Mayor.
(R.C. § 737.20)
§ 34.10 PROPERTY RECOVERED BY POLICE.
   (A)   Stolen or other property recovered by members of the police force
shall be deposited and kept in a place designated by the Mayor. Each article
shall be entered in a book kept for that purpose, with the name of the owner,
if ascertained, the person from whom taken, the place where found with general
circumstances, the date of its receipt, and the name of the officer recovering
it.
   (B)   An inventory of all money or other property shall be given to the
party from whom taken, and, in case it is not claimed by some person within 30
days after arrest and seizure, it shall be delivered to the person from whom
taken, and to no other person, either attorney, agent, factor, or clerk, except
by special order of the Mayor.
(R.C. § 737.29)
§ 34.11 DISPOSITION TO CLAIMANT.
   If, within 30 days, the money or property recovered under §
34.10 is claimed by any person other than the person from whom the property was
recovered from, it shall be retained by the custodian thereof until after the
discharge or conviction of the person from whom it was taken, and so long as it
may be required as evidence in any case in court. If the claimant establishes
to the satisfaction of the court that he or she is the rightful owner, it shall
be restored to him or her; otherwise, it shall be returned to the accused
person, personally, and not to any attorney, agent, factor, or clerk of the
accused person, except upon special order of the Mayor after all liens and
claims in favor of the municipality have first been discharged and satisfied.
(R.C. § 737.31)
§ 34.12 SALE OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY; DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section and unless the property
involved is required to be disposed of pursuant to another section of the Ohio
Revised Code, property that is unclaimed for 90 days or more shall be sold by
the Marshal, Police Chief or licensed auctioneer at public auction, after
notice of the sale has been provided by publication once a week for three
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the county or as
provided in R.C. § 7.16. The proceeds of the sale shall be paid to the
Treasurer and shall be credited to the General Fund of the municipality.
   (B)   If authorized to do so by an ordinance adopted by the Legislative
Authority of the municipality and if the property involved is not required to
be disposed of pursuant to another section of the Ohio Revised Code, the Police
Chief or Marshal may contribute property that is unclaimed for 90 days or more
to one or more public agencies, to one or more nonprofit organizations no part
of the net income of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or
individual and no substantial part of the activities of which consists of
carrying on propaganda or otherwise attempting to influence legislation, or to
one or more organizations satisfying IRC § 501(c)(3) or (c)(19).
(R.C. § 737.32)
§ 34.13 EXPENSES OF STORAGE AND SALE; NOTICE.
   Upon the sale of any unclaimed or impounded property as provided in §
34.12, if any such unclaimed or impounded property was ordered removed to a
place of storage or stored, or both, by or under the direction of the Police
Chief or Marshal, any expenses or charges for the removal or storage, or both,
and costs of sale, provided the same are approved by the Police Chief or
Marshal, shall first be paid from the proceeds of the sale. Notice shall be
given by registered mail 30 days before the date of sale to the owner and
mortgagee, or other lien holder, at their last known address.
(R.C. § 737.33)
§ 34.14 CONTRACTS FOR POLICE PROTECTION; NONRESIDENT SERVICE WITHOUT CONTRACT.
   (A)   The Legislative Authority, in order to obtain police protection or to
obtain additional police protection or to allow police officers to work in
multi-jurisdictional drug, gang or career criminal task forces, may enter into
contracts with one or more municipal corporations, townships, township police
districts, joint police districts, or county sheriffs in the state, with one or
more park districts created pursuant to R.C. § 511.18 or 1545.01, with one or
more port authorities, or with a contiguous municipal corporation in an
adjoining state, upon any terms that are agreed upon, for services of police
departments or the use of police equipment or for the interchange of services
of police departments or police equipment within the several territories of the
contracting subdivisions.
   (B)   The provisions of R.C. Chapter 2744, insofar as it applies to the
operation of police departments, shall apply to the contracting political
subdivisions and to the Police Department members when they are rendering
service outside their own subdivisions pursuant to the contracts.
   (C)   Police Department members acting outside the subdivision in which they
are employed, pursuant to a contract entered into under this section, shall be
entitled to participate in any indemnity fund established by their employer to
the same extent as while acting within the employing subdivision. Those members
shall be entitled to all the rights and benefits of R.C. Chapter 4123, to the
same extent as while performing service within the subdivision.
   (D)   The contracts may provide for:
      (1)   A fixed annual charge to be paid at the times agreed upon and
stipulated in the contract;
      (2)   Compensation based upon:
         (a)   A stipulated price for each call or emergency;
         (b)   The number of members or pieces of equipment employed; or
         (c)   The elapsed time of service required in each call or emergency;
      (3)   Compensation for loss or damage to equipment while engaged in
rendering police services outside the limits of the political subdivision
owning and furnishing the equipment; and
      (4)   Reimbursement of the political subdivision in which the police
department members are employed for any indemnity award or premium contribution
assessed against the employing subdivision for workers’ compensation benefits
for injuries or death of its police department members occurring while engaged
in rendering police services pursuant to the contract.
(R.C. § 737.04)
   (E)   Nonresident service without contract.
      (1)   The Police Department may provide police protection to any county,
municipal corporation, township or township police district, or joint police
district of the state, to a park district created pursuant to R.C. § 511.18 or
1545.01, to a port authority, to any multi-jurisdictional drug, gang or career
criminal task force, or to a governmental entity of an adjoining state without
a contract to provide police protection, upon the approval, by resolution, of
the Legislative Authority and upon authorization by an officer or employee of
the Police Department who is designated by title of office or position,
pursuant to the resolution of the Legislative Authority, to give the
authorization.
      (2)   The provisions of R.C. Chapter 2744, insofar as it applies to the
operation of police departments, shall apply to the municipality and to members
of its Police Department when the members are rendering police services
pursuant to this section outside the municipality.
      (3)   Police Department members acting, as provided in this section,
outside the municipality, shall be entitled to participate in any pension or
indemnity fund established by their employer to the same extent as while acting
within the municipality. Those members shall be entitled to all the rights and
benefits of R.C. Chapter 4123, to the same extent as while performing services
within the municipality.
(R.C. § 737.041)
§ 34.15 PEACE OFFICER ADMINISTERING OATHS; ACKNOWLEDGING COMPLAINTS, SUMMONSES,
AFFIDAVITS AND RETURNS OF COURT ORDERS.
   (A)   As used in this section, PEACE OFFICER has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2935.01, except that the term does not include, for any purpose, the
superintendent or any trooper of the State Highway Patrol.
   (B)   A peace officer who has completed a course of in-service training that
includes training in the administration of oaths and the acknowledgment of
documents and that is approved by the chief legal officer of the political
subdivision in which the peace officer is elected or of the political
subdivision or other entity in which or by which the peace officer is appointed
or employed may administer oaths and acknowledge criminal and juvenile
complaints, summonses, affidavits, and returns of court orders in matters
related to the peace officer’s official duties.
   (C)   A trooper of the State Highway Patrol who has completed a course of
in-service training that includes training in the administration of oaths and
the acknowledgment of documents and that is approved by the Ohio Director of
Public Safety may administer oaths and acknowledge criminal and juvenile court
complaints, summonses, affidavits, and returns of court orders in matters
related to the trooper’s official duties.
   (D)   Except as authorized by division (B) or (C) of this section, no peace
officer or trooper who has completed a course of in-service training of a type
described in division (B) or (C) of this section shall knowingly perform any
act that is specifically required of a notary public unless the peace officer
or trooper has complied with R.C. Chapter 147.
(R.C. § 2935.081)
§ 34.16 AUXILIARY POLICE UNIT.
   (A)   Pursuant to provisions of R.C. § 737.161, the village establishes an
auxiliary police unit within the Police Department.
   (B)   The Mayor shall be the executive head of the auxiliary police unit and
shall make all appointments and removals of the members subject to any general
rules prescribed by the Council by ordinance.
      (1)   Each member must have obtained or will obtain, within a period not
to exceed a year, a certificate of completion of the peace officers basic
training program and any other training programs prescribed for a police
officer at a permanent peace officer pursuant to R.C. §§ 109.71 et seq.
      (2)   The Police Chief shall, from time to time, interview and recommend
to the Mayor those persons who appear to be most qualified to perform and
execute the duties and responsibilities of a law enforcement officer and would
meet the need of the auxiliary police unit.
      (3)   All appointments to the auxiliary police unit shall be temporary
and part-time.
      (4)   Members appointed to the auxiliary police unit may be removed at
any time without cause by the Mayor, subject to any general rules prescribed by
the Council by ordinance. Removal shall be effective upon written notice to
such member sent to his or her last known address or by hand delivery of such
notice to the member.
   (C)   The Chief of Police shall be the commanding officer of the auxiliary
police unit and shall control the assignment, training, stationing and the
direction of work of the members appointed to such unit, under such general
rules as the Mayor shall prescribe.
   (D)   The Mayor may prescribe rules and regulations for the organization,
administration, conduct and control of the auxiliary police unit not
inconsistent with this section.
   (E)   All services performed by members of the auxiliary police unit shall
be on a voluntary basis and with $1 per year comp, certified.
   (F)   Unless otherwise limited by the Mayor or Chief of Police, members
appointed to the auxiliary police unit and on duty are vested with all police
powers, including, but not limited to, the power to pursue, arrest and detain
persons violating laws of the state or ordinances of the village to the same
degree as full-time police officers.
   (G)   Members appointed to the auxiliary police unit shall wear a uniform
identical to that worn by full-time police officers while on duty.
(Prior Code, § 34.50) (Ord. 1993-33, passed - -1993)
§ 34.17 POLICE DEPARTMENT POLICY MANUAL ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The village formally adopts by reference the Village Police Department
Policy Manual, attached to the resolution codified herein.
(Res. 2019-19, passed 12-10-2019)
CHAPTER 35: FIRE AND EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
35.01   Municipal fire regulations; fire department
   
35.02   Fire Chief; Fire Prevention Officer; employment of firefighters;
criminal records check for firefighters
   
35.03   Schooling of officers and firefighters of fire department
   
35.04   Legislative Authority may purchase engines and equipment
   
35.05   Buildings for department
   
35.06   Records
   
35.07   Maximum consecutive hours for firefighters on duty
   
35.08   Investigation of cause of fire
   
35.09   Right to examine buildings, premises, and vehicles
   
35.10   Burning buildings for firefighting instruction or research
   
35.11   Impersonating fire safety inspector
   
35.12   Standards for equipment
   
35.13   Persons entitled to be known as firefighters
   
35.14   Firefighting and emergency services agreements
   
35.15   Regulation of construction in fire limits
   
35.16   Combination of departments
   
35.17   Bloodborne pathogens exposure control plan
   
35.18   Incident management standards
   
35.19   9-1-1 Plan
Volunteer Firefighters’ Dependents Fund Board
   
35.30   Definitions
   
35.31   Establishment
   
35.32   Membership; vacancies
   
35.33   Election and term of members
   
35.34   Organization; rules and regulations; roster
   
35.35   Compensation and expenses of Board; legal advisor
Statutory reference:
   Power of municipality to establish a fire department, see R.C. § 715.05
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 35.01 MUNICIPAL FIRE REGULATIONS; FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   The Legislative Authority may establish all necessary regulations to guard
against the occurrence of fires and protect the property and lives of its
citizens against damage and accidents resulting therefrom, and for that purpose
may establish and maintain a fire department, provide for the establishment and
organization of fire engine and hose companies and rescue units, establish the
hours of labor of the members of its fire department who shall not be required
to be on duty continuously more than six days in every seven, and provide
bylaws and regulation for the government of companies and their members as is
necessary and proper.
(R.C. § 737.21)
§ 35.02 FIRE CHIEF; FIRE PREVENTION OFFICER; EMPLOYMENT OF FIREFIGHTERS;
CRIMINAL RECORDS CHECK FOR FIREFIGHTERS.
   (A)   Each municipality establishing a fire department shall have a Fire
Chief as the Department’s head, appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Legislative Authority, who shall continue in office until
removed from office as provided by R.C. §§ 733.35 through 733.39. Neither this
section nor any section of the Ohio Revised Code requires, or shall be
construed to require, that the Fire Chief be a resident of the municipality.
   (B)   In each municipality not having a fire department, the Mayor shall,
with the advice and consent of the Legislative Authority, appoint a Fire
Prevention Officer who shall exercise all of the duties of a Fire Chief, except
those involving the maintenance and operation of fire apparatus.
   (C)   The Legislative Authority may fix the compensation it considers best.
The appointee shall continue in office until removed from office as provided by
R.C. §§ 733.35 through 733.39. The provisions of §
35.03 shall extend to the Fire Prevention Officer.
   (D)   The Legislative Authority may provide for the appointment of permanent
full-time paid firefighters as it considers best and fix their compensation, or
for the services of volunteer firefighters, who shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the Legislative Authority, and shall continue in
office until removed from office.
   (E)   No person shall be appointed as a permanent full-time paid firefighter
of the municipality unless either of the following applies:
      (1)   The person has received a certificate issued under former R.C. §
3303.07 or R.C. § 4765.55 evidencing satisfactory completion of a firefighter
training program;
      (2)   The person began serving as a permanent full-time paid firefighter
with the municipality prior to July 2, 1970, and receives a fire training
certificate issued under R.C. § 4765.55.
   (F)   No person who is appointed as a volunteer firefighter of the
municipality shall remain in that position unless either of the following
applies:
      (1)   Within one year of the appointment, the person has received a
certificate issued under former R.C. § 3303.07 or R.C. § 4765.55 evidencing
satisfactory completion of a firefighter training program;
      (2)   The person has served as a permanent full-time paid firefighter
with the municipality prior to July 2, 1970, or as a volunteer firefighter with
the municipality prior to July 2, 1979, and receives a certificate issued under
R.C. § 4765.55.
   (G)   No person shall receive an appointment under this section unless the
person has, not more than 60 days prior to receiving the appointment, passed a
physical examination given by a licensed physician, a physician assistant, a
clinical nurse specialist, a certified nurse practitioner, or a certified
nurse-midwife, showing that the person meets the physical requirements
necessary to perform the duties of the position to which the person is to be
appointed as established by the Legislative Authority. The appointing authority
shall, prior to making an appointment, file with the Ohio Police and Fire
Pension Fund or the Local Volunteer Firefighter’s Dependents Fund Board a copy
of the report or findings of that licensed physician, physician assistant,
clinical nurse specialist, certified nurse practitioner, or certified nurse-
midwife. The professional fee for the physical examination shall be paid for by
the Legislative Authority.
(R.C. § 737.22)
   (H)   Criminal records check for firefighters.
      (1)   The Fire Chief may request the Superintendent of the Ohio Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation (“BCII”) to conduct a criminal
records check with respect to any person who is under consideration for
appointment or employment as a permanent, full-time paid firefighter or any
person who is under consideration for appointment as a volunteer firefighter.
      (2)   (a)   The Fire Chief may request that the Superintendent of BCII
obtain information from the Federal Bureau of Investigation as a part of the
criminal records check requested pursuant to division (H)(1) of this section.
         (b)   The Fire Chief, authorized by division (H)(1) of this section to
request a criminal records check, shall provide to each person for whom the
Fire Chief intends to request a criminal records check a copy of the form
prescribed pursuant to R.C. § 109.578(C)(1) and a standard impression sheet to
obtain fingerprint impressions prescribed pursuant to R.C. § 109.578(C)(2),
obtain the completed form and impression sheet from the person, and forward the
completed form and impression sheet to the Superintendent of BCII at the time
the criminal records check is requested.
         (c)   Any person subject to a criminal records check who receives a
copy of the form and a copy of the impression sheet pursuant to division (H)(2)
(b) of this section and who is requested to complete the form and provide a set
of fingerprint impressions shall complete the form or provide all the
information necessary to complete the form and shall provide the impression
sheet with the impressions of the person’s fingerprints. If a person fails to
provide the information necessary to complete the form or fails to provide
impressions of the person’s fingerprints, the appointing authority shall not
appoint or employ the person as a permanent full-time paid firefighter or a
volunteer firefighter.
      (3)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (H)(3)(b) of this
section, an appointing authority shall not appoint or employ a person as a
permanent, full-time paid firefighter or a volunteer firefighter if the Fire
Chief has requested a criminal records check pursuant to division (H)(1) of
this section and the criminal records check indicates that the person
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any of the following:
            1.   A felony;
            2.   A violation of R.C. § 2909.03;
            3.   A violation of an existing or former law of this state, any
other state, or the United States that is substantially equivalent to any of
the offenses described in division (H)(3)(a)1. or (H)(3)(a)2. of this section.
         (b)   Notwithstanding division (H)(3)(a) of this section, an
appointing authority may appoint or employ a person as a permanent, full-time
paid firefighter or a volunteer firefighter if all of the following apply:
            1.   The Fire Chief has requested a criminal records check pursuant
to division (H)(1) of this section.
            2.   The criminal records check indicates that the person
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any of the offenses
described in division (H)(3)(a) of this section.
            3.   The person meets rehabilitation standards established in rules
adopted under division (H)(5) of this section.
         (c)   If the Fire Chief requests a criminal records check pursuant to
division (H)(1) of this section, an appointing authority may appoint or employ
a person as a permanent, full-time paid firefighter or volunteer firefighter
conditionally until the criminal records check is completed and the Fire Chief
receives the results. If the results of the criminal records check indicate
that, pursuant to division (H)(3)(a) of this section, the person subject to the
criminal records check is disqualified from appointment or employment, the Fire
Chief shall release the person from appointment or employment.
      (4)   The Fire Chief shall pay to the BCII the fee prescribed pursuant to
R.C. § 109.578(C)(3) for each criminal records check conducted in accordance
with that section. The Fire Chief may charge the applicant who is subject to
the criminal records check a fee for the costs the Fire Chief incurs in
obtaining the criminal records check. A fee charged under this division shall
not exceed the amount of fees the Fire Chief pays for the criminal records
check. If a fee is charged under this division, the Fire Chief shall notify the
applicant at the time of the applicant’s initial application for appointment or
employment of the amount of the fee and that, unless the fee is paid, the
applicant will not be considered for appointment or employment.
      (5)   The appointing authority shall adopt rules in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 119 to implement this division (H). The rules shall include
rehabilitation standards a person who has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to an offense listed in division (H)(3)(a) of this section must meet for the
appointing authority to appoint or employ the person as a permanent, full-time
paid firefighter or a volunteer firefighter.
      (6)   The Fire Chief requesting a criminal records check for an applicant
shall inform each applicant, at the time of the person’s initial application
for appointment or employment, that the applicant is required to provide a set
of impressions of the person’s fingerprints and that the Fire Chief requires a
criminal records check to be conducted and satisfactorily completed in
accordance with R.C. § 109.578.
      (7)   As used in this section:
         APPOINTING AUTHORITY. Means any person or body that has the authority
to hire, appoint, or employ permanent, full-time paid firefighters and
volunteer firefighters under R.C. § 737.22.
         CRIMINAL RECORDS CHECK. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 109.578.
         SUPERINTENDENT OF BCII. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.86.
(R.C. § 737.221)
§ 35.03 SCHOOLING OF OFFICERS AND FIREFIGHTERS OF FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   The Legislative Authority may send any of the officers and firefighters of
its fire department to schools of instruction designed to promote the
efficiency of firefighters, and, if authorized in advance, may pay their
necessary expenses from the funds used for the maintenance and operation of the
fire department.
(R.C. § 737.23)
§ 35.04 LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY MAY PURCHASE ENGINES AND EQUIPMENT.
   The Legislative Authority may purchase the necessary fire engines and other
equipment as is necessary for the extinguishment of fires and the saving of
lives, and may establish lines of fire alarm telegraph within the limits of the
municipality.
(R.C. § 737.24)
§ 35.05 BUILDINGS FOR DEPARTMENT.
   The Legislative Authority may provide or erect necessary and suitable
buildings containing rooms for fire engines and other equipment, and provide
for the meetings of the fire and hose companies.
(R.C. § 737.25)
§ 35.06 RECORDS.
   The Fire Chief shall keep in convenient form a complete record of all fires.
The record shall include the time of the alarm, location of fire, cause of fire
(if known), type of building, name of owner and tenant, purpose for which
occupied, value of building and contents, members of the department responding
to the alarm, and other information as he or she may deem advisable, or as may
be required from time to time by the Legislative Authority.
§ 35.07 MAXIMUM CONSECUTIVE HOURS FOR FIREFIGHTERS ON DUTY.
   (A)   Whenever the municipality employs three or more full-time paid
firefighters, the Fire Chief shall divide the uniform force into not less than
two platoons, and where the uniform force is so divided into two platoons, the
Chief shall keep a platoon of the uniform force on duty 24 hours after which
the platoon serving 24 consecutive hours shall be allowed to remain off duty
for at least 24 consecutive hours, except in cases of extraordinary emergency.
Each individual member of the platoons, in addition to receiving a minimum of
24 hours off duty in each period of 48 hours, shall receive an additional
period of 24 consecutive hours off duty in each period of eight days, so that
no individual member shall be on duty more than a total of 72 hours in any
period of eight days. The Chief shall arrange the schedule of working hours to
comply with this section. The Chief may, however, in cases of sickness, death,
or on other necessary occasions, permit the exchange of working hours between
members of the department. All employees of the fire department shall be given
not less than two weeks’ leave of absence annually, with full pay. This
section, insofar as it relates to off duty periods, does not apply to the
municipality if it adopts a 40-hour week, or if it has a three platoon system,
the members of which work 24 consecutive hours, immediately followed by 48
consecutive hours off duty, but the provisions relating to the two weeks’ leave
of absence do apply.
   (B)   As used in this section, FULL-TIME PAID FIREFIGHTERS does not include
volunteer firefighters, or firefighters who work part time.
(R.C. § 4115.02)
§ 35.08 INVESTIGATION OF CAUSE OF FIRE.
   (A)   Investigation of fires generally.
      (1)   The Legislative Authority may invest any officer of the fire or
police department with the power, and impose on him or her the duty, to be
present at all fires, investigate the cause thereof, examine witnesses, compel
the attendance of witnesses and the production of books and papers, and to do
and perform all other acts necessary to the effective discharge of such duties.
      (2)   The officer may administer oaths, make arrests, and enter for the
purpose of examination any building which, in his or her opinion, is in danger
from fire. The officer shall report his or her proceedings to the Legislative
Authority at such times as are required.
(R.C. § 737.27)
   (B)   Investigation of major fires.
      (1)   The Fire Chief, or the Fire Prevention Officer, shall investigate
the cause, origin, and circumstances of each major fire, as determined by the
rules of the State Fire Marshal, occurring in the municipality by which
property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall make an investigation to
determine whether the fire was the result of carelessness or design. The
investigation shall be commenced within two days, not including Sunday, if the
fire occurred on that day. The State Fire Marshal may superintend the
investigation.
      (2)   An officer making an investigation of a fire occurring in the
municipality shall notify the State Fire Marshal, and within one week of the
occurrence of the fire shall furnish him or her a written statement of all
facts relating to its cause and origin, and other information as is required by
forms provided by the State Fire Marshal.
      (3)   In the performance of the duties imposed by this chapter, the Fire
Chief or Fire Prevention Officer, at any time of day or night, may enter upon
and examine any building or premises where a fire has occurred, and other
buildings and premises adjoining or near thereto.
(R.C. § 3737.24)
§ 35.09 RIGHT TO EXAMINE BUILDINGS, PREMISES, AND VEHICLES.
   The Fire Chief, other members of the department as may be designated by the
Chief, and the Fire Prevention Officer may at all reasonable hours enter into
all buildings and upon all premises and vehicles within their jurisdiction for
the purpose of examination.
(R.C. § 3737.14(A))
§ 35.10 BURNING BUILDINGS FOR FIREFIGHTING INSTRUCTION OR RESEARCH.
   No building that contains asbestos shall be burned for the purpose of
instruction in the methods of firefighting or research in the control of fires.
(R.C. § 3737.14(B))
Statutory reference:
   Notification requirements, see R.C. § 3737.14(C), (D)
§ 35.11 IMPERSONATING FIRE SAFETY INSPECTOR.
   (A)   No person who is not a certified fire safety inspector shall act as
such or hold himself or herself out to be such, unless prior to commencing any
inspection function, he or she discloses the purpose for which he or she is
making the inspection and the fact that he or she is not employed by any state
or local fire service or agency, and that he or she is not acting in an
official capacity for any governmental subdivision or agency.
(R.C. § 3737.64)
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 3737.99(D))
§ 35.12 STANDARDS FOR EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, or use any fire protection or
fire fighting equipment that does not meet the minimum standards established by
the State Fire Marshal in the Ohio Fire Code.
   (B)   Except for public and private mobile fire trucks, no person shall
service, test, repair, or install for profit any fire protection or fire
fighting equipment without a certificate or a provisional certificate issued by
the State Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. § 3737.65.
(R.C. § 3737.65(A), (B))
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) or (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 3737.99(E))
§ 35.13 PERSONS ENTITLED TO BE KNOWN AS FIREFIGHTERS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      FIREFIGHTING AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 9.60.
      PRIVATE FIRE COMPANY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 9.60.
   (B)   No person shall claim to the public to be or act as a firefighter,
volunteer firefighter, member of a fire department, Fire Chief, or Fire
Prevention Officer unless the person is recognized as a firefighter, volunteer
firefighter, member of a fire department, member of a private fire company,
Fire Chief, or Fire Prevention Officer by the State Fire Marshal or has
received a certificate issued under R.C. § 4765.55 or former R.C. § 3303.07
evidencing satisfactory completion of a firefighter training program and has
been appointed by the governing board of a firefighting agency or, in the case
of a volunteer firefighter, receives such a certificate within one year after
appointment by the governing board of a firefighting agency.
(R.C. § 3737.66)
   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 3737.99(G))
§ 35.14 FIREFIGHTING AND EMERGENCY SERVICES AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4765.01.
      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE ORGANIZATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4765.01.
      FIRE PROTECTION. Means the use of firefighting equipment by the Fire
Department of a firefighting agency or a private fire company, and includes the
provision of ambulance, emergency medical, and rescue services by those
entities.
      FIREFIGHTING AGENCY. Means the municipality, other municipal corporation,
a township, township fire district, joint ambulance district, joint emergency
medical services district or joint fire district and the office of the State
Fire Marshal.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
      PRIVATE FIRE COMPANY. Means a nonprofit group or organization owning and
operating firefighting equipment not controlled by a firefighting agency.
   (B)   Any firefighting agency, private fire company, or emergency medical
service organization may contract with any governmental entity in this state or
another jurisdiction to provide fire protection or emergency medical services,
as appropriate, whether on a regular basis or only in times of emergency, upon
the approval of the governing boards or administrative heads of the entities
that are parties to the contract.
   (C)   The municipality may contract with any firefighting agency, private
fire company, or emergency medical service organization of this state or
another jurisdiction to obtain fire protection or emergency medical services,
as appropriate, whether on a regular basis or only in times of emergency, upon
the approval of the governing boards or administrative heads of the entities
that are parties to the contract.
   (D)   (1)   Any firefighting agency other than the office of the State Fire
Marshal, private fire company, or emergency medical service organization may
provide fire protection or emergency medical services, as appropriate, to any
governmental entity in this state or another jurisdiction, without a contract
to provide fire protection or emergency medical services, upon the approval of
the governing board of the agency, company, or organization and upon
authorization by an officer or employee of the agency, company, or organization
designated by that individual’s title, office, or position pursuant to the
authorization of the governing board of the agency, company, or organization.
      (2)   The office of the State Fire Marshal may provide fire protection or
emergency medical services, as appropriate, to any governmental entity,
firefighting agency, private fire company, or emergency medical service
organization in this state or another jurisdiction, without a contract to
provide fire protection or emergency medical services, upon the authorization
of the State Fire Marshal.
   (E)   (1)   The provisions of R.C. Chapter 2744, insofar as it is applicable
to the operation of fire departments or emergency medical service
organizations, applies to a political subdivision that is operating a fire
department or emergency medical service organization, and to the members of the
fire department or emergency medical service organization, when the members are
rendering service pursuant to this section outside the boundaries of the
political subdivision.
      (2)   Members acting outside the boundaries of the political subdivision
that is operating the fire department or emergency medical service organization
may participate in any pension or indemnity fund established by the political
subdivision to the same extent as while acting within the boundaries of the
political subdivision, and are entitled to all the rights and benefits of R.C.
Chapter 4123, to the same extent as while performing service within the
boundaries of the political subdivision.
   (F)   A private fire company or private, nonprofit emergency medical service
organization providing service pursuant to this section to a governmental
entity in this state or another jurisdiction has the same immunities and
defenses in a civil action that a political subdivision has under R.C. §
2744.02. The employees of such a fire company or emergency medical service
organization have the same immunities and defenses in a civil action that
employees of a political subdivision have under R.C. § 2744.03.
   (G)   (1)   The office of the State Fire Marshal, when providing services
pursuant to this section, is liable for injury, death, or loss to person or
property caused by the negligent operation of any motor vehicle by its
employees upon the public roads, highways, or streets in the state when the
employees are engaged within the scope of their employment and authority,
without regard to the proximity of that operation to the office of the State
Fire Marshal. Notwithstanding R.C. § 2743.02(A)(1), the following are full
defenses to that liability:
         (a)   An employee providing fire protection was operating a motor
vehicle while engaged in duty at a fire, proceeding toward a place where a fire
is in progress or is believed to be in progress, or answering any other
emergency and the operation of the vehicle did not constitute willful or wanton
misconduct.
         (b)   An employee providing emergency medical services was operating a
motor vehicle while responding to or completing a call for emergency medical
care or treatment, the employee was holding a valid driver’s license issued
under R.C. Chapter 4507, the operation of the vehicle did not constitute
willful or wanton misconduct, and the operation complies with the precautions
described in R.C. § 4511.03.
      (2)   An employee of the office of the State Fire Marshal, when providing
service pursuant to this section, is immune from liability for injury, death,
or loss to person or property caused by the operation of any motor vehicle upon
the public roads, highways, or streets in the state, without regard to the
proximity of that operation to the office of the State Fire Marshal, unless one
of the following applies:
         (a)   The operation of the vehicle was manifestly outside the scope of
the employee’s employment of official responsibilities.
         (b)   The operation of the vehicle constituted willful or wanton
misconduct.
(R.C. § 9.60)
§ 35.15 REGULATION OF CONSTRUCTION IN FIRE LIMITS.
   The Legislative Authority may regulate the erection of houses and business
structures and prohibit the erection of buildings within such limits as it
deems proper, unless the outer walls are constructed of noncombustible
material, and, on the petition of the owners of not less than two-thirds of the
ground included in any square or half-square, may prohibit the erection thereon
of any building, or addition to any building more than ten feet high, unless
the outer walls are made of iron, stone, brick and mortar, or of some of them,
and may provide for the removal of any building or additions erected in
violation of the prohibition.
(R.C. § 737.28)
§ 35.16 COMBINATION OF DEPARTMENTS.
   (A)   The separate Fire Department and Emergency Medical Services Department
operated by the village are to be combined into one department, to be known
formally as the “New Richmond Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department”,
which took effect at 12:01 a.m. on January 1, 2006.
   (B)   The Department head (“Chief”) will report directly to the Mayor and
Village Council.
(Ord. 2005-54, passed 11-22-2005)
§ 35.17 BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS EXPOSURE CONTROL PLAN.
   The village adopts a revised Bloodborne Pathogens Exposure Control Plan as §
10 of the “Fire and EMS Department Operating Guidelines” document that was
previously and formally adopted by the Village Council.
(Ord. 2006-24, passed 8-8-2006)
§ 35.18 INCIDENT MANAGEMENT STANDARDS.
   The village establishes the National Incident Management System (NIMS) as
the standard for incident management.
(Res. 2005-1, passed 1-11-2005)
§ 35.19 9-1-1 PLAN.
   In accordance with R.C. § 128.08, the village approves the “Countywide 9-1-
1 Program Review Committees Final Plan”, attached to the resolution codified
herein as Exhibit A, and made a part hereof.
(Res. 2024-06, passed 5-14-2024)
VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTERS’ DEPENDENTS FUND BOARD
§ 35.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIRE DEPARTMENT. A volunteer fire department, a fire department of a
political subdivision or fire district of the state, or a private volunteer
company that has elected to participate in the Volunteer Firefighters’
Dependents Fund pursuant to R.C. § 146.02.
   MEMBER OF THE FUND. Includes a political subdivision or fire district of the
state that maintains, in whole or in part, a volunteer fire department or
employs volunteer firefighters, and a private volunteer fire company that has
elected to participate in the Volunteer Firefighters’ Dependents Fund.
   PRIVATE VOLUNTEER FIRE COMPANY. A company of trained volunteer firefighters
having a contract to furnish fire protection or emergency service or both to a
political subdivision or fire district of the state.
   TOTALLY AND PERMANENTLY DISABLED. The term means that a volunteer
firefighter is unable to engage in any substantial gainful employment for a
period of not less than twelve months by reason of a medically determinable
physical impairment that is permanent or presumed to be permanent.
   VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER.
      (1)   The term means both of the following, subject to division (2) of
this definition:
         (a)   A duly appointed member of a fire department on either a non-pay
or part-pay basis who is ineligible to be a member of the Ohio Police and Fire
Pension Fund, or whose employment as a firefighter does not in itself qualify
any such person for membership in the Public Employees Retirement System, or
who has wived membership in the Public Employees Retirement System;
         (b)   Firefighters drafted, requisitioned, or appointed to serve in an
emergency.
      (2)   (a)   A volunteer firefighter who is a member of the Public
Employees Retirement System shall be considered a volunteer firefighter for
purposes of this chapter and R.C. Chapter 146 and, in particular, for purposes
of R.C. § 146.12(A) and (B), until the firefighter has at least 1.5 years of
Ohio service credit for purposes of R.C. § 145.45(B);
         (b)   A volunteer firefighter who is a member of the Public Employees
Retirement System shall be considered a volunteer firefighter for purposes of
this chapter and R.C. Chapter 146 and, in particular, for purposes of R.C. §
146.12(C), until the firefighter has at least five years of total service
credit for purposes of R.C. §§ 145.35 and 145.36 or R.C. § 145.361.
   VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTERS’ DEPENDENTS FUND. The Fund established by R.C. §
146.07.
(R.C. § 146.01)
§ 35.31 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   If and when the municipality has a Fire Department employing volunteer
firefighters, it shall be a member of the Volunteer Firefighters’ Dependents
Fund and shall establish a Volunteer Firefighters’ Dependents Fund Board.
   (B)   A private volunteer fire company which has contracted to afford fire
protection to a political subdivision or fire district may become a member of
the Volunteer Firefighters’ Dependents Fund by election and shall, if it so
elects, establish a Volunteer Firefighters’ Dependents Fund Board. The company
shall notify the State Fire Marshal and the governing body of the political
subdivision or fire district with which it has its major contract of the
election to become a member of the Fund.
(R.C. § 146.02)
§ 35.32 MEMBERSHIP; VACANCIES.
   (A)   A Volunteer Firefighters’ Dependents Fund Board provided for in §
35.31(A) shall consist of five members chosen as follows:
      (1)   Two members elected by the Legislative Authority of the political
subdivision or the Legislative Authority of the fire district;
      (2)   Two members elected by the Fire Department or the volunteer
firefighters;
      (3)   One member elected by the Board members who were elected pursuant
to divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section. This member shall be an elector
of the municipality or the fire district, but not a public employee, a member
of Legislative Authority or a member of the Fire Department.
   (B)   A Volunteer Firefighters’ Dependents Fund Board provided for in §
35.31(B) shall consist of five members chosen as follows:
      (1)   Two members elected by Legislative Authority of the political
subdivision or the Legislative Authority of the fire district with which the
private volunteer fire company has its major contract;
      (2)   Two members elected by the private volunteer fire company;
      (3)   One member elected by the Board members who were elected pursuant
to divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) of this section. This member shall be an elector
of a political subdivision or fire district with which the private volunteer
fire company has contracted to afford fire protection, but not a public
employee, a member of the Legislative Authority or a member of the fire
company.
   (C)   Any vacancy occurring in a Volunteer Firefighters’ Dependents Fund
Board shall be filled at a special election called by the Secretary of the
Board.
(R.C. § 146.03)
§ 35.33 ELECTION AND TERM OF MEMBERS.
   (A)   The term of each member of the Volunteer Firefighters’ Dependents Fund
Board is one year and begins on January 1.
   (B)   Election of Board members provided for in §
35.32(A)(1) and (B)(1) shall be held each year no earlier than November 1 and
no later than the second Monday in December, and the election of the Board
members provided for in §
35.32(A)(3) and (B)(3) shall be held each year on or before December 31.
   (C)   The Board members provided for in §
35.32(A)(2) and (B)(2) shall be elected on or before the second Monday in
December, as follows:
      (1)   The Secretary of the Board shall give notice of the election by
posting it in a conspicuous place at the headquarters of the Fire Department or
fire company and at the house of each company composing the Fire Department.
Between 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on the day designated, each member of the
Department or company shall send in writing the name of two persons, members of
the Department or company, who are the member’s choices.
      (2)   All votes cast at the election shall be counted and recorded by the
Board which shall announce the result. The two members receiving the highest
number of votes are elected. If any two persons receive a tie vote, it shall be
decided by lot or in any other way agreed upon by the persons for whom the tie
vote was cast.
(R.C. § 146.04)
§ 35.34 ORGANIZATION; RULES AND REGULATIONS; ROSTER.
   (A)   The Volunteer Firefighters’ Dependents Fund Board shall meet promptly
after its election and organize. A Chairperson and a Secretary shall be
elected. The Secretary shall keep a complete record of the proceedings of the
Board, which record shall be maintained as a permanent file.
   (B)   The Board may adopt rules necessary for the handling and processing of
claims and shall perform such other duties as are necessary to carry out this
subchapter and R.C. §§ 146.01 through 146.19.
   (C)   The Secretary of the Board shall immediately certify to the State Fire
Marshal the names and addresses of the members elected, by whom elected, and
the names of the Board Chairperson and Secretary. The Secretary shall also
forward a certificate prepared by the Municipal Clerk or the clerk of the fire
district of the current assessed valuation of the municipality or fire district
if the municipality or fire district is a member of the Fund.
   (D)   A private volunteer fire company which is a member of the Fund shall
provide the Secretary of the Board with a roster of the fire company members
and shall report any changes to the Secretary when they occur. Only persons
whose names appear on the list, and in no event more than an average number of
50 names per station operated by the volunteer fire company, are eligible for
benefits under this subchapter and R.C. §§ 146.01 through 146.19.
(R.C. § 146.05)
§ 35.35 COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES OF BOARD; LEGAL ADVISOR.
   (A)   The members of the Volunteer Firefighters’ Dependents Fund Board shall
serve without compensation. The municipality or the fire district within which
the Board operates shall provide the necessary meeting place, stationery,
postage, and supplies for the efficient conduct of its business.
   (B)   The legal advisor for the Board is the prosecuting attorney of the
county in which the Board is located.
(R.C. § 146.06)
CHAPTER 36: CIVIL ACTIONS AGAINST THE MUNICIPALITY
Section
   
36.01   Definitions
   
36.02   Nonliability of municipality; exceptions
   
36.03   Defenses and immunities
   
36.04   Limitation of actions
   
36.05   Damages
   
36.06   Satisfaction of judgments
   
36.07   Defending and indemnifying employees
   
36.08   Liability insurance
   
36.09   Certain actions unaffected
   
36.10   Certain charges against municipal officers filed with Probate Judge;
proceedings
§ 36.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EMERGENCY CALL. A call to duty including but not limited to communications
from citizens, police dispatches, and personal observations by peace officers
of inherently dangerous situations that demand an immediate response on the
part of a peace officer.
   EMPLOYEE. An officer, agent, employee, or servant, whether or not
compensated or full-time or part-time, who is authorized to act and is acting
within the scope of his or her employment for a political subdivision. The term
does not include an independent contractor and does not include any individual
engaged by a school district pursuant to R.C. § 3319.301. The term includes any
elected or appointed official of a political subdivision. The term also
includes a person who has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a criminal
offense and who has been sentenced to perform community service work in a
political subdivision whether pursuant to R.C. § 2951.02 or otherwise, and a
child who is found to be a delinquent child and who is ordered by a juvenile
court pursuant to R.C. § 2152.19 or 2152.20 to perform community service or
community work in a political subdivision.
   GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTION.
      (1)   A function of a political subdivision that is specified in division
(2) of this definition or that satisfies any of the following:
         (a)   A function that is imposed upon the state as an obligation of
sovereignty and that is performed by a political subdivision voluntarily or
pursuant to legislative requirement;
         (b)   A function that is for the common good of all citizens of the
state; or
         (c)   A function that promotes or preserves the public peace, health,
safety, or welfare, that involves activities that are not engaged in or not
customarily engaged in by nongovernmental persons, and that is not specified in
this section as a proprietary function.
      (2)   The term includes but is not limited to the following:
         (a)   The provision or nonprovision of police, fire, emergency
medical, ambulance, and rescue services or protection;
         (b)   The power to preserve the peace; to prevent and suppress riots,
disturbances, and disorderly assemblages; to prevent, mitigate, and clean up
releases of oil and hazardous and extremely hazardous substances as defined in
R.C. § 3750.01; and to protect persons and property;
         (c)   The provision of a system of public education;
         (d)   The provision of a free public library system;
         (e)   The regulation of the use of, and the maintenance and repair of,
roads, highways, streets, avenues, alleys, sidewalks, bridges, aqueducts,
viaducts, and public grounds;
         (f)   Judicial, quasi-judicial, prosecutorial, legislative, and quasi-
legislative functions;
         (g)   The construction, reconstruction, repair, renovation,
maintenance, and operation of buildings that are used in connection with the
performance of a governmental function, including but not limited to office
buildings and courthouses;
         (h)   The design, construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
maintenance, and operation of jails, places of juvenile detention, workhouses,
or any other detention facility, as defined in R.C. § 2921.01;
         (i)   The enforcement or nonperformance of any law;
         (j)   The regulation of traffic, and the erection or non-erection of
traffic signs, signals, or control devices;
         (k)   The collection and disposal of solid wastes, as defined in R.C.
§ 3734.01 including but not limited to the operation of solid waste disposal
facilities as “facilities” is defined in that section, and the collection and
management of hazardous waste generated by households. As used in this
subsection, HAZARDOUS WASTE GENERATED BY HOUSEHOLDS means solid waste
originally generated by individual households that is listed specifically as
hazardous waste in or exhibits one or more characteristics of hazardous waste
as defined by rules adopted under R.C. § 3734.12, but that is excluded from
regulation as a hazardous waste by those rules;
         (l)   The provision or nonprovision, planning or design, construction,
or reconstruction of a public improvement, including but not limited to a sewer
system;
         (m)   The operation of a job and family services department or agency,
including but not limited to the provision of assistance to aged and infirm
persons and to persons who are indigent;
         (n)   The operation of a health board, department, or agency,
including but not limited to any statutorily required or permissive program for
the provision of immunizations or other inoculations to all or some members of
the public; provided that a governmental function does not include the supply,
manufacture, distribution, or development of any drug or vaccine employed in
any such immunization or inoculation program by any supplier, manufacturer,
distributor, or developer of the drug or vaccine;
         (o)   The operation of mental health facilities, developmental
disabilities facilities, alcohol treatment and control centers, and children’s
homes or agencies;
         (p)   The provision or nonprovision of inspection services of all
types, including but not limited to inspections in connection with building,
zoning, sanitation, fire, plumbing, and electrical codes, and the taking of
actions in connection with those types of codes, including but not limited to
the approval of plans for the construction of buildings or structures and the
issuance or revocation of building permits or stop work orders in connection
with buildings or structures;
         (q)   Urban renewal projects and the elimination of slum conditions,
including the performance of any activity that a County Land Reutilization
Corporation is authorized to perform under R.C. Chapter 1724 or R.C. Chapter
5722;
         (r)   Flood control measures;
         (s)   The design, construction, reconstruction, renovation, operation,
care, repair, and maintenance of a township cemetery;
         (t)   The issuance of revenue obligations under R.C. § 140.06;
         (u)   The design, construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
maintenance, and operation of any school athletic facility, school auditorium,
or gymnasium or any recreation area or facility, including but not limited to
any of the following:
            1.   A park, playground, or playfield;
            2.   An indoor recreational facility;
            3.   A zoo or zoological park;
            4.   A bath, swimming pool, pond, water park, wading pool, wave
pool, water slide or other type of aquatic facility;
            5.   A golf course;
            6.   A bicycle motocross facility or other type of recreational
area or facility in which bicycling, skating, skate boarding, or scooter riding
is engaged;
            7.   A rope course or climbing walls; and
            8.   An all-purpose vehicle facility in which all-purpose vehicles,
as defined in R.C. § 4519.01, are contained, maintained, or operated for
recreational activities;
         (v)   The provision of public defender services by a county or joint
county public defender’s office pursuant to R.C. Chapter 120;
         (w)   1.   At any time before regulations prescribed pursuant to 49
U.S.C. § 20153 become effective, the designation, establishment, design,
construction, implementation, operation, repair, or maintenance of a public
road rail crossing in a zone within a municipal corporation in which, by
ordinance, the Legislative Authority of the municipal corporation regulates the
sounding of locomotive horns, whistles, or bells;
            2.   On and after the effective date of regulations prescribed
pursuant to 49 U.S.C. § 20153, the designation, establishment, design,
construction, implementation, operation, repair, or maintenance of a public
road rail crossing in such a zone or of a supplementary safety measure, as
defined in 49 U.S.C. § 20153, at or for a public road rail crossing, if and to
the extent that the public road rail crossing is excepted, pursuant to
subsection (c) of that section, from the requirement of the regulations
prescribed under subsection (b) of that section; and
         (x)   A function that the General Assembly mandates a political
subdivision to perform.
   LAW. Any provision of the Constitution, statutes, or rules of the United
States or of this state, provisions of charters, ordinances, resolutions, and
rules of political subdivisions, and written policies adopted by boards of
education. When used in connection with the “common law”, this definition does
not apply.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION or SUBDIVISION. A municipal corporation, township,
county, school district, or other body corporate and politic responsible for
governmental activities in a geographic area smaller than that of the state.
The term includes but is not limited to a county hospital commission appointed
under R.C. § 339.14, board of hospital commissioners appointed for a municipal
hospital under R.C. § 749.04, board of hospital trustees appointed for a
municipal hospital under R.C. § 749.22, regional planning commission created
pursuant to R.C. § 713.21, county planning commission created pursuant to R.C.
§ 713.22, joint planning council created pursuant to R.C. § 713.231, interstate
regional planning commission created pursuant to R.C. § 713.30, port authority
created pursuant to R.C. § 4582.02 or 4582.26 or in existence on December 16,
1964, regional council established by political subdivisions pursuant to R.C.
Chapter 167, emergency planning district and joint emergency planning district
designated under R.C. § 3750.03, joint emergency medical services district
created pursuant to R.C. § 307.052, a fire and ambulance district created
pursuant to R.C. § 505.375, joint interstate emergency planning district
established by an agreement entered into under that section, and a county solid
waste management district and joint solid waste management district established
under R.C. § 343.01 or 343.012, a community school established under R.C.
Chapter 3314, county land reutilization corporation organized under R.C.
Chapter 1724, the county or counties served by a community-based correctional
facility and program or district community-based correction facility and
program established and operated under R.C. §§ 2301.51 through 2301.58, a
community-based correctional facility and program or district community-based
correctional facility and program that is so established and operated, and the
facility governing board of a community-based correctional facility and program
or district community-based correctional facility and program that is so
established and operated.
   PROPRIETARY FUNCTION.
      (1)   A function of a political subdivision that is specified in division
(2) of this definition or that satisfies both of the following:
         (a)   The function is not one described in divisions (1)(a) or (1)(b)
of the definition of “governmental function” contained in this section, and is
not one specified in division (2) of the definition of “governmental function”
contained in this section;
         (b)   The function is one that promotes or preserves the public peace,
health, safety, or welfare and that involves activities that are customarily
engaged in by nongovernmental persons.
      (2)   The term includes but is not limited to the following:
         (a)   The operation of a hospital by one or more political
subdivisions;
         (b)   The design, construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
maintenance, and operation of a public cemetery other than a township cemetery;
         (c)   The establishment, maintenance, and operation of a utility,
including but not limited to a light, gas, power, or heat plant, a railroad, a
busline or other transit company, an airport, and a municipal water supply
system;
         (d)   The maintenance, destruction, operation, and upkeep of a sewer
system; and
         (e)   The operation and control of a public stadium, auditorium, civic
or social center, exhibition hall, arts and crafts center, band or orchestra,
or off-street parking facility.
   PUBLIC ROADS. Means public roads, highways, streets, avenues, alleys, and
bridges within a political subdivision. The term does not include berms,
shoulders, rights-of-way, or traffic control devices unless the traffic control
devices are mandated by the Ohio Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
   STATE. The State of Ohio, including but not limited to the General Assembly,
the Supreme Court, the offices of all elected state officers, and all
departments, boards, offices, commissions, agencies, colleges, and
universities, institutions, and other instrumentalities of the State of Ohio.
The term does not include political subdivisions.
(R.C. § 2744.01)
§ 36.02 NONLIABILITY OF MUNICIPALITY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Classifications of functions; nonliability; jurisdiction of the
courts.
      (1)   For the purposes of this chapter, the functions of political
subdivisions are classified as governmental functions and proprietary
functions. Except as provided in division (B) of this section, a political
subdivision is not liable in damages in a civil action for injury, death, or
loss to person or property allegedly caused by any act or omission of the
political subdivision or an employee of the political subdivision in connection
with a governmental or proprietary function.
      (2)   The defenses and immunities conferred under this chapter and R.C.
Chapter 2744 apply in connection with all governmental and proprietary
functions performed by the political subdivision and its employees, whether
performed on behalf of the political subdivision or on behalf of another
political subdivision.
      (3)   Subject to statutory limitations upon their monetary jurisdiction,
the Courts of Common Pleas, the Municipal Courts, and the County Courts have
jurisdiction to hear and determine civil actions governed by or brought
pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   Exceptions. Subject to §
36.03 and R.C. §§ 2744.03 and 2744.05, a political subdivision is liable in
damages in a civil action for injury, death, or loss to person or property
allegedly caused by an act or omission of the political subdivision or of any
of its employees in connection with a governmental or proprietary function, as
follows:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, political
subdivisions are liable for injury, death, or loss to person or property caused
by the negligent operation of any motor vehicle by their employees when the
employees are engaged within the scope of their employment and authority. The
following are full defenses to that liability:
         (a)   A member of a municipal police department or any other police
agency was operating a motor vehicle while responding to an emergency call and
the operation of the vehicle did not constitute willful or wanton misconduct;
         (b)   A member of a municipal fire department or any other
firefighting agency was operating a motor vehicle while engaged in duty at a
fire, proceeding toward a place where a fire is in progress or is believed to
be in progress, or answering any other emergency alarm and the operation of the
vehicle did not constitute willful or wanton misconduct;
         (c)   A member of an emergency medical service owned or operated by a
political subdivision was operating a motor vehicle while responding to or
completing a call for emergency medical care or treatment, the member was
holding a valid commercial driver’s license issued pursuant to R.C. Chapter
4506 or a driver’s license issued pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4507, the operation
of the vehicle did not constitute willful or wanton misconduct, and the
operation complies with the precautions of R.C. § 4511.03.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. §§ 3314.07 and 3746.24,
political subdivisions are liable for injury, death, or loss to person or
property caused by the negligent performance of acts by their employees with
respect to proprietary functions of the political subdivisions.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 3746.24, political
subdivisions are liable for injury, death, or loss to person or property caused
by their negligent failure to keep public roads in repair and other negligent
failure to remove obstructions from public roads, except that it is a full
defense to that liability, when a bridge within a municipality is involved,
that the municipality does not have the responsibility for maintaining or
inspecting the bridge.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 3746.24, political
subdivisions are liable for injury, death, or loss to person or property that
is caused by the negligence of their employees and that occurs within or on the
grounds of, and is due to physical defects within or on the grounds of,
buildings that are used in connection with the performance of a governmental
function, including but not limited to office buildings and courthouses, but
not including jails, places of juvenile detention, workhouses, or any other
detention facility, as defined in R.C. § 2921.01.
      (5)   In addition to the circumstances described in divisions (B)(1)
through (B)(4) of this section, a political subdivision is liable for injury,
death, or loss to person or property when civil liability is expressly imposed
upon the political subdivision by a section of the Ohio Revised Code, including
but not limited to R.C. §§ 2743.02 and 5591.37. Civil liability shall not be
construed to exist under another section of this code or the Ohio Revised Code
merely because that section imposes a responsibility or mandatory duty upon a
political subdivision, because that section provides for a criminal penalty,
because of a general authorization in that section that a political subdivision
may sue and be sued, or because that section uses the term “shall” in a
provision pertaining to a political subdivision.
   (C)   An order that denies a political subdivision or an employee of a
political subdivision the benefit of an alleged immunity from liability as
provided in this chapter or any other provision of the law is a final order.
(R.C. § 2744.02)
§ 36.03 DEFENSES AND IMMUNITIES.
   (A)   In a civil action brought against a political subdivision or an
employee of a political subdivision to recover damages for injury, death, or
loss to person or property allegedly caused by any act or omission in
connection with a governmental or proprietary function, the following defenses
or immunities may be asserted to establish nonliability:
      (1)   The political subdivision is immune from liability if the employee
involved was engaged in the performance of a judicial, quasi-judicial,
prosecutorial, legislative, or quasi-legislative function.
      (2)   The political subdivision is immune from liability if the conduct
of the employee involved, other than negligent conduct, that gave rise to the
claim of liability was required by law or authorized by law, or if the conduct
of the employee involved that gave rise to the claim of liability was necessary
or essential to the exercise of powers of the political subdivision or
employee.
      (3)   The political subdivision is immune from liability if the action or
failure to act by the employee involved that gave rise to the claim of
liability was within the discretion of the employee with respect to policy
making, planning, or enforcement powers by virtue of the duties and
responsibilities of the office or position of the employee.
      (4)   The political subdivision is immune from liability if the action or
failure to act by the political subdivision or employee involved that gave rise
to the claim of liability, resulted in injury or death to a person who had been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a criminal offense and who, at the time of
the injury or death, was serving any portion of his or her sentence by
performing community service work for or in the political subdivision whether
pursuant to R.C. § 2951.02 or otherwise, or resulted in injury or death to a
child who was found to be a delinquent child and who, at the time of the injury
or death, was performing community service or community work for or in a
political subdivision in accordance with the order of a juvenile court entered
pursuant to R.C. § 2152.19 or 2152.20, and if, at the time of that person’s or
child’s injury or death, the person or child was covered for purposes of R.C.
Chapter 4123 in connection with the community service or community work for or
in the political subdivision.
      (5)   The political subdivision is immune from liability if the injury,
death, or loss to person or property resulted from the exercise of judgment or
discretion in determining whether to acquire, or how to use, equipment,
supplies, materials, personnel, facilities, and other resources, unless the
judgment or discretion was exercised with malicious purpose, in bad faith, or
in a wanton or reckless manner.
      (6)   In addition to any immunity or defense referred to in division (A)
(7) of this section and in circumstances not covered by that division or R.C.
§§ 3314.07 and 3746.24, the employee is immune from liability unless one of the
following applies:
         (a)   His or her acts or omissions were manifestly outside the scope
of his or her employment or official responsibilities;
         (b)   His or her acts or omissions were with malicious purpose, in bad
faith, or in a wanton or reckless manner;
         (c)   Civil liability is expressly imposed upon the employee by a
section of the Ohio Revised Code. Civil liability shall not be construed to
exist under another section of the Ohio Revised Code merely because that
section imposes a responsibility or mandatory duty upon an employee, because
that section provides for a criminal penalty, because of a general
authorization in that section that an employee may sue and be sued, or because
the section uses the term “shall” in a provision pertaining to an employee.
      (7)   The political subdivision, and an employee who is the Chief Legal
Officer of a political subdivision, an assistant of any such person, or a judge
of a court of this state, is entitled to any defense or immunity available at
common law or established by the Ohio Revised Code.
   (B)   Any immunity or defense conferred upon, or referred to in connection
with, an employee by division (A)(6) or (A)(7) of this section does not affect
or limit any liability of a political subdivision for an act or omission of the
employee as provided in §
36.02 above.
(R.C. § 2744.03)
§ 36.04 LIMITATION OF ACTIONS.
   (A)   An action against a political subdivision to recover damages for
injury, death, or loss to person or property allegedly caused by any act or
omission in connection with a governmental or proprietary function, whether
brought as an original action, cross-claim, counterclaim, third-party claim, or
claim for subrogation, shall be brought within two years after the cause of
action accrues, or within any applicable shorter period of time for bringing
the action provided by the Ohio Revised Code. The period of limitation
contained in this division shall be tolled pursuant to R.C. § 2305.16. This
section applies to actions brought against political subdivisions by all
persons, governmental entities, and the state.
   (B)   In the complaint filed in a civil action against a political
subdivision or an employee of a political subdivision to recover damages for
injury, death, or loss to person or property allegedly caused by an act or
omission in connection with a governmental or proprietary function, whether
filed in an original action, cross-claim, counterclaim, third-party claim, or
claim for subrogation, the complainant shall include a demand for a judgment
for the damages that the judge in a nonjury trial or the jury in a jury trial
finds that the complainant is entitled to be awarded, but shall not specify in
that demand any monetary amount for damages sought.
(R.C. § 2744.04)
§ 36.05 DAMAGES.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code or rules
of a court to the contrary, in an action against a political subdivision to
recover damages for injury, death or loss to person or property caused by an
act or omission in connection with a governmental or proprietary function,
punitive or exemplary damages shall not be awarded.
   (B)   (1)   If a claimant receives or is entitled to receive benefits for
injuries or loss allegedly incurred from a policy or policies of insurance or
any other source, the benefits shall be disclosed to the court, and the amount
of the benefits shall be deducted from any award against a political
subdivision recovered by the claimant. No insurer or other person is entitled
to bring an action under a subrogation provision in an insurance or other
contract against a political subdivision with respect to those benefits. The
amount of the benefits shall be deducted from an award against a political
subdivision under division (B)(1) of this section regardless of whether the
claimant may be under an obligation to pay back the benefits upon recovery, in
whole or in part, for the claim. A claimant whose benefits have been deducted
from an award under division (B)(1) of this section is not considered fully
compensated and shall not be required to reimburse a subrogated claim for
benefits deducted from an award pursuant to division (B)(1) of this section.
      (2)   Nothing in division (B)(1) of this section shall be construed to do
either of the following:
         (a)   Limit the rights of a beneficiary under a life insurance policy
or the rights of sureties under fidelity or surety bonds;
         (b)   Prohibit the Department of Medicaid from recovering from the
political subdivision, pursuant to R.C. § 5160.37, the cost of medical
assistance under a medical assistance program.
   (C)   (1)   There shall not be any limitation on compensatory damages that
represent the actual loss of the person who is awarded the damages. However,
except in wrongful death actions brought pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2125, damages
that arise from the same cause of action, transaction or occurrence, or series
of transactions or occurrences and that do not represent the actual loss of the
person who is awarded the damages shall not exceed $250,000 in favor of any one
person. The limitation on damages that do not represent the actual loss of the
person who is awarded the damages provided in this section does not apply to
court costs that are awarded to a plaintiff, or to interest on a judgment
rendered in favor of a plaintiff, in an action against a political subdivision.
      (2)   (a)   As used in this section, THE ACTUAL LOSS OF THE PERSON WHO IS
AWARDED THE DAMAGES includes all of the following:
            1.   All wages, salaries, or other compensation lost by the person
injured as a result of the injury, including wages, salaries, or other
compensation lost as of the date of a judgment and future expected lost
earnings of the person injured;
            2.   All expenditures of the person injured or another person on
behalf of the person injured for medical care or treatment, for rehabilitation
services, or for other care, treatment, services, products, or accommodations
that were necessary because of the injury;
            3.   All expenditures to be incurred in the future, as determined
by the court, by the person injured or another person on behalf of the person
injured for medical care or treatment, for rehabilitation services, or for
other care, treatment, service, products or accommodations that will be
necessary because of the injury;
            4.   All expenditures of a person whose property was injured or
destroyed or of another person on behalf of the person whose property was
injured or destroyed in order to repair or replace the property that was
injured or destroyed;
            5.   All expenditures of the person injured or of the person whose
property was injured or destroyed or of another person on behalf of the person
injured or of the person whose property was injured or destroyed in relation to
the actual preparation or presentation of the claim involved;
            6.   Any other expenditures of the person injured or of the person
whose property was injured or destroyed or of another person on behalf of the
person injured or of the person whose property was injured or destroyed that
the court determines represent an actual loss experienced because of the
personal or property injury or property loss.
         (b)   As used in this section, THE ACTUAL LOSS OF THE PERSON WHO IS
AWARDED THE DAMAGES does not include any fees paid or owed to an attorney for
any services rendered in relation to a personal or property injury or property
loss, and does not include any damages awarded for pain and suffering, for the
loss of society, consortium, companionship, care, assistance, attention,
protection, advice, guidance, counsel, instruction, training, or education of
the person injured, for mental anguish, or for any other intangible loss.
(R.C. § 2744.05)
§ 36.06 SATISFACTION OF JUDGMENTS.
   (A)   Real or personal property, and moneys, accounts, deposits, or
investments of a political subdivision are not subject to execution, judicial
sale, garnishment, or attachment to satisfy a judgment rendered against a
political subdivision in a civil action to recover damages for injury, death,
or loss to person or property caused by an act or omission of the political
subdivision or any of its employees in connection with a governmental or
proprietary function. Those judgments shall be paid from funds of the political
subdivisions that have been appropriated for that purpose, but, if sufficient
funds are not currently appropriated for the payment of judgments, the fiscal
officer of a political subdivision shall certify the amount of any unpaid
judgments to the taxing authority of the political subdivision for inclusion in
the next succeeding budget and annual appropriation measure and payment in the
next succeeding fiscal year as provided by R.C. § 5705.08, unless any judgment
of that nature is to be paid from the proceeds of bonds issued pursuant to R.C.
§ 133.14 or pursuant to annual installments authorized by divisions (B) or (C)
of this section.
   (B)   (1)   (a)   As used in this section, THE ACTUAL LOSS OF THE PERSON WHO
IS AWARDED THE DAMAGES includes all of the following:
            1.   All wages, salaries, or other compensation lost by the person
injured as a result of the injury, as of the date of judgment;
            2.   All expenditures of the person injured or of another person on
behalf of the person injured for medical care or treatment, for rehabilitation
services, or for other care, treatment, services, products, or accommodations
that were necessary because of the injury;
            3.   All expenditures of a person whose property was injured or
destroyed or of another person on behalf of the person whose property was
injured or destroyed in order to repair or replace the property that was
injured or destroyed;
            4.   All expenditures of the person injured or whose property was
injured or destroyed or of another person on behalf of the person injured whose
property was injured or destroyed in relation to the actual preparation or
presentation of the claim involved;
            5.   Any other expenditure of the person injured or whose property
was injured or destroyed or of another person on behalf of the person injured
or of the person whose property was injured or destroyed that the court
determines represent an actual loss experienced because of the personal or
property injury or property loss.
         (b)   As used in this section, THE ACTUAL LOSS OF THE PERSON WHO IS
AWARDED THE DAMAGES does not include any of the following:
            1.   Wages, salaries, or other compensation lost by the person
injured as a result of the injury that are future expected earnings of that
person;
            2.   Expenditures to be incurred in the future, as determined by
the court, by the person injured or by another person on behalf of the person
injured for medical care or treatment, for rehabilitation services, or for
other care, treatment, services, products, or accommodations that will be
necessary because of the injury;
            3.   Any fees paid or owed to an attorney for any services rendered
in relation to a personal or property injury or property loss;
            4.   Any damages awarded for pain and suffering, for the loss of
society, consortium, companionship, care, assistance, attention, protection,
advice, guidance, counsel, instruction, training, or education of the person
injured, for mental anguish, or for any other intangible loss.
      (2)   (a)   Except as specifically provided to the contrary in this
section, a court that renders a judgment against a political subdivision as
described in division (A) of this section and that is not in favor of the state
may authorize the political subdivision, upon the motion of the political
subdivision, to pay the judgment or a specified portion of the judgment in
annual installments over a period not to exceed ten years, subject to the
payment of interest at the rate specified in R.C. § 1343.03(A). A court shall
not authorize the payment in installments under this division of any portion of
a judgment or entire judgment that represents the actual loss of the person who
is awarded the damages.
         (b)   Additionally, a court shall not authorize the payment in
installments under this division of any portion of a judgment or entire
judgment that does not represent the actual loss of the person who is awarded
the damages unless the court, after balancing the interests of the political
subdivision and of the person in whose favor the judgment was rendered,
determines that installment payments would be appropriate under the
circumstances and would not be unjust to the person in whose favor the judgment
was rendered. If a court makes that determination, it shall fix the amount of
the installment payments in a manner that achieves for the person in whose
favor the judgment was rendered the same economic result over the period as
that person would have received if the judgment or portion of the judgment
subject to the installment payments had been paid in a lump sum payment.
   (C)   At the option of a political subdivision, a judgment as described in
division (A) of this section and that is rendered in favor of the state may be
paid in equal annual installments over a period not to exceed ten years,
without the payment of interest.
(R.C. § 2744.06)
§ 36.07 DEFENDING AND INDEMNIFYING EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(2) of this section,
a political subdivision shall provide for the defense of an employee, in any
state or federal court, in any civil action or proceeding which contains an
allegation for damages for injury, death, or loss to person or property caused
by an act or omission of the employee in connection with a governmental or
proprietary function. Amounts expended by a political subdivision in the
defense of its employees shall be from funds appropriated for this purpose or
from proceeds of insurance.
      (2)   A political subdivision does not have the duty to provide for the
defense of an employee under division (A)(1) of this section if any of the
following apply:
         (a)   The act or omission occurred while the employee was not acting
in good faith.
         (b)   The act or omission occurred while the employee was acting
manifestly outside the scope of the employee’s employment or official
responsibilities.
         (c)   The civil action or proceeding is commenced by or on behalf of a
political subdivision.
         (d)   The employee is an employee of a regional council of governments
established under R.C. Chapter 167 and both of the following apply:
            1.   The employee is not also an employee of a political
subdivision that is a member of the council.
            2.   The act or omission, if proven, would constitute a violation
of R.C. Chapter 102 or R.C. Chapter 2921.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2) of this section,
a political subdivision shall indemnify and hold harmless an employee in the
amount of any judgment, other than a judgment for punitive or exemplary
damages, that is obtained against the employee in a state or federal court or
as a result of a law of a foreign jurisdiction and that is for damages for
injury, death, or loss to person or property caused by an act or omission in
connection with a governmental or proprietary function.
      (2)   A political subdivision is not required to indemnify and hold
harmless an employee under division (B)(1) of this section if any of the
following apply:
         (a)   At the time of the act or omission, the employee was not acting
in good faith.
         (b)   At the time of the act or omission, the employee was not acting
within the scope of the employee’s employment or official responsibilities.
         (c)   The employee is an employee of a regional council of governments
established under R.C. Chapter 167 and both of the following apply:
            1.   The employee is not also an employee of a political
subdivision that is a member of the council.
            2.   The act or omission constitutes a violation of R.C. Chapter
102 or R.C. Chapter 2921.
   (C)   (1)   A political subdivision may enter into a consent judgment or
settlement and may secure releases from liability for itself or an employee,
with respect to any claim for injury, death, or loss to person or property
caused by an act or omission in connection with a governmental or proprietary
function.
      (2)   No action or appeal of any kind shall be brought by any person,
including any employee or a taxpayer, with respect to the decision of a
political subdivision pursuant to division (C)(1) of this section whether to
enter into a consent judgment or settlement or to secure releases, or
concerning the amount and circumstances of a consent judgment or settlement.
Amounts expended for any settlement shall be from funds appropriated for this
purpose.
   (D)   (1)   If a political subdivision refuses to provide an employee with a
defense in a civil action or proceeding as described in division (A) of this
section, upon the motion of the political subdivision, the court shall conduct
a hearing regarding the political subdivision’s duty to defend the employee in
that civil action. The political subdivision shall file the motion within 30
days of the close of discovery in the action. After the motion is filed, the
employee shall have not less than 30 days to respond to the motion.
      (2)   At the request of the political subdivision or the employee, the
court shall order the motion to be heard at an oral hearing. At the hearing on
the motion, the court shall consider all evidence and arguments submitted by
the parties. The court shall determine whether the political subdivision has
the duty to defend the employee under division (A) of this section. The
pleadings shall not be determinative of whether the employee acted in good
faith or was manifestly outside the scope of employment or official
responsibilities.
      (3)   If the court determines that the political subdivision has the duty
to defend the employee under division (A) of this section, the court shall
order the political subdivision to defend the employee in the action.
(R.C. § 2744.07)
§ 36.08 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   (A)   (1)   A political subdivision may use public funds to secure insurance
with respect to its and its employees’ potential liability in damages in civil
actions for injury, death, or loss to persons or property allegedly caused by
an act or omission of the political subdivision or any of its employees in
connection with a governmental or proprietary function. The insurance may be at
the limits, for the circumstances, and subject to the terms and conditions,
that are determined by the political subdivision in its discretion. The
insurance may be for the period of time that is set forth in specifications for
competitive bids or, when competitive bidding is not required, for the period
of time that is mutually agreed upon by the political subdivision and insurance
company. The period of time does not have to be, but can be, limited to the
fiscal cycle under which the political subdivision is funded and operated.
      (2)   (a)   Regardless of whether a political subdivision procures a
policy of liability insurance pursuant to division (A)(1) of this section or
otherwise, the political subdivision may establish and maintain a self-
insurance program relative to its and its employees’ potential liability in
damages in civil actions for injury, death, or loss to persons or property
allegedly caused by an act or omission of the political subdivision or any of
its employees in connection with a governmental or proprietary function. The
political subdivision may reserve such funds as it deems appropriate in a
special fund that may be established pursuant to an ordinance or resolution of
the political subdivision and not subject to R.C. § 5705.12. The political
subdivision may allocate the costs of insurance of a self-insurance program, or
both, among the funds or accounts in the subdivision’s treasury on the basis of
relative exposure and loss experience. The political subdivision may require
any deductibles under an insurance or self-insurance program, or both, to be
paid from funds or accounts in the subdivision’s treasury from which a loss was
directly attributable. If it so chooses, the political subdivision may contract
with any person, other political subdivision, or regional council of
governments for purposes of the administration of the program.
         (b)   Political subdivisions that have established self-insurance
programs relative to their and their employees’ potential liability as
described in division (A)(2)(a) of this section may mutually agree that their
self-insurance programs will be jointly administered in a specific manner.
   (B)   The purchase of liability insurance, or the establishment and
maintenance of a self-insurance program, by a political subdivision does not
constitute a waiver of any immunity or defense of the political subdivision or
its employees, except that the political subdivision may specifically waive any
immunity or defense to which it or its employees may be entitled if a provision
to that effect is specifically included in the policy of insurance or in a
written plan of operation of the self-insurance program, or if any, the
legislative enactment of the political subdivision authorizing the purchase of
the insurance or the establishment and maintenance of the self-insurance
program. Such a specific waiver shall be only to the extent of the insurance or
self-insurance program coverage.
   (C)   The authorizations for political subdivisions to secure insurance and
to establish and maintain self-insurance programs in this section are in
addition to any other authority to secure insurance or to establish and
maintain self-insurance programs that is granted pursuant to the Ohio Revised
Code or the Ohio Constitution, and they are not in derogation of any other
authorization.
(R.C. § 2744.08)
   (D)   If a political subdivision, pursuant to division (A)(2)(a) of this
section or a joint self-insurance pool pursuant to R.C. § 2744.081, has
allocated costs to, or required the payment of deductibles from, funds or
accounts in the subdivision’s treasury, the subdivisions’s fiscal officer,
pursuant to ordinance or resolution of the Legislative Authority, shall
transfer amounts equal to those costs or deductibles from the funds or accounts
of the subdivision’s General Fund if both of the following occur:
      (1)   The subdivision requests payment from the employee responsible for
the funds or accounts for those costs or deductibles;
      (2)   The employee receiving the request fails to remit payment within 45
days after the date of receipt of the request.
   (E)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 5705.14, 5705.15, and 5705.16 do not apply
to transfers made pursuant to division (D) of this section.
(R.C. § 2744.082)
Statutory reference:
   Joint municipal self-insurance pools, see R.C. § 2744.081
§ 36.09 CERTAIN ACTIONS UNAFFECTED.
   This chapter does not apply to, and shall not be construed to apply to, the
following:
   (A)   Civil actions that seek to recover damages from a political
subdivision or any of its employees for contractual liability;
   (B)   Civil actions by an employee, or the collective bargaining
representative of an employee, against his or her political subdivision
relative to any matter that arises out of the employment relationship between
the employee and the political subdivision;
   (C)   Civil actions by an employee of a political subdivision against the
political subdivision relative to wages, hours, conditions, or other terms of
his or her employment;
   (D)   Civil actions by sureties, and the rights of sureties, under fidelity
or surety bonds;
   (E)   Civil claims based upon alleged violations of the Constitution or
statutes of the United States, except that the provisions of §
36.07 shall apply to such claims or related civil actions.
(R.C. § 2744.09)
§ 36.10 CERTAIN CHARGES AGAINST MUNICIPAL OFFICERS FILED WITH PROBATE JUDGE;
PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   When a complaint under oath is filed with the probate judge of the
county in which the municipality or the larger part thereof is situated, by any
elector of the municipality, signed and approved by four other electors
thereof, the judge shall forthwith issue a citation to any person charged in
the complaint for his or her appearance before the judge within ten days from
the filing thereof, and shall also furnish the accused and the Solicitor or
Director of Law with a copy thereof. The complaint shall charge any of the
following:
         (a)   That a member of the Legislative Authority has received,
directly or indirectly, compensation for his or her services as a member
thereof, as a committee person, or otherwise, contrary to law;
         (b)   That a member of the Legislative Authority or an officer of the
municipality is or has been interested, directly or indirectly, in the profits
of a contract, job, work or service, or is or has been acting as a
commissioner, architect, superintendent or engineer in work undertaken or
prosecuted by the municipality, contrary to law; or
         (c)   That a member of the Legislative Authority or an officer of the
municipality has been guilty of misfeasance or malfeasance in office.
      (2)   Before acting upon the complaint, the judge shall require the party
complaining to furnish sufficient security for costs.
(R.C. § 733.72)
   (B)   Appearance of counsel; jury. On the day fixed by the probate judge for
the return of the citation issued pursuant to division (A) of this section, the
Solicitor or Director of Law shall appear on behalf of the complainant to
conduct the prosecution, and the accused may also appear by counsel. A time
shall be set for hearing the case, which shall be not more than ten days after
the return. If a jury is demanded by either party, the probate judge shall
direct the summoning of 12 jurors in the manner provided by R.C. Chapter 2313.
If the municipality does not have a Solicitor or Director of Law, or if the
Solicitor or Director of Law is accused of any misfeasance or malfeasance in
his or her office, the Prosecuting Attorney shall appear on behalf of the
complainant to conduct the prosecution.
(R.C. § 733.73)
   (C)   Challenge of jurors. On the day fixed for trial under division (B) of
this section, if a jury is impaneled, either party, in addition to the
peremptory challenges allowed by law in other cases, may object for good cause
to any juror summoned, and vacancies occurring for any cause may be filled by
the probate judge from the bystanders until the panel is full, unless the party
charged, or the party’s counsel, demands that additional jurors be summoned to
fill such vacancy.
(R.C. § 733.74)
   (D)   Proceedings on the trial. On the day designated under division (B) of
this section for the trial, the trial shall take place, unless continued on
affidavit for good cause to another time not exceeding ten days. On the trial,
the Solicitor or Director of Law shall appear for the prosecution, examine
witnesses designated by the complainant, and such others as he or she
discovers, and either party may have process from the probate judge to compel
the attendance of witnesses.
(R.C. § 733.75)
   (E)   Removal of officer if found guilty. If, on the trial, the charges in
the complaint mentioned in division (A) of this section are sustained by the
verdict of the jury, or by the decision of the probate judge when there is no
jury, the judge shall enter the charges and findings thereon upon the record of
the court, make an order removing the officer from office, and forthwith
transmit a certified copy thereof to the Presiding Officer of the Legislative
Authority, whereupon the vacancy shall be filled as provided by law.
(R.C. § 733.76)
   (F)   Payment of costs. The cost and expenses of the trial shall be charged
against the party filing the complaint under division (A) of this section, the
accused, or the municipality, or apportioned among them, as the probate judge
directs, and shall be collected as in other cases. No costs or expenses shall
be charged to the accused if he or she is acquitted upon trial. If an appeal on
questions of law is instituted by the officer complained of, to reverse or
vacate the order of the probate court, the officer shall not exercise the
functions of his or her office until the order is finally reversed or vacated.
(R.C. § 733.77)
CHAPTER 37: DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
37.01   Landmark Commission; provisions adopted by reference
   
37.02   Recreation Commission
   
37.03   Audit Committee
Shade Tree Commission
   
37.15   Established; members
   
37.16   Term; vacancy
   
37.17   Compensation
   
37.18   Powers and duties
   
37.19   Rules and regulations
   
37.20   Reports
   
37.21   Investigations
   
37.22   Heritage Tree program
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 37.01 LANDMARK COMMISSION; PROVISIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The Landmark Ordinance, copies of which are on file in the office of the
Village Clerk, is adopted and incorporated as part of this code of ordinances
as fully as if set out at length herein.
(Prior Code, § 37.01) (Ord. 1998-02, passed 4-14-1998; Ord. 2001-29, passed -
-; Ord. 2005-38, passed 10-11-2005; Ord. 2024-07, passed 1-25-2024)
§ 37.02 RECREATION COMMISSION.
   There is established, as part of this code of ordinances, a Recreation
Commission for the purpose of utilizing the auditorium at the Market Street
school building.
(Ord. 1994-5, passed - -1994)
§ 37.03 AUDIT COMMITTEE.
   The village’s Personnel and Finance Committee shall also serve as the
village’s Audit Committee.
(Ord. 2007-7, passed 3-13-2007)
SHADE TREE COMMISSION
§ 37.15 ESTABLISHED; MEMBERS.
   There is established a Shade Tree Commission for the village, which shall
consist of the following members: the Public Works Superintendent, the
Chairperson of the Public Works Committee of the Council, the Village
Administrator, who shall all serve as ex officio members, and three residents
who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 37.25) (Ord. 2002-35, passed 9-24-2002)
§ 37.16 TERM; VACANCY.
   The three resident members shall be for three consecutive years with the
exception of the first term when one member shall have a two-year term and one
member shall have a one-year term. In the event that a vacancy occurs during
the term of any member, his or her successor shall be appointed to complete
that portion of the member’s term which is unexpired.
(Prior Code, § 37.26) (Ord. 2002-35, passed 9-24-2002)
§ 37.17 COMPENSATION.
   Members of the Shade Tree Commission shall serve without monetary
compensation.
(Prior Code, § 37.27) (Ord. 2002-35, passed 9-24-2002)
§ 37.18 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Shade Tree Commission has the power to study, investigate, plan, advise,
report and recommend to the Council, to the Public Works Superintendent and/or
to the Mayor, any plan, action, program or legislation which the Commission
finds or determines to be necessary or advisable for the care, preservation,
trimming, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubbery
along public roadways, streets and alleys.
(Prior Code, § 37.28) (Ord. 2002-35, passed 9-24-2002)
§ 37.19 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Shade Tree Commission shall choose its own officers, make its own rules
and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the
membership shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. An attendance
record of less than 50% from three consecutive meetings shall constitute cause
for removal from the Commission and replacement by the Mayor. Meetings are to
be open to the public in accordance with the state statutes.
(Prior Code, § 37.29) (Ord. 2002-35, passed 9-24-2002)
§ 37.20 REPORTS.
   All plans, findings, advice, reports and recommendations made by the Shade
Tree Commission shall be in writing and shall designate by name those members
who approve or concur thereof. Any member who does not so approve or concur has
the right, as part of his or her report, to state his or her reasons for
nonapproval or nonconcurrence.
(Prior Code, § 37.30) (Ord. 2002-35, passed 9-24-2002)
§ 37.21 INVESTIGATIONS.
   The Shade Tree Commission, on request, whether from Council, the Mayor or
the Public Works Superintendent, shall consider, investigate, make findings,
report and recommend upon any special matter or question which comes within the
scope of the Commission’s functions.
(Prior Code, § 37.31) (Ord. 2002-35, passed 9-24-2002)
§ 37.22 HERITAGE TREE PROGRAM.
   The Heritage Tree Program is created, and is to be administered by the Shade
Tree Commission.
(Res. 2005-47, passed 11-22-2005)
CHAPTER 38: GENERAL MUNICIPAL POLICIES
Section
   
38.01   Harassment policy
   
38.02   All Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan
   
38.03   Integrated Emergency Management Plan adopted by reference
   
38.04   Home Repair Program Guidelines adopted by reference
   
38.05   Program to recover user fees for deployment of public safety services
   
38.06   Personnel policy adopted by reference
   
38.07   Credit card policy
   
38.08   Public records policy
   
38.09   Record retention policy
   
38.10   Procurement policy
   
38.11   Competitive bidding policy
§ 38.01 HARASSMENT POLICY.
   (A)   General policy. It is the village’s policy to afford all employees a
workplace that is free from all forms of harassment or discrimination,
including sexual, racial, religious, age, disability or national origin
harassment or discrimination. Such misconduct should be reported promptly,
regardless of who originates it or participates in it, and regardless of
whether it is oral, written, visual or physical conduct. If found to have
occurred, such misconduct will result in corrective action that the village
determines is an appropriate resolution of the matter. The corrective action
could range up to and including termination of the offender.
(Prior Code, § 38.01)
   (B)   Explanation of sexual harassment.
      (1)   The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) defines SEXUAL
HARASSMENT as unwelcome sexual advances (verbal and/or physical), requests for
favors and other verbal and/or physical conduct of a sexual nature constitute
sexual harassment when:
         (a)   Submission to such conduct is either an explicit or implicit
term or condition of employment (such as promotion, job assignment, overtime
opportunity, wage increase, and the like);
         (b)   Submission to or rejection of the conduct is used as a basis for
making employment decisions; and/or
         (c)   The conduct has the purpose or the effect of substantially
interfering with an individual’s work performance or creating a hostile or
offensive work environment.
      (2)   SEXUAL HARASSMENT under this definition may range from sexual
innuendo, perhaps in the guise of humor, to coerced sexual relations. It may
include, but certainly is not limited to:
         (a)   Sexual jokes or offensive sexual language;
         (b)   Unwelcome sexual references;
         (c)   Verbal harassment of a sexual nature;
         (d)   Physical contact such as touching, patting, pinching, rubbing or
squeezing;
         (e)   Leering at or ogling or other sexual references or comments
about a person’s body, appearance or clothing;
         (f)   Seeking sexual attention with implied or explicit threats or
rewards; and/or
         (g)   Displaying pictures or objects that have women and/or men as
sexual objects.
      (3)   Using and insisting upon good manners, professional behavior and
the exercise of good sense will go a long way in avoiding and preventing the
inappropriate conduct covered by this policy. Should there be any incident,
however, which it is believed violated this policy, it should be reported
immediately.
(Prior Code, § 38.02)
   (C)   Reporting procedure.
      (1)   If an employee believes that he or she has been harassed or
witnesses harassment of another employee, he or she is encouraged to report the
incident to either his or her supervisor, department head or the Chief
Personnel Administrator within three working days after its occurrence. All
reported incidents will be investigated immediately and as confidentially as
possible. The village recognizes that whether an incident stems from a purely
social relationship that does not discriminate or is not offensive can only be
determined after careful consideration of the facts. If, after investigation,
it is decided that the employee has been harassed, the employee who committed
the harassment will be subject to disciplinary action.
      (2)   If called upon, an employee is expected to cooperate during a
harassment investigation. If an employee hinders the investigation or fails to
cooperate, he or she may be subject to disciplinary action. Likewise, any
employee who retaliates against another employee for filing a harassment
complaint, serving as a witness or otherwise cooperating during an
investigation is subject to disciplinary action.
      (3)   False accusations of harassment can have severe and long-lasting
effects upon innocent persons. The village trusts and expects that each
employee will act responsibly and support the village’s efforts to establish a
pleasant working atmosphere that is free of harassment and discrimination.
      (4)   Accusations of harassment that prove to be false may result in
implementation of disciplinary action against the person falsely making the
accusations.
(Prior Code, § 38.03)
(Ord. 1999-02, passed 2-9-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 38.02 ALL NATURAL HAZARD MITIGATION PLAN.
   The Council adopts an amended “All Natural Hazards Mitigation Plan”,
attached to the resolution codified herein and shown as Exhibit A.
(Res. 2009-1, passed 1-13-2009)
§ 38.03 INTEGRATED EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The “Integrated Emergency Management Plan”, copies of which are on file in
the office of the Village Clerk, is adopted and incorporated by reference as if
fully set out herein.
(Prior Code, § 38.12) (Ord. 1998-04, passed 1-13-1998)
§ 38.04 HOME REPAIR PROGRAM GUIDELINES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The “Home Repair Program Guidelines”, copies of which are on file in the
office of the Village Clerk, are adopted and incorporated as part of this code
of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.
(Prior Code, § 38.14) (Ord. 2002-44, passed 11-12-2002)
§ 38.05 PROGRAM TO RECOVER USER FEES FOR DEPLOYMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY SERVICES.
   The village has established and implemented a program to recover user fees
for the deployment of public safety services rendered by the village for motor
vehicle accident services that are outside the scope of basic crime prevention,
investigation and fire protection, copies of which are on file in the office of
the Village Clerk, which is adopted and incorporated as part of this code of
ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.
(Prior Code, § 38.15) (Ord. 2007-49, passed 11-13-2007)
§ 38.06 PERSONNEL POLICY ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The village’s personnel policy, copies of which are on file in the office of
the Village Clerk, is adopted and incorporated as part of this code of
ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.
(Ord. 2012-6, passed 3-13-2012; Ord. 2014-12, passed 5-13-2014; Ord. 2014-26,
passed 9-9-2014; Ord. 2017-17, passed 8-22-2017; Ord. 2022-, passed 2-8-2022)
§ 38.07 CREDIT CARD POLICY.
   (A)   The Village Council adopts the purchasing card policy for the village,
attached to the resolution codified herein as Exhibit A, drafted in compliance
with R.C. §§ 9.21 and 717.31 to replace any existing and previous village
credit card policies.
   (B)   The Village Council requires the village’s Chief Executive Officer,
the Village Administrator, to appoint a Compliance Officer for the village, in
compliance with R.C. §§ 9.21 and 717.31, within a reasonable period of time.
(Res. 2019-02, passed 1-22-2019)
§ 38.08 PUBLIC RECORDS POLICY.
   The village’s public records policy, copies of which are on file in the
office of the Village Clerk, is adopted and incorporated as part of this code
of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.
(Ord. 2013-29, passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 2014-10, passed 4-22-2014)
§ 38.09 RECORD RETENTION POLICY.
   The records retention periods policy, copies of which are on file in the
office of the Village Clerk, is adopted and incorporated by reference as if
fully set out herein.
(Ord. 2018-09, passed 6-25-2018; Ord. 2019-08, passed 8-13-2019)
§ 38.10 PROCUREMENT POLICY.
   (A)   Purchasing. The purchasing process is designed to provide a proper
system of internal control over purchasing, to ensure that the proper
authorizations are obtained before items are purchased, and to ensure that
statutory requirements for purchasing are followed.
   (B)   Requisitions. A requisition should be prepared by the department head
or the designated representative for the purchase of commodities and then be
forwarded to the Fiscal Officer. The requisition should show the quantity and
type of commodities needed, the purpose for which they are to be used, the date
required and the fund which will incur the expense.
   (C)   Purchase order system. 
      (1)   Whenever possible, a purchase order should be issued for all
materials or supplies purchased by the village. The Fiscal Officer may not
certify any purchase order unless sufficient unencumbered funds are available
to pay the obligation when it is due. The purchase order should be pre-numbered
for control purposes.
      (2)   The following procedure applies for obtaining purchase orders.
         (a)   The requester completes the requisition and submits it to the
Village Administrator/Police Chief or Fire/EMS Chief, as applicable, for review
and approval.
         (b)   If approved, the Village Administrator, Police Chief or Fire/EMS
Chief forwards the requisition to the Fiscal Officer for final signature.
         (c)   A copy of the purchase order is sent to the vendor unless there
are specific instructions to the contrary.
         (d)   A copy is filed by the Fiscal Officer.
   (D)   Open-ended purchase orders. Open-ended purchase orders may be used for
many repetitive purchases from one vendor. Rather than issuing a purchase order
for each purchase, one purchase order with a total dollar limit is issued for a
specified period. For open-ended purchase orders, the Fiscal Officer should
provide to the appropriate department heads a list of vendors and items to be
purchased from those vendors, along with a purchase order number for the
current period (e.g., one month), and the total amount encumbered. To maintain
adequate controls, purchase transactions over a specified maximum amount should
be allowed only after contacting the Fiscal Officer.
   (E)   Purchasing levels.
      (1)   Purchases estimated to cost less than $5,000 can be exercised at
the sole discretion of the department heads but said department head shall
exercise due diligence to assure that the village is getting the most value for
the dollar.
      (2)   Purchases or services in excess of $5,000 but less than $50,000
require a requisition and three written quotes. Requisitions shall be reviewed
by the department head and the Fiscal Officer. Upon approval by the department
head and Fiscal Officer, the Fiscal Officer will issue a purchase order. All
purchases requiring contracts shall secure Village Council approval and be
executed by the Village Administrator.
      (3)   Purchases or services over $50,000 require Village Council approval
and shall be subject to sealed bid, state bid or cooperative bid processes.
         (a)   In accordance with R.C. Chapter 731, the village may elect to
forego the bidding for contracts if the village elects and declares, by
resolution, to participate in purchase contracts, in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 125 and the terms and conditions prescribed by the Department of
Administrative Services.
         (b)   Bids shall be sealed and shall be opened by the Village
Administrator in the presence of the Fiscal Officer, or designee, at a
designated time and place.
         (c)   The village, by resolution, may award a bid to the lowest
responsive and responsible bidder per Res. 2011-21, R.C. Chapter 731 and R.C. §
9.312.
         (d)   The Village Council shall approve all contracts via resolution
resulting from competitive bids prior to being awarded. The village controls
the right to reject any or all bids.
      (4)   Change orders shall only be executed in writing. Change orders
associated with Council approved contracts shall be approved via motion of the
Village Council.
   (F)   Payment of vendors’ invoices. Department heads should timely provide
to the Fiscal Officer documents and data needed to consider and approve
vendors’ invoices. These documents and data include a copy of the purchase
order with expected unit prices, returns and allowances data and notification
of any exceptions or discrepancies between goods ordered and those received.
(Ord. 2013-32, passed 11-26-2013)
§ 38.11 COMPETITIVE BIDDING POLICY.
   The village adopts a policy of requiring each competitively bid contract to
be awarded to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder in accordance with
R.C. § 9.312.
(Res. 2018-07, passed 7-10-2018)
CHAPTER 39: TAXATION
Section
Income Tax
   
39.01   Authority to levy tax; purpose of tax
   
39.02   Definitions
   
39.03   Imposition of tax
   
39.04   Collection at source
   
39.05   Annual return; filing
   
39.06   Credit for tax paid to other municipalities
   
39.07   Estimated taxes
   
39.08   Rounding of amounts
   
39.09   Requests for refunds
   
39.10   Second municipality imposing tax after time period allowed for refund
   
39.11   Amended returns
   
39.12   Limitations
   
39.13   Audits
   
39.14   Service of assessment
   
39.15   Administration of claims
   
39.16   Tax information confidential
   
39.17   Fraud
   
39.18   Interest and penalties
   
39.19   Authority of Tax Administrator; verification of information
   
39.20   Request for opinion of the Tax Administrator
   
39.21   Board of Tax Review
   
39.22   Authority to create rules and regulations
   
39.23   Rental and leased property
   
39.24   Collection of tax after termination of subchapter
   
39.25   Election to be subject to R.C. 718.80 to 718.95
   39.26   Tax rate
 
   
39.99   Penalty
INCOME TAX
§ 39.01 AUTHORITY TO LEVY TAX; PURPOSE OF TAX.
   (A)   To provide funds for the purposes of general municipal operations,
maintenance, new equipment, extension and enlargement of municipal services and
facilities and capital improvements, the village levies an annual municipal
income tax on income, qualifying wages, commissions and other compensation, and
on net profits as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   (1)   The annual tax is levied at a rate of 2%. The tax is levied at a
uniform rate on all persons residing in or earning or receiving income in the
village. The tax is levied on income, qualifying wages, commissions and other
compensation, and on net profits as hereinafter provided in §
39.03 and other sections as they may apply.
      (2)   The funds collected under the provisions of this subchapter shall
be deposited in the General Fund and said funds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the provisions contained in the annual appropriations
ordinance.
   (C)   The tax on income and the withholding tax established by this
subchapter are authorized by Article XVIII, § 3 of the State Constitution. The
tax is levied in accordance with, and is intended to be consistent with, the
provisions and limitations of R.C. § 718.
(Ord. 2009-54, passed 11-24-2009; Ord. 2015-22, passed 11-24-2015; Ord. 2016-
11, passed 7-26-2016; Res. 2016-09, passed 7-26-2016)
§ 39.02 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Any term used in this subchapter that is not otherwise defined in this
subchapter has the same meaning as when used in a comparable context in laws of
the United States relating to federal income taxation or in R.C. Title LVII,
unless a different meaning is clearly required. If a term used in this
subchapter that is not otherwise defined in this subchapter is used in a
comparable context in both the laws of the United States relating to federal
income tax and in R.C. Title LVII and the use is not consistent, then the use
of the term in the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax
shall control over the use of the term in R.C. Title LVII.
   (B)   The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and the gender neutral.
   (C)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ADJUSTED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME. 
         (a)   For a person required to file as a C corporation, or for a
person that has elected to be taxed as a C corporation, as defined herein,
means a C corporation’s federal taxable income before net operating losses and
special deductions, as determined under the Internal Revenue Code, adjusted as
follows:
            1.   Deduct intangible income to the extent included in federal
taxable income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether the
intangible income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets held
for the production of income;
            2.   Add an amount equal to 5% of intangible income deducted under
division (a)1. above, but excluding that portion of intangible income directly
related to the sale, exchange or other disposition of property described in
I.R.C. § 1221;
            3.   Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the computation of
federal taxable income if the losses directly relate to the sale, exchange or
other disposition of an asset described in I.R.C. §§ 1221 or 1231;
            4.   a.   Except as provided division (a)4.b. below, deduct income
and gain included in federal taxable income to the extent the income and gain
directly relate to the sale, exchange or other disposition of an asset
described in I.R.C. §§ 1221 or 1231.
               b.   Division (a)4.a. above does not apply to the extent the
income or gain is income or gain described in I.R.C. §§ 1245 or 1250.
            5.   Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a deduction
in the computation of federal taxable income;
            6.   In the case of a real estate investment trust or regulated
investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to, distributions
to or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of investors and allowed
as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income;
            7.   Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded in
computing federal taxable income, any income derived from a transfer agreement
or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement under R.C. § 4313.02;
            8.   a.   Except as limited by divisions (a)8.b. through (a)8.d.
below, deduct any net operating loss incurred by the person in a taxable year
beginning on or after January 1, 2017. The amount of such net operating loss
shall be deducted from net profit that is reduced by exempt income to the
extent necessary to reduce municipal taxable income to zero, with any remaining
unused portion of the net operating loss carried forward to not more than five
consecutive taxable years following the taxable year in which the loss was
incurred, but in no case for more years than necessary for the deduction to be
fully utilized.
               b.   No person shall use the deduction allowed by this division
(a)(8) to offset qualifying wages.
               c.   i.   For taxable years beginning in 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021
or 2022, a person may not deduct more than 50% of the amount of the deduction
otherwise allowed by division (a)8.a. above.
                  ii.   For taxable years beginning in 2023 or thereafter, a
person may deduct the full amount allowed by division (a)8.a. above.
                  iii.   Any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward deduction
that is available must be utilized before a taxpayer may deduct any amount
pursuant to this division (a)8.
                  iv.   Nothing in division (a)8.c.i. above precludes a person
from carrying forward, use with respect to any return filed for a taxable year
beginning after 2018, any amount of net operating loss that was not fully
utilized by operation of division (a)8.c.i. above. To the extent that an amount
of net operating loss that was not fully utilized in one or more taxable years
by operation of division (a)8.c.i. above is carried forward for use with
respect to a return filed for a taxable year beginning in 2019, 2020, 2021 or
2022, the limitation described in division (a)8.c.i. above shall apply to the
amount carried forward.
            9.   Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity owned directly
or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer’s federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that net profit in
the group’s federal taxable income in accordance with §
39.05(V)(3)(b); and
            10.   Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity owned directly
or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer’s federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that loss in the
group’s federal taxable income in accordance with §
39.05(V)(3)(b).
         (b)   If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is not a disregarded
entity that has made an election described in this section, is not a publicly
traded partnership that has made the election described in this section, and is
not an individual, the taxpayer shall compute ADJUSTED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME
under this section as if the taxpayer were a C corporation, except guaranteed
payments and other similar amounts paid or accrued to a partner, former
partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member or former member shall not be
allowed as a deductible expense unless such payments are in consideration for
the use of capital and treated as payment of interest under I.R.C. § 469 or
United States Treasury regulations. Amounts paid or accrued to a qualified
self-employed retirement plan with respect to a partner, former partner,
shareholder, former shareholder, member or former member of the taxpayer,
amounts paid or accrued to or for health insurance for a partner, former
partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member or former member, and amounts
paid or accrued to or for life insurance for a partner, former partner,
shareholder, former shareholder, member or former member shall not be allowed
as a deduction.
         (c)   Nothing in division (a) above shall be construed as allowing the
taxpayer to add or deduct any amount more than once or shall be construed as
allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or accrued for purposes of
federal self-employment tax.
      ASSESSMENT. 
         (a)   A written finding by the Tax Administrator that a person has
underpaid municipal income tax, or owes penalty and interest, or any
combination of tax, penalty or interest, to the municipal corporation that
commences the person’s time limitation for making an appeal to the Board of Tax
Review pursuant to §
39.21, and has “assessment” written in all capital letters at the top of such
finding.
         (b)   ASSESSMENT does not include a notice denying a request for
refund issued under §
39.09(C)(3), a billing statement notifying a taxpayer of current or past-due
balances owed to the municipal corporation, a Tax Administrator’s request for
additional information, a notification to the taxpayer of mathematical errors,
or a Tax Administrator’s other written correspondence to a person or taxpayer
that does not meet the criteria prescribed by division (a) above.
      AUDIT. The examination of a person or the inspection of the books,
records, memoranda or accounts of a person, ordered to appear before the Tax
Administrator, for the purpose of determining liability for a municipal income
tax.
      BOARD OF TAX REVIEW, BOARD OF REVIEW or BOARD OF TAX APPEALS. In addition
to other named local boards constituted to hear appeals of municipal income tax
matters, means the entity created under §
39.21.
      CALENDAR QUARTER. The three-month period ending on the last day of March,
June, September or December.
      CASINO OPERATOR and CASINO FACILITY. Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
3772.01.
      CERTIFIED MAIL, EXPRESS MAIL, UNITED STATES MAIL and POSTAL SERVICE. In
addition to similar terms, include any delivery service authorized pursuant to
R.C. § 5703.056.
      DISREGARDED ENTITY. A single member limited liability company, a
qualifying subchapter S subsidiary, or another entity if the company,
subsidiary or entity is a DISREGARDED ENTITY for federal income tax purposes.
      DOMICILE. The true, fixed and permanent home of a taxpayer and to which,
whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return. A taxpayer may have more than
one residence but not more than one DOMICILE.
      EMPLOYEE. An individual who is an employee for federal income tax
purposes.
      EMPLOYER. A person that is an employer for federal income tax purposes.
      EXEMPT INCOME. All of the following:
         (a)   The military pay or allowances of members of the Armed Forces of
the United States or members of their reserve components, including the
National Guard of any state;
         (b)   Intangible income;
         (c)   Social Security benefits, railroad retirement benefits,
unemployment compensation, pensions, retirement benefit payments, payments from
annuities and similar payments made to an employee or to the beneficiary of an
employee under a retirement program or plan, disability payments received from
private industry or local, state or federal governments or from charitable,
religious or educational organizations, and the proceeds of sickness, accident
or liability insurance policies. As used in this division (c), UNEMPLOYMENT
COMPENSATION does not include supplemental unemployment compensation described
in I.R.C. § 3402(o)(2);
         (d)   The income of religious, fraternal, charitable, scientific,
literary or educational institutions to the extent such income is derived from
tax-exempt real estate, tax-exempt tangible or intangible property or tax-
exempt activities;
         (e)   Compensation paid under R.C. §§ 3501.28 or 3501.36 to a person
serving as a precinct election official to the extent that such compensation
does not exceed $1,000 for the taxable year. Such compensation in excess of
$1,000 for the taxable year may be subject to taxation by a municipal
corporation. A municipal corporation shall not require the payer of such
compensation to withhold any tax from that compensation;
         (f)   Dues, contributions and similar payments received by charitable,
religious, educational or literary organizations or labor unions, lodges and
similar organizations;
         (g)   Alimony and child support received;
         (h)   Compensation for personal injuries or for damages to property
from insurance proceeds or otherwise, excluding compensation paid for lost
salaries or wages or compensation from punitive damages;
         (i)   Income of a public utility when that public utility is subject
to the tax levied under R.C. §§ 5727.24 or 5727.30. This division (i) does not
apply for purposes of R.C. Chapter 5745;
         (j)   Gains from involuntary conversions, interest on federal
obligations, items of income subject to a tax levied by the state and that a
municipal corporation is specifically prohibited by law from taxing, and income
of a decedent’s estate during the period of administration except such income
from the operation of a trade or business;
         (k)   Compensation or allowances excluded from federal gross income
under I.R.C. § 107;
         (l)   Employee compensation that is not qualifying wages as defined
herein;
         (m)   Compensation paid to a person employed within the boundaries of
a United States Air Force base under the jurisdiction of the United States Air
Force that is used for the housing of members of the United States Air Force
and is a center for Air Force operations, unless the person is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile. If the compensation is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile, tax on such income shall be payable
only to the municipal corporation of residence or domicile;
         (n)   An S corporation shareholder’s share of net profits of the S
corporation, other than any part of the share of net profits that represents
wages as defined in I.R.C. § 3121(a) or net earnings from self-employment as
defined in I.R.C. § 1402(a);
         (o)   1.   For tax years through 2023, to the extent authorized under
a resolution or ordinance adopted by the village before January 1, 2016, all or
a portion of the income of individuals or a class of individuals under 18 years
of age.
            2.   For tax years 2024 and after, the income of individuals under
18 years of age.
         (p)   1.   Except as provided in divisions (p)2. through (p)4. below,
qualifying wages described in §
39.04(C)(2) or (C)(5) to the extent the qualifying wages are not subject to
withholding for the village under either of those divisions.
            2.   The exemption provided in division (p)1. above does not apply
with respect to the municipal corporation in which the employee resided at the
time the employee earned the qualifying wages.
            3.   The exemption provided in division (p)1. above does not apply
to qualifying wages that an employer elects to withhold under §
39.04(C)(4)(b).
            4.   The exemption provided in division (p)1. above does not apply
to qualifying wages if both of the following conditions apply.
               a.   For qualifying wages described in §
39.04(C)(2), the employee’s employer withholds and remits tax on the qualifying
wages to the municipal corporation in which the employee’s principal place of
work is situated, or, for qualifying wages described in §
39.04(C)(5), the employee’s employer withholds and remits tax on the qualifying
wages to the municipal corporation in which the employer’s fixed location is
located.
               b.   The employee receives a refund of the tax described in
division (p)4.a. above on the basis of the employee not performing services in
that municipal corporation.
         (q)   1.   Except as provided in divisions (q)2. or (q)3. below,
compensation that is not qualifying wages paid to a nonresident individual for
personal services performed in the village on not more than 20 days in a
taxable year.
            2.   The exemption provided in division (q)1. above does not apply
under either of the following circumstances:
               a.   The individual’s base of operation is located in the
municipal corporation; and/or
               b.   The individual is a professional athlete, professional
entertainer or public figure, and the compensation is paid for the performance
of services in the individual’s capacity as a professional athlete,
professional entertainer or public figure. For purposes of this division
(q)2.b., PROFESSIONAL ATHLETE, PROFESSIONAL ENTERTAINER and PUBLIC FIGURE have
the same meanings as in §
39.04(C).
            3.   Compensation to which this division (q) applies shall be
treated as earned or received at the individual’s base of operation. If the
individual does not have a base of operation, the compensation shall be treated
as earned or received where the individual is domiciled.
            4.   For purposes of this division (q), BASE OF OPERATION means the
location where an individual owns or rents an office, storefront or similar
facility to which the individual regularly reports and at which the individual
regularly performs personal services for compensation.
         (r)   Compensation paid to a person for personal services performed
for a political subdivision on property owned by the political subdivision,
regardless of whether the compensation is received by an employee of the
subdivision or another person performing services for the subdivision under a
contract with the subdivision, if the property on which services are performed
is annexed to a municipal corporation pursuant to R.C. § 709.023 on or after
March 27, 2013, unless the person is subject to such taxation because of
residence. If the compensation is subject to taxation because of residence,
municipal income tax shall be payable only to the municipal corporation of
residence;
         (s)   Income the taxation of which is prohibited by the Constitution
or laws of the United States; and
         (t)   Any item of income that is EXEMPT INCOME of a pass-through
entity under this section is EXEMPT INCOME of each owner of the pass-through
entity to the extent of that owner’s distributive or proportionate share of
that item of the entity’s income.
      FORM 2106. Internal Revenue Service Form 2106 filed by a taxpayer
pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      GENERIC FORM. An electronic or paper form that is not prescribed by a
particular municipal corporation and that is designed for reporting taxes
withheld by an employer, agent of an employer or other payer, estimated
municipal income taxes or annual municipal income tax liability or for filing a
refund claim.
      GROSS RECEIPTS. The total revenue derived from sales, work done or
service rendered.
      INCOME. Includes the following:
         (a)   1.   For residents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages,
commissions and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by
the resident, including the resident’s distributive share of the net profit of
pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by the resident and any net
profit of the resident, except as provided in this section;
            2.   For the purposes of division (a)1. above:
               a.   Any net operating loss of the resident incurred in the
taxable year and the resident’s distributive share of any net operating loss
generated in the same taxable year and attributable to the resident’s ownership
interest in a pass-through entity shall be allowed as a deduction, for that
taxable year and the following five taxable years, against any other net profit
of the resident or the resident’s distributive share of any net profit
attributable to the resident’s ownership interest in a pass-through entity
until fully utilized, subject to division (a)4. below; and
               b.   The resident’s distributive share of the net profit of each
pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by the resident shall be
calculated without regard to any net operating loss that is carried forward by
that entity from a prior taxable year and applied to reduce the entity’s net
profit for the current taxable year.
            3.   Division (a)2. above does not apply with respect to any net
profit or net operating loss attributable to an ownership interest in an S
corporation unless shareholders’ shares of net profits from S corporations are
subject to tax in the municipal corporation as provided in this section; and
            4.   Any amount of a net operating loss used to reduce a taxpayer’s
net profit for a taxable year shall reduce the amount of net operating loss
that may be carried forward to any subsequent year for use by that taxpayer. In
no event shall the cumulative deductions for all taxable years with respect to
a taxpayer’s net operating loss exceed the original amount of that net
operating loss available to that taxpayer.
         (b)   In the case of nonresidents, all income, salaries, qualifying
wages, commissions and other compensation from whatever source earned or
received by the nonresident for work done, services performed or rendered, or
activities conducted in the municipal corporation, including any net profit of
the nonresident, but excluding the nonresident’s distributive share of the net
profit or loss of only pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by
the nonresident;
         (c)   For taxpayers that are not individuals, net profit of the
taxpayer; and
         (d)   Lottery, sweepstakes, gambling and sports winnings, winnings
from games of chance and prizes and awards. If the taxpayer is a professional
gambler for federal income tax purposes, the taxpayer may deduct related
wagering losses and expenses to the extent authorized under the Internal
Revenue Code and claimed against such winnings.
      INTANGIBLE INCOME. Income of any of the following types: income yield,
interest, capital gains, dividends or other income arising from the ownership,
sale, exchange or other disposition of intangible property including, but not
limited to, investments, deposits, money or credits as those terms are defined
in R.C. Chapter 5701, and patents, copyrights, trademarks, tradenames,
investments in real estate investment trusts, investments in regulated
investment companies and appreciation on deferred compensation. INTANGIBLE
INCOME does not include prizes, awards or other income associated with any
lottery winnings, gambling winnings or other similar games of chance.
      INTERNAL REVENUE CODE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5747.01.
      LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY. A limited liability company formed under R.C.
Chapter 1705 or under the laws of another state.
      MUNICIPAL CORPORATION. Includes a joint economic development district or
joint economic development zone that levies an income tax under R.C. §§
715.691, 715.70, 715.71 or 715.74.
      MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME. 
         (a)   Includes the following:
            1.   For a person other than an individual, income reduced by
exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and then, as
applicable, apportioned or sitused to the village under §
39.03, and further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward
available to the person for the village; and
            2.   a.   For an individual who is a resident of the village,
income reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income,
then reduced as provided in division (b) below, and further reduced by any pre-
2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the individual for the
municipal corporation.
               b.   For an individual who is a nonresident of the village,
income reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and
then, as applicable, apportioned or sitused to the municipal corporation under
§
39.03, then reduced as provided in division (b) below, and further reduced by
any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the individual for
the village.
         (b)   In computing the MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME of a taxpayer who is
an individual, the taxpayer may subtract, as provided in division (a)2.a. above
or this division (b), the amount of the individual’s employee business expenses
reported on the individual’s form 2106 that the individual deducted for federal
income tax purposes for the taxable year, subject to the limitation imposed by
I.R.C. § 67. For the municipal corporation in which the taxpayer is a resident,
the taxpayer may deduct all such expenses allowed for federal income tax
purposes, but only to the extent the expenses do not relate to exempt income.
For a municipal corporation in which the taxpayer is not a resident, the
taxpayer may deduct such expenses only to the extent the expenses are related
to the taxpayer’s performance of personal services in that nonresident
municipal corporation and are not related to exempt income.
      NET OPERATING LOSS. A loss incurred by a person in the operation of a
trade or business. NET OPERATING LOSS does not include unutilized losses
resulting from basis limitations, at-risk limitations or passive activity loss
limitations.
      NET PROFIT. 
         (a)   For a person other than an individual, means adjusted federal
taxable income.
         (b)   NET PROFIT for a person who is an individual, means the
individual’s net profit required to be reported on schedule C, schedule E or
schedule F reduced by any net operating loss carried forward. For the purposes
of this division (b), the net operating loss carried forward shall be
calculated and deducted in the same manner as provided in this section.
         (c)   For the purposes of this subchapter, and notwithstanding
division (a) above, NET PROFIT of a disregarded entity shall not be taxable as
against that disregarded entity, but shall instead be included in the NET
PROFIT of the owner of the disregarded entity.
         (d)   A publicly traded partnership that is treated as a partnership
for federal income tax purposes, and that is subject to tax on its NET PROFITS
by the village, may elect to be treated as a C corporation for the village. The
election shall be made on the annual return for the village. The village will
treat the publicly traded partnership as a C corporation if the election is so
made.
      NONRESIDENT. An individual that is not a resident.
      OHIO BUSINESS GATEWAY. The online computer network system, created under
R.C. § 125.30, that allows persons to electronically file business reply forms
with state agencies and includes any successor electronic filing and payment
system.
      OTHER PAYER. Any person, other than an individual’s employer or the
employer’s agent, that pays an individual any amount included in the federal
gross income of the individual. OTHER PAYER includes casino operators and video
lottery terminal sales agents.
      PASS-THROUGH ENTITY. A partnership not treated as an association taxable
as a C corporation for federal income tax purposes, a limited liability company
not treated as an association taxable as a C corporation for federal income tax
purposes, an S corporation, or any other class of entity from which the income
or profits of the entity are given pass-through treatment for federal income
tax purposes. PASS-THROUGH ENTITY does not include a trust, estate, grantor of
a grantor trust or disregarded entity.
      PENSION. Any amount paid to an employee or former employee that is
reported to the recipient on an IRS Form 1099-R, or successor form. PENSION
does not include deferred compensation, or amounts attributable to nonqualified
deferred compensation plans, reported as FICA/Medicare wages on an IRS form W-
2, Wage and Tax Statement or successor form.
      PERSON. Includes individuals, firms, companies, joint stock companies,
business trusts, estates, trusts, partnerships, limited liability partnerships,
limited liability companies, associations, C corporations, S corporations,
governmental entities and any other entity.
      POSTAL SERVICE. The United States Postal Service.
      POSTMARK DATE or DATE OF POSTMARK. In addition to similar terms, include
the date recorded and marked in the manner described in R.C. § 5703.056(B)(3).
      PRE-2017 NET OPERATING LOSS CARRYFORWARD.
         (a)   Any net operating loss incurred in a taxable year beginning
before January 1, 2017, to the extent such loss was permitted, by a resolution
or ordinance of the village that was adopted by the village before January 1,
2016, to be carried forward and utilized to offset income or net profit
generated in the village in future taxable years.
         (b)   For the purpose of calculating municipal taxable income, any
PRE-2017 NET OPERATING LOSS CARRYFORWARD may be carried forward to any taxable
year, including taxable years beginning in 2017 or thereafter, for the number
of taxable years provided in the resolution or ordinance or until fully
utilized, whichever is earlier.
      PUBLICLY TRADED PARTNERSHIP. Any partnership, an interest in which is
regularly traded on an established securities market. A PUBLICLY TRADED
PARTNERSHIP may have any number of partners.
      QUALIFYING WAGES. Wages, as defined in I.R.C. § 3121(a), without regard
to any wage limitations, adjusted as follows:
         (a)   Deduct the following amounts:
            1.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes
compensation attributable to a plan or program described in I.R.C. § 125;
            2.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes payment
on account of a disability related to sickness or an accident paid by a party
unrelated to the employer, agent of an employer or other payer;
            3.   Any amount attributable to a nonqualified deferred
compensation plan or program described in I.R.C. § 3121(v)(2)(C) if the
compensation is included in wages; and
            4.   Any amount included in wages that is exempt income.
         (b)   Add the following amounts:
            1.   Any amount not included in wages solely because the employee
was employed by the employer before April 1, 1986;
            2.   Any amount not included in wages because the amount arises
from the sale, exchange or other disposition of a stock option, the exercise of
a stock option, or the sale, exchange or other disposition of stock purchased
under a stock option. This division (b)2. applies only to those amounts
constituting ordinary income;
            3.   Any amount not included in wages if the amount is an amount
described in section I.R.C. §§ 401(k), 403(b) or 457. This division (b)3.
applies only to employee contributions and employee deferrals;
            4.   Any amount that is supplemental unemployment compensation
benefits described in I.R.C. § 3402(g)(2) and not included in wages;
            5.   Any amount received that is treated as self-employment income
for federal tax purposes in accordance with I.R.C. § 1402(a)(8); and
            6.   Any amount not included in wages if all of the following
apply:
               a.   For the taxable year the amount is employee compensation
that is earned outside the United States and that either is included in the
taxpayer’s gross income for federal income tax purposes or would have been
included in the taxpayer’s gross income for such purposes if the taxpayer did
not elect to exclude the income under I.R.C. § 911;
               b.   For no preceding taxable year did the amount constitute
wages as defined in I.R.C. § 3121(a);
               c.   For no succeeding taxable year will the amount constitute
wages; and
               d.   For any taxable year the amount has not otherwise been
added to wages pursuant to either this division (b) or R.C. § 718.03, as that
section existed before the effective date of H.B. 5 of the 130th General
Assembly, March 23, 2015.
      RELATED ENTITY. Any of the following:
         (a)   An individual stockholder, or a member of the stockholder’s
family enumerated in I.R.C. § 318, if the stockholder and the members of the
stockholder’s family own directly, indirectly, beneficially or constructively,
in the aggregate, at least 50% of the value of the taxpayer’s outstanding
stock;
         (b)   A stockholder, or a stockholder’s partnership, estate, trust or
corporation, if the stockholder and the stockholder’s partnerships, estates,
trusts or corporations own directly, indirectly, beneficially or
constructively, in the aggregate, at least 50% of the value of the taxpayer’s
outstanding stock;
         (c)   A corporation, or a party related to the corporation in a manner
that would require an attribution of stock from the corporation to the party or
from the party to the corporation under division (d) below; provided, the
taxpayer owns directly, indirectly, beneficially or constructively, at least
50% of the value of the corporation’s outstanding stock; and
         (d)   The attribution rules described in I.R.C. § 318 apply for the
purpose of determining whether the ownership requirements in divisions (a) to
(c) above have been met.
      RELATED MEMBER. A person that, with respect to the taxpayer during all or
any portion of the taxable year, is either a related entity, a component member
as defined in I.R.C. § 1563(b), or a person to or from whom there is
attribution of stock ownership in accordance with I.R.C. § 1563(e) except, for
purposes of determining whether a person is a RELATED MEMBER under this
definition, 20% shall be substituted for 5% wherever 5% appears in I.R.C. §
1563(e).
      RESIDENT. An individual who is domiciled in the municipal corporation as
determined under §
39.03(E).
      S CORPORATION. A person that has made an election under I.R.C. Chapter 1,
Subchapter S, Subtitle A for its taxable year.
      SCHEDULE C. Internal Revenue Service schedule C (form 1040) filed by a
taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      SCHEDULE E. Internal Revenue Service schedule E (form 1040) filed by a
taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      SCHEDULE F. Internal Revenue Service schedule F (form 1040) filed by a
taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      SINGLE MEMBER LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY. A limited liability company that
has one direct member.
      SMALL EMPLOYER. Any employer that had total revenue of less than $500,000
during the preceding taxable year. For purposes of this definition, TOTAL
REVENUE means receipts of any type or kind, including, but not limited to,
sales receipts; payments; rents; profits; gains, dividends and other investment
income; compensation; commissions; premiums; money; property; grants;
contributions; donations; gifts; program service revenue; patient service
revenue; premiums; fees, including premium fees and service fees; tuition
payments; unrelated business revenue; reimbursements; any type of payment from
a governmental unit, including grants and other allocations; and any other
similar receipts reported for federal income tax purposes or under generally
accepted accounting principles. SMALL EMPLOYER does not include the federal
government; any state government, including any state agency or
instrumentality; any political subdivision; or any entity treated as a
government for financial accounting and reporting purposes.
      TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The individual charged with direct responsibility for
administration of an income tax levied by the village in accordance with this
subchapter.
      TAX RETURN PREPARER. Any individual described in I.R.C. § 7701(a)(36) and
26 C.F.R. § 301.7701-15.
      TAXABLE YEAR. The corresponding tax reporting period as prescribed for
the taxpayer under the Internal Revenue Code.
      TAXPAYER.
         (a)   A person subject to a tax levied on income by a municipal
corporation in accordance with this subchapter. TAXPAYER does not include a
grantor trust or, except as provided in division (b)1. below, a disregarded
entity.
         (b)   1.   A single member limited liability company that is a
disregarded entity for federal tax purposes may be a separate TAXPAYER from its
single member in all Ohio municipal corporations in which it either filed as a
separate TAXPAYER or did not file for its taxable year ending in 2003, if all
of the following conditions are met:
               a.   The limited liability company’s single member is also a
limited liability company;
               b.   The limited liability company and its single member were
formed and doing business in one or more Ohio municipal corporations for at
least five years before January 1, 2004;
               c.   Not later than December 31, 2004, the limited liability
company and its single member each made an election to be treated as a separate
TAXPAYER under division (L) of R.C. § 718.01(L) as that section existed on
December 31, 2004;
               d.   The limited liability company was not formed for the
purpose of evading or reducing Ohio municipal corporation income tax liability
of the limited liability company or its single member; and
               e.   The Ohio municipal corporation that was the primary place
of business of the sole member of the limited liability company consented to
the election.
            2.   For purposes of division (b)1.e. above, a municipal
corporation was the primary place of business of a limited liability company
if, for the limited liability company’s taxable year ending in 2003, its income
tax liability was greater in that municipal corporation than in any other
municipal corporation in the state, and that tax liability to that municipal
corporation for its taxable year ending in 2003 was at least $400,000.
      TAXPAYERS’ RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The rights provided to taxpayers
in §§
39.09,
39.12,
39.13,
39.19(B),
39.20 and
39.21, and R.C. §§ 5717.011 and 5717.03, and the responsibilities of taxpayers
to file, report, withhold, remit and pay municipal income tax and otherwise
comply with R.C. Chapter 718 and resolutions, ordinances and rules and
regulations adopted by the village for the imposition and administration of a
municipal income tax.
      VIDEO LOTTERY TERMINAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3770.21.
      VIDEO LOTTERY TERMINAL SALES AGENT. A lottery sales agent licensed under
R.C. Chapter 3770 to conduct video lottery terminals on behalf of the state
pursuant to R.C. § 3770.21.
(Ord. 2009-54, passed 11-24-2009; Ord. 2014-28, passed 9-9-2014; Ord. 2015-22,
passed 11-24-2015; Ord. 2024-01, passed 1-9-2024)
§ 39.03 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   The income tax levied by the village at a rate of 2% is levied on the
municipal taxable income of every person residing in and/or earning and/or
receiving income in the village.
   (A)   Individuals.
      (1)   For residents of the village, the income tax levied herein shall be
on all income, salaries, qualifying wages, commissions and other compensation
from whatever source earned or received by the resident, including the
resident’s distributive share of the net profit of pass-through entities owned
directly or indirectly by the resident and any net profit of the resident. This
is further detailed in the definition of income in §
39.02.
      (2)   For nonresidents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages,
commissions and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by
the nonresident for work done, services performed or rendered, or activities
conducted in the municipal corporation, including any net profit of the
nonresident, but excluding the nonresident’s distributive share of the net
profit or loss of only pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by
the nonresident.
      (3)   For residents and nonresidents, income can be reduced to municipal
taxable income, as defined in §
39.02. Exemptions which may apply are specified in §
39.02.
   (B)   Refundable credit for nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division (B), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         NONQUALIFIED DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN. A compensation plan described
in I.R.C. § 3121(v)(2)(C).
         QUALIFYING LOSS. The amount of compensation attributable to a
taxpayer’s nonqualified deferred compensation plan, less the receipt of money
and property attributable to distributions from the nonqualified deferred
compensation plan. Full loss is sustained if no distribution of money and
property is made by the nonqualified deferred compensation plan. The taxpayer
sustains a QUALIFYING LOSS only in the taxable year in which the taxpayer
receives the final distribution of money and property pursuant to that
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
         QUALIFYING TAX RATE.
            1.   The applicable tax rate for the taxable year for the which the
taxpayer paid income tax to the village with respect to any portion of the
total amount of compensation the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
            2.   If different tax rates applied for different taxable years,
then the QUALIFYING TAX RATE is a weighted average of those different tax
rates. The weighted average shall be based upon the tax paid to the village
each year with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
         REFUNDABLE CREDIT. The amount of the village income tax that was paid
on the nondistributed portion, if any, of a nonqualified deferred compensation
plan.
      (2)   If, in addition to the village, a taxpayer has paid tax to other
municipal corporations with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation
plan, the amount of the credit that a taxpayer may claim from each municipal
corporation shall be calculated on the basis of each municipal corporation’s
proportionate share of the total municipal corporation income tax paid by the
taxpayer to all municipal corporations with respect to the nonqualified
deferred compensation plan.
      (3)   In no case shall the amount of the credit allowed under this
section exceed the cumulative income tax that a taxpayer has paid to the
village for all taxable years with respect to the nonqualified deferred
compensation plan.
      (4)   The credit allowed under this division (B) is allowed only to the
extent the taxpayer’s qualifying loss is attributable to:
         (a)   The insolvency or bankruptcy of the employer who had established
the nonqualified deferred compensation plan; or
         (b)   The employee’s failure or inability to satisfy all of the
employer’s terms and conditions necessary to receive the nonqualified deferred
compensation.
   (C)   Domicile.
      (1)   (a)   An individual is presumed to be domiciled in the village for
all or part of a taxable year if the individual was domiciled in the village on
the last day of the immediately preceding taxable year or if the Tax
Administrator reasonably concludes that the individual is domiciled in the
village for all or part of the taxable year.
         (b)   An individual may rebut the presumption of domicile described in
division (C)(1)(a) above if the individual establishes by a preponderance of
the evidence that the individual was not domiciled in the village for all or
part of the taxable year.
      (2)   For the purpose of determining whether an individual is domiciled
in the village for all or part of a taxable year, factors that may be
considered include, but are not limited to, the following:
         (a)   The individual’s domicile in other taxable years;
         (b)   The location at which the individual is registered to vote;
         (c)   The address on the individual’s driver’s license;
         (d)   The location of real estate for which the individual claimed a
property tax exemption or reduction allowed on the basis of the individual’s
residence or domicile;
         (e)   The location and value of abodes owned or leased by the
individual;
         (f)   Declarations, written or oral, made by the individual regarding
the individual’s residency;
         (g)   The primary location at which the individual is employed;
         (h)   The location of educational institutions attended by the
individual’s dependents as defined in I.R.C. § 152, to the extent that tuition
paid to such educational institution is based on the residency of the
individual or the individual’s spouse in the municipal corporation where the
educational institution is located; and
         (i)   The number of contact periods the individual has with the
village. For the purposes of this division (C)(2)(i), an individual has one
“contact period” with the village if the individual is away overnight from the
individual’s abode located outside of the village and while away overnight from
that abode spends at least some portion, however minimal, of each of two
consecutive days in the village.
      (3)   All additional applicable factors are provided in the rules and
regulations.
   (D)   Businesses.
      (1)   This division (D)(1) applies to any taxpayer engaged in a business
or profession in the village, unless the taxpayer is an individual who resides
in the village or the taxpayer is an electric company, combined company or
telephone company that is subject to and required to file reports under R.C.
Chapter 5745.
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (D)(1)(b) and (D)(2)
below, net profit from a business or profession conducted both within and
without the boundaries of the village shall be considered as having a taxable
situs in the village for purposes of municipal income taxation in the same
proportion as the average ratio of the following:
            1.   a.   The average original cost of the real property and
tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or
profession in the village during the taxable period to the average original
cost of all of the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the
taxpayer in the business or profession during the same period, wherever
situated.
               b.   As used in division (D)(1)(a)1.a. above, tangible personal
or real property shall include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and
the value of such property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental
thereon by eight;
            2.   Wages, salaries and other compensation paid during the taxable
period to individuals employed in the business or profession for services
performed in the village to wages, salaries and other compensation paid during
the same period to individuals employed in the business or profession, wherever
the individual’s services are performed, excluding compensation from which
taxes are not required to be withheld under §
39.04(C);
            3.   Total gross receipts of the business or profession from sales
and rentals made and services performed during the taxable period in the
village to total gross receipts of the business or profession during the same
period from sales, rentals and services, wherever made or performed.
         (b)   1.   If the apportionment factors described in division (D)(1)
(a) above do not fairly represent the extent of a taxpayer’s business activity
in the village, the taxpayer may request, or the Tax Administrator of the
village may require, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or any portion
of the income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method involving
one or more of the following:
               a.   Separate accounting;
               b.   The exclusion of one or more of the factors;
               c.   The inclusion of one or more additional factors that would
provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the taxpayer to the
municipal corporation; and/or
               d.   A modification of one or more of the factors.
            2.   A taxpayer request to use an alternative apportionment method
shall be in writing and shall accompany a tax return, timely filed appeal of an
assessment, or timely filed amended tax return. The taxpayer may use the
requested alternative method unless the Tax Administrator denies the request in
an assessment issued within the period prescribed by §
39.12(A).
            3.   The Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer to use an
alternative apportionment method as described in division (D)(1)(b)1. above,
but only by issuing an assessment to the taxpayer within the period prescribed
by §
39.12(A).
            4.   Nothing in this division (D)(1)(b) nullifies or otherwise
affects any alternative apportionment arrangement approved by the Tax
Administrator or otherwise agreed upon by both the Tax Administrator and
taxpayer before January 1, 2016.
         (c)   As used in division (D)(1)(a)2. above, wages, salaries and other
compensation includes only wages, salaries or other compensation paid to an
employee for services performed at any of the following locations:
            1.   A location that is owned, controlled or used by, rented to or
under the possession of one of the following:
               a.   The employer;
               b.   A vendor, customer, client or patient of the employer, or a
related member of such a vendor, customer, client or patient; and/or
               c.   A vendor, customer, client or patient of a person described
in (D)(1)(c)1.b. above, or a related member of such a vendor, customer, client
or patient.
            2.   Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing, investigation,
inquiry, review, court-martial or similar administrative, judicial or
legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted, provided that the
compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of, the employer
or that the employee’s presence at the location directly or indirectly benefits
the employer;
            3.   Any other location, if the Tax Administrator determines that
the employer directed the employee to perform the services at the other
location in lieu of a location described in division (D)(1)(c)1. or (D)(1)(c)2.
above solely in order to avoid or reduce the employer’s municipal income tax
liability. If the Tax Administrator makes such a determination, the employer
may dispute the determination by establishing, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that the Tax Administrator’s determination was unreasonable.
         (d)   For the purposes of division (D)(1)(a)3. above, and except as
provided in division (G) below, receipts from sales and rentals made and
services performed shall be sitused to a municipal corporation as follows.
            1.   Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property
shall be sitused to the municipal corporation in which the sale originated. For
the purposes of this division (D)(1)(c), a sale of property originates in the
village if, regardless of where title passes, the property meets any of the
following criteria.
               a.   The property is shipped to or delivered within the village
from a stock of goods located within the village.
               b.   The property is delivered within the village from a
location outside the village; provided, the taxpayer is regularly engaged
through its own employees in the solicitation or promotion of sales within the
village and the sales result from such solicitation or promotion.
               c.   The property is shipped from a place within the village to
purchasers outside the village, provided that the taxpayer is not, through its
own employees, regularly engaged in the solicitation or promotion of sales at
the place where delivery is made.
            2.   Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be sitused to
the village to the extent that such services are performed in the village.
            3.   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from the sale
of real property located in the village shall be sitused to the village.
            4.   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from rents
and royalties from real property located in the village shall be sitused to the
village.
            5.   Gross receipts from rents and royalties from tangible personal
property shall be sitused to the village based upon the extent to which the
tangible personal property is used in the village.
         (e)   The net profit received by an individual taxpayer from the
rental of real estate owned directly by the individual, or by a disregarded
entity owned by the individual, shall be subject to the village’s tax only if
the property generating the net profit is located in the village or if the
individual taxpayer that receives the net profit is a resident of the village.
The village shall allow such taxpayers to elect to use separate accounting for
the purpose of calculating net profit sitused under this division (D) to the
municipal corporation in which the property is located.
         (f)   1.   Commissions received by a real estate agent or broker
relating to the sale, purchase or lease of real estate shall be sitused to the
municipal corporation in which the real estate is located. Net profit reported
by the real estate agent or broker shall be allocated to the village, if
applicable, based upon the ratio of the commissions the agent or broker
received from the sale, purchase or lease of real estate located in the village
to the commissions received from the sale, purchase or lease of real estate
everywhere in the taxable year.
            2.   An individual who is a resident of the village shall report
the individual’s net profit from all real estate activity on the individual’s
annual tax return for the village. The individual may claim a credit for taxes
the individual paid on such net profit to another municipal corporation to the
extent that such a credit is allowed under the village’s income tax ordinance.
         (g)   When calculating the ratios described in division (D)(1)(a)
above for the purposes of that division (D)(1)(a) or division (D)(1)(b) above,
the owner of a disregarded entity shall include in the owner’s ratios the
property, payroll and gross receipts of such disregarded entity.
      (2)   (a)   For the purpose of this division (D)(2), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
            QUALIFYING REMOTE EMPLOYEE OR OWNER. An individual who is an
employee of a taxpayer or who is a partner or member holding an ownership
interest in a taxpayer that is treated as a partnership for federal income tax
purposes; provided, that the individual meets both of the following criteria.
               a.   The taxpayer has assigned the individual to a qualifying
reporting location.
               b.   The individual is permitted or required to perform services
for the taxpayer at a qualifying remote work location.
            QUALIFYING REMOTE WORK LOCATION. A permanent or temporary location
at which an employee or owner chooses or is required to perform services for
the taxpayer, other than a reporting location of the taxpayer or any other
location owned or controlled by a customer or client of the taxpayer,
QUALIFYING REMOTE WORK LOCATION may include the residence of an employee or
owner and may be located outside of a municipal corporation that imposes an
income tax in accordance with this subchapter. An employee or owner may have
more than one QUALIFYING REMOTE WORK LOCATION during a taxable year.
            REPORTING LOCATION. Either of the following:
               a.   A permanent or temporary place of doing business, such as
an office, warehouse, storefront, construction site or similar location, that
is owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the taxpayer; or
               b.   Any location in this state owned or controlled by a
customer or client of the taxpayer; provided, that the taxpayer is required to
withhold taxes under §
39.04, on qualifying wages paid to an employee for the performance of personal
services at that location.
            QUALIFYING REPORTING LOCATION. One of the following:
               a.   The reporting location in this state at which an employee
or owner performs services for the taxpayer on a regular or periodic basis
during the taxable year;
               b.   If no reporting location exists in this state for an
employee or owner under division a. above, the reporting location in this state
at which the employee’s or owner’s supervisor regularly or periodically reports
during the taxable year; or
               c.   If no reporting location exists in this state for an
employee or owner under divisions a. or b. above, the location that the
taxpayer otherwise assigns as the employee’s or owner’s qualifying reporting
location, provided the assignment is made in good faith and is recorded and
maintained in the taxpayer’s business records. A taxpayer may change the
QUALIFYING REPORTING LOCATION designated for an employee or owner under this
division (D)(2)(a) at any time.
         (b)   1.   For tax years ending on or after December 31, 2023, a
taxpayer may elect to apply the provisions of this division (D)(2)(b) to the
apportionment of its net profit from a business or profession. For taxpayers
that make this election, the provisions of division (D)(1) above apply to such
apportionment except as otherwise provided in this division (D)(2)(b).
            2.   A taxpayer shall make the election allowed under this division
(D)(2)(b) in writing on or with the taxpayer’s net profit return or, if
applicable, a timely filed amended net profit return or a timely filed appeal
of an assessment. The election applies to the taxable year for which that
return or appeal is filed and for all subsequent taxable years, until the
taxpayer revokes the election.
            3.   The taxpayer shall make the initial election with the tax
administrator of each municipal corporation with which, after applying the
apportionment provisions authorized in this division (D)(2)(b), the taxpayer is
required to file a net profit tax return for that taxable year, A taxpayer
shall not be required to notify the tax administrator of a municipal
corporation in which a qualifying remote employee’s or owner’s qualifying
remote work location is located, unless the taxpayer is otherwise required to
file a net profit return with that municipal corporation due to business
operations that are unrelated to the employee’s or owner’s activity at the
qualifying remote work location.
            4.   After the taxpayer makes the initial election, the election
applies to every municipal corporation in which the taxpayer conducts business.
The taxpayer shall not be required to file a net profit return with a municipal
corporation solely because a qualifying remote employee’s or owner’s qualifying
remote work location is located in such municipal corporation.
            5.   Nothing in this division (D)(2)(b) prohibits a taxpayer from
making a new election under this division (D)(2)(b) after properly revoking a
prior election.
         (c)   For the purpose of calculating the ratios described in division
(D)(1)(a) above, all of the following apply to a taxpayer that has made the
election described in division (D)(2)(b) above:
            1.   For the purpose of division (D)(1)(a)1. above, the average
original cost of any tangible personal property used by a qualifying remote
employee or owner at that individual’s qualifying remote work location shall be
sitused to that individual’s qualifying reporting location.
            2.   For the purpose of division (D)(1)(a)2. above, any wages,
salaries and other compensation paid during the taxable period to a qualifying,
remote employee or owner for services performed at that individual’s qualifying
remote work location shall be sitused to that individual’s qualifying reporting
location.
            3.   For the purpose of division (D)(1)(a)3. above, and
notwithstanding division (D)(1)(d) above, any gross receipts of the business or
profession from services performed during the taxable period by a qualifying
remote employee or owner for services performed at that individual’s qualifying
remote work location shall be sitused to that individual’s qualifying reporting
location.
         (d)   Nothing in this division (D)(2) prevents a taxpayer from
requesting, or a Tax Administrator from requiring, that the taxpayer use, with
respect to all or a portion of the income of the taxpayer, an alternative
apportionment method as described in division (D)(1)(b) above. However, a tax
administrator shall not require an alternative apportionment method in such a
manner that it would require a tax payer to file a net profit return with a
municipal corporation solely because a qualifying remote employee’s or owner’s
qualifying remote work location is located in that municipal corporation.
         (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (D)(2), nothing in
this division (D)(2) is intended to affect the withholding of taxes on
qualifying wages pursuant to §
39.04.
(Ord. 2009-54, passed 11-24-2009; Ord. 2015-22, passed 11-24-2015; Ord. 2016-
11, passed 7-26-2016; Res. 2016-09, passed 7-26-2016; Ord. 2024-01, passed 1-9-
2024)
§ 39.04 COLLECTION AT SOURCE.
   (A)   Withholding provisions.
      (1)   Each employer, agent of an employer or other payer located or doing
business in the village shall withhold an income tax from the qualifying wages
earned and/or received by each employee in the village. Except for qualifying
wages for which withholding is not required under §
39.03 or division (A)(2)(d) or (A)(2)(f) below, the tax shall be withheld at
the rate, specified in §
39.03, of 2%. An employer, agent of an employer or other payer shall deduct and
withhold the tax from qualifying wages on the date that the employer, agent or
other payer directly, indirectly or constructively pays the qualifying wages
to, or credits the qualifying wages to the benefit of, the employee.
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (A)(2)(b) below, an employer,
agent of an employer or other payer shall remit to the Tax Administrator of the
village the greater of the income taxes deducted and withheld or the income
taxes required to be deducted and withheld by the employer, agent or other
payer according to the following schedule.
            1.   Taxes required to be deducted and withheld shall be remitted
monthly to the Tax Administrator if the total taxes deducted and withheld or
required to be deducted and withheld by the employer, agent or other payer on
behalf of the village in the preceding calendar year exceeded $2,399, or if the
total amount of taxes deducted and withheld or required to be deducted and
withheld on behalf of the village in any month of the preceding calendar
quarter exceeded $200. Payment under this division (A)(2)(a)1. shall be made so
that the payment is received by the Tax Administrator not later than 15 days
after the last day of each month for which the tax was withheld.
            2.   Any employer, agent of an employer or other payer not required
to make payments under division (A)(2)(a)1. above of taxes required to be
deducted and withheld shall make quarterly payments to the Tax Administrator
not later than the fifteenth day of the month following the end of each
calendar quarter.
         (b)   If the employer, agent of an employer or other payer is required
to make payments electronically for the purpose of paying federal taxes
withheld on payments to employees under I.R.C. § 6302, 26 C.F.R. § 31.6302-1 or
any other federal statute or regulation, the payment shall be made by
electronic funds transfer to the Tax Administrator of all taxes deducted and
withheld on behalf of the village. The payment of tax by electronic funds
transfer under this division (A)(2) does not affect an employer’s, agent’s or
other payer’s obligation to file any return as required under this section.
         (c)   An employer, agent of an employer or other payer shall make and
file a return showing the amount of tax withheld by the employer, agent or
other payer from the qualifying wages of each employee and remitted to the Tax
Administrator. A return filed by an employer, agent or other payer under this
division (A)(2) shall be accepted by Tax Administrator and the village as the
return required of an non-resident employee whose sole income subject to the
tax under this subchapter is the qualifying wages reported by the employee’s
employer, agent of an employer or other payer.
         (d)   An employer, agent of an employer or other payer is not required
to withhold village income tax with respect to an individual’s disqualifying
disposition of an incentive stock option if, at the time of the disqualifying
disposition, the individual is not an employee of either the corporation with
respect to whose stock the option has been issued or of such corporation’s
successor entity.
         (e)   1.   An employee is not relieved from liability for a tax by the
failure of the employer, agent of an employer or other payer to withhold the
tax as required under this subchapter or by the employer’s, agent’s or other
payer’s exemption from the requirement to withhold the tax.
            2.   The failure of an employer, agent of an employer or other
payer to remit to the village the tax withheld relieves the employee from
liability for that tax unless the employee colluded with the employer, agent or
other payer in connection with the failure to remit the tax withheld.
         (f)   Compensation deferred before June 26, 2003, is not subject to
village income tax or income tax withholding requirement to the extent the
deferred compensation does not constitute qualifying wages at the time the
deferred compensation is paid or distributed.
         (g)   Each employer, agent of an employer or other payer required to
withhold taxes is liable for the payment of that amount required to be
withheld, whether or not such taxes have been withheld, and such amount shall
be deemed to be held in trust for the village until such time as the withheld
amount is remitted to the Tax Administrator.
         (h)   On or before the last day of February of each year, an employer
shall file a withholding reconciliation return with the Tax Administrator
listing:
            1.   The names, addresses and Social Security numbers of all
employees from whose qualifying wages tax was withheld or should have been
withheld for the village during the preceding calendar year;
            2.   The amount of tax withheld, if any, from each such employee,
the total amount of qualifying wages paid to such employee during the preceding
calendar year;
            3.   The name of every other municipal corporation for which tax
was withheld or should have been withheld from such employee during the
preceding calendar year;
            4.   Any other information required for federal income tax
reporting purposes on Internal Revenue Service Form W-2 or its equivalent form
with respect to such employee; and
            5.   Other information as may be required by the Tax Administrator.
         (i)   The officer or the employee of the employer, agent of an
employer or other payer with control or direct supervision of or charged with
the responsibility for withholding the tax or filing the reports and making
payments as required by this section, shall be personally liable for a failure
to file a report or pay the tax due as required by this section. The
dissolution of an employer, agent of an employer or other payer does not
discharge the officer’s or employee’s liability for a failure of the employer,
agent of an employer or other payer to file returns or pay any tax due.
         (j)   An employer is required to deduct and withhold village income
tax on tips and gratuities received by the employer’s employees and
constituting qualifying wages, but only to the extent that the tips and
gratuities are under the employer’s control. For the purposes of this division
(A)(2), a tip or gratuity is under the employer’s control if the tip or
gratuity is paid by the customer to the employer for subsequent remittance to
the employee, or if the customer pays the tip or gratuity by credit card, debit
card, or other electronic means.
         (k)   The Tax Administrator shall consider any tax withheld by an
employer at the request of an employee, when such tax is not otherwise required
to be withheld by this subchapter, to be tax required to be withheld and
remitted for the purposes of this section.
   (B)   Occasional entrant - withholding.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division (B), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         EMPLOYER. Includes a person that is a related member to or of an
employer.
         FIXED LOCATION. A permanent place of doing business in this state,
such as an office, warehouse, storefront or similar location owned or
controlled by an employer.
         PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK. The fixed location to which an employee is
required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis. If
the employee is not required to report for employment duties on a regular and
ordinary basis to a fixed location, PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK means the worksite
location in this state to which the employee is required to report for
employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis. If the employee is not
required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis to a
fixed location or worksite location, PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK means the location
in this state at which the employee spends the greatest number of days in a
calendar year performing services for or on behalf of the employee’s employer.
If there is not a single municipal corporation in which the employee spent the
“greatest number of days in a calendar year” performing services for or on
behalf of the employer, but instead there are two or more municipal
corporations in which the employee spent an identical number of days that is
greater than the number of days the employee spent in any other municipal
corporation, the employer shall allocate any of the employee’s qualifying wages
subject to division (B)(2)(a)1. below among those two or more municipal
corporations. The allocation shall be made using any fair and reasonable
method, including, but not limited to, an equal allocation among such municipal
corporations or an allocation based upon the time spent or sales made by the
employee in each such municipal corporation. A municipal corporation to which
qualifying wages are allocated under this division (B) shall be the employee’s
PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK with respect to those qualifying wages for the purposes
of this section. For the purposes of this definition, the location at which an
employee spends a particular day shall be determined in accordance with
division (B)(2)(b) below, except that “location” shall be substituted for
“municipal corporation” wherever “municipal corporation” appears in that
division (B)(2)(b).
         PROFESSIONAL ATHLETE. An athlete who performs services in a
professional athletic event for wages or other remuneration.
         PROFESSIONAL ENTERTAINER. A person who performs services in the
professional performing arts for wages or other remuneration on a per-event
basis.
         PUBLIC FIGURE. A person of prominence who performs services at
discrete events, such as speeches, public appearances, or similar events, for
wages or other remuneration on a per-event basis.
         WORKSITE LOCATION. A construction site or other temporary worksite in
this state at which the employer provides services for more than 20 days during
the calendar year. WORKSITE LOCATION does not include the home of an employee.
      (2)   (a)   Subject to divisions (B)(3), (B)(5), (B)(6) and (B)(7) below,
an employer is not required to withhold village income tax on qualifying wages
paid to an employee for the performance of personal services in the village if
the employee performed such services in the village on 20 or fewer days in a
calendar year, unless one of the following conditions applies.
            1.   The employee’s principal place of work is located in the
village.
            2.   The employee performed services at one or more presumed
worksite locations in the village. For the purposes of this division (B)(2)(a),
PRESUMED WORKSITE LOCATION means a construction site or other temporary
worksite in the village at which the employer provides or provided services
that can reasonably be, or would have been, expected by the employer to last
more than 20 days in a calendar year. Services can reasonably be expected by
the employer to last more than 20 days if either of the following applies at
the time the services commence:
               a.   The nature of the services are such that it will require
more than 20 days of the services to complete the services; and
               b.   The agreement between the employer and its customer to
perform services at a location requires the employer to perform the services at
the location for more than 20 days.
            3.   The employee is a resident of the village and has requested
that the employer withhold tax from the employee’s qualifying wages as provided
in this section.
            4.   The employee is a professional athlete, professional
entertainer or public figure, and the qualifying wages are paid for the
performance of services in the employee’s capacity as a professional athlete,
professional entertainer or public figure.
         (b)   For the purposes of division (B)(2)(a) above, an employee shall
be considered to have spent a day performing services in the village only if
the employee spent more time performing services for, or on behalf of, the
employer in the village than in any other municipal corporation on that day.
For the purposes of determining the amount of time an employee spent in a
particular location, the time spent performing one or more of the following
activities shall be considered to have been spent at the employee’s principal
place of work:
            1.   Traveling to the location at which the employee will first
perform services for the employer for the day;
            2.   Traveling from a location at which the employee was performing
services for the employer to any other location;
            3.   Traveling from any location to another location in order to
pick up or load, for the purpose of transportation or delivery, property that
has been purchased, sold, assembled, fabricated, repaired, refurbished,
processed, remanufactured or improved by the employee’s employer;
            4.   Transporting or delivering property described in division (B)
(2)(b)3. above; provided that, upon delivery of the property, the employee does
not temporarily or permanently affix the property to real estate owned, used or
controlled by a person other than the employee’s employer; and/or
            5.   Traveling from the location at which the employee makes the
employee’s final delivery or pick-up for the day to either the employee’s
principal place of work or a location at which the employee will not perform
services for the employer.
      (3)   If the principal place of work of an employee is located in another
Ohio municipal corporation that imposes an income tax, the exception from
withholding requirements described in division (B)(2)(a) above shall apply only
if, with respect to the employee’s qualifying wages described in division (B)
(2)(a) above, the employer withholds and remits tax on such qualifying wages to
that municipal corporation.
      (4)   (a)   Except as provided in division (B)(4)(b) below, if, during a
calendar year, the number of days an employee spends performing personal
services in the village exceeds the 20-day threshold, the employer shall
withhold and remit tax to the village for any subsequent days in that calendar
year on which the employer pays qualifying wages to the employee for personal
services performed in the village.
         (b)   An employer required to begin withholding tax for the village
under division (B)(4)(a) above may elect to withhold tax for the village for
the first 20 days on which the employer paid qualifying wages to the employee
for personal services performed in the village.
      (5)   If an employer’s fixed location is the village and the employer
qualifies as a small employer, as defined in §
39.02, the employer shall withhold municipal income tax on all of the
employee’s qualifying wages for a taxable year and remit that tax only to the
village, regardless of the number of days which the employee worked outside the
corporate boundaries of the village. To determine whether an employer qualifies
as a small employer for a taxable year, a the employer will be required to
provide the Tax Administrator with the employer’s federal income tax return for
the preceding taxable year.
      (6)   Divisions (B)(2)(a) and (B)(4) above shall not apply to the extent
that a Tax Administrator and an employer enter into an agreement regarding the
manner in which the employer shall comply with the requirements of this
section.
(Ord. 2009-54, passed 11-24-2009; Ord. 2015-22, passed 11-24-2015; Ord. 2016-
11, passed 7-26-2016; Res. 2016-09, passed 7-26-2016)
§ 39.05 ANNUAL RETURN; FILING.
   (A)   An annual village income tax return shall be completed and filed by
every taxpayer for each taxable year for which the taxpayer is subject to the
tax, whether or not a tax is due thereon.
      (1)   The Tax Administrator may accept, on behalf of all nonresident
individual taxpayers, a return filed by an employer, agent of an employer or
other payer under §
39.04 when the nonresident individual taxpayer’s sole income subject to the tax
is the qualifying wages reported by the employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer, and no additional tax is due to the village.
      (2)   Retirees having no municipal taxable income for the village income
tax purposes may file with the Tax Administrator a written exemption from these
filing requirements on a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator. The written
exemption shall indicate the date of retirement and the entity from which
retired. The exemption shall be in effect until such time as the retiree
receives municipal taxable income taxable to the village, at which time the
retiree shall be required to comply with all applicable provisions of this
subchapter.
   (B)   If an individual is deceased, any return or notice required of that
individual shall be completed and filed by that decedent’s executor,
administrator or other person charged with the property of that decedent.
   (C)   If an individual is unable to complete and file a return or notice
required by the village, the return or notice required of that individual shall
be completed and filed by the individual’s duly authorized agent, guardian,
conservator, fiduciary or other person charged with the care of the person or
property of that individual.
   (D)   Returns or notices required of an estate or a trust shall be completed
and filed by the fiduciary of the estate or trust.
   (E)   The village shall permit spouses to file a joint return.
   (F)   (1)   Each return required to be filed under this division (F) shall
contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer’s duly authorized agent
and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer. The return shall
include the taxpayer’s Social Security number or taxpayer identification
number. Each return shall be verified by a declaration under penalty of
perjury.
      (2)   The Tax Administrator shall require a taxpayer who is an individual
to include, with each annual return; and amended return, copies of the
following documents: all of the taxpayer’s Internal Revenue Service Form W-2,
“Wage and Tax Statements”, including all information reported on the taxpayer’s
federal W-2, as well as taxable wages reported or withheld for any municipal
corporation; the taxpayer’s Internal Revenue Service Form 1040; and, with
respect to an amended tax return, any other documentation necessary to support
the adjustments made in the amended return. An individual taxpayer who files
the annual return required by this section electronically is not required to
provide paper copies of any of the foregoing to the Tax Administrator unless
the Tax Administrator requests such copies after the return has been filed.
      (3)   The Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer that is not an
individual to include, with each annual net profit return, amended net profit
return, or request for refund required under this section, copies of only the
following documents: the taxpayer’s Internal Revenue Service Form 1041, Form
1065, Form 1120, Form 1120-REIT, Form 1120F or Form 1120S, and, with respect to
an amended tax return or refund request, any other documentation necessary to
support the refund request or the adjustments made in the amended return. A
taxpayer that is not an individual and that files an annual net profit return
electronically through the Ohio Business Gateway or in some other manner shall
either mail the documents required under this division to the Tax Administrator
at the time of filing or, if electronic submission is available, submit the
documents electronically through the Ohio Business Gateway.
      (4)   After a taxpayer files a tax return, the Tax Administrator may
request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information, statements, or
documents required by the village to determine and verify the taxpayer’s
municipal income tax liability. The requirements imposed under this division
(F) apply regardless of whether the taxpayer files on a generic form or on a
form prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
   (G)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, each return
required to be filed under this section shall be completed and filed as
required by the Tax Administrator on or before the date prescribed for the
filing of state individual income tax returns under R.C.§ 5747.08. The taxpayer
shall complete and file the return or notice on forms prescribed by the Tax
Administrator or on generic forms, together with remittance made payable to the
village. No remittance is required if the net amount due is $10 or less.
      (2)   Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax return shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of the village’s income tax
return. The extended due date of the village’s income tax return shall be the
fifteenth day of the tenth month after the last day of the taxable year to
which the return relates. For tax years ending on or after January 1, 2023, the
extended due date of the village’s income tax return for a taxpayer that is not
an individual shall be the fifteenth day of the eleventh month after the last
day of the taxable year to which the return relates. An extension of time to
file under this division (G) is not an extension of the time to pay any tax due
unless the Tax Administrator grants an extension of that date.
         (a)   A copy of the federal extension request shall be included with
the filing of the village’s income tax return.
         (b)   A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax return may request that
the Tax Administrator grant the taxpayer a six-month extension of the date for
filing the taxpayer’s village income tax return. If the request is received by
the Tax Administrator on or before the date the village income tax return is
due, the Tax Administrator shall grant the taxpayer’s requested extension.
      (3)   If the Tax Commissioner extends for all taxpayers the date for
filing state income tax returns under R.C. § 5747.08(G), a taxpayer shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of the village’s income tax
return. The extended due date of the village’s income tax return shall be the
same as the extended due date of the state income tax return.
      (4)   If the Tax Administrator considers it necessary in order to ensure
the payment of the tax imposed by the village, the Tax Administrator may
require taxpayers to file returns and make payments otherwise than as provided
in this division (G)(4), including taxpayers not otherwise required to file
annual returns.
      (5)   If a taxpayer receives an extension for the filing of a municipal
income tax return under division (G)(2) through (G)(4) above, the Tax
Administrator shall not make any inquiry or send any notice to the taxpayer
with regard to the return on or before the date the taxpayer files the return
or on or before the extended due date to file the return, whichever occurs
first. If a Tax Administrator violates this division (G)(5), the municipal
corporation shall reimburse the taxpayer for any reasonable costs incurred to
respond to such inquiry or notice, up to $150. This division (G)(5) does not
apply to an extension received under division (G)(2) above if the Tax
Administrator has actual knowledge that the taxpayer failed to file for a
federal extension as required to receive the extension under division (G)(2)
above or failed to file for an extension under division (G)(2)(b) above.
      (6)   To the extent that any provision in this division (G) conflicts
with any provision in divisions (N), (O), (P) or (Q) below, the provisions in
divisions (N), (O), (P) or (Q) below prevail.
   (H)   (1)   For taxable years beginning after 2015, the village shall not
require a taxpayer to remit tax with respect to net profits if the net amount
due is $10 or less.
      (2)   Any taxpayer not required to remit tax to the village for a taxable
year pursuant to division (H)(1) above shall file with the village an annual
net profit return under division (F)(3) above.
   (I)   If a payment is required to be made by electronic funds transfer, the
payment is considered to be made when the payment is credited to an account
designated by the Tax Administrator for the receipt of tax payments, except
that, when a payment made by electronic funds transfer is delayed due to
circumstances not under the control of the taxpayer, the payment is considered
to be made when the taxpayer submitted the payment. This division (I) shall not
apply to payments required to be made under §
39.04(A)(2)(a)1. or provisions for semi-monthly withholding.
   (J)   Taxes withheld for the village by an employer, the agent of an
employer or other payer as described in §
39.04 shall be allowed to the taxpayer as credits against payment of the tax
imposed on the taxpayer by the village, unless the amounts withheld were not
remitted to the village and the recipient colluded with the employer, agent or
other payer in connection with the failure to remit the amounts withheld.
   (K)   Each return required by the village to be filed in accordance with
this division (K) shall include a box that the taxpayer may check to authorize
another person, including a tax return preparer who prepared the return, to
communicate with the Tax Administrator about matters pertaining to the return.
   (L)   The Tax Administrator shall accept for filing a generic form of any
income tax return, report or document required by the village; provided, that
the generic form, once completed and filed, contains all of the information
required by ordinance, resolution or rules and regulations adopted by the
village or the Tax Administrator; and provided, that the taxpayer or tax return
preparer filing the generic form otherwise complies with the provisions of this
subchapter and of the village’s ordinance, resolution or rules and regulations
governing the filing of returns, reports or documents.
   (M)   (1)   Any taxpayer subject to municipal income taxation with respect
to the taxpayer’s net profit from a business or profession may file the
village’s income tax return, estimated municipal income tax return, or
extension for filing a municipal income tax return, and may make payment of
amounts shown to be due on such returns, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
      (2)   Any employer, agent of an employer or other payer may report the
amount of municipal income tax withheld from qualifying wages, and may make
remittance of such amounts, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
      (3)   Nothing in this section affects the due dates for filing employer
withholding tax returns.
   (N)   Each member of the National Guard of any state and each member of a
reserve component of the Armed Forces of the United States called to active
duty pursuant to an executive order issued by the President of the United
States or an act of the Congress of the United States, and each civilian
serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in
support of the Armed Forces, may apply to the Tax Administrator of the village
for both an extension of time for filing of the return and an extension of time
for payment of taxes required by the village during the period of the member’s
or civilian’s duty service, and for 180 days thereafter. The application shall
be filed on or before the one-hundred-eightieth day after the member’s or
civilian’s duty terminates. An applicant shall provide such evidence as the Tax
Administrator considers necessary to demonstrate eligibility for the extension.
   (O)   (1)   If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant is
qualified for an extension under this section, the Tax Administrator shall
enter into a contract with the applicant for the payment of the tax in
installments that begin on the one-hundred-eighty-first day after the
applicant’s active duty or service terminates. The Tax Administrator may
prescribe such contract terms as the Tax Administrator considers appropriate.
However, taxes pursuant to a contract entered into under this division (O)(1)
are not delinquent, and the Tax Administrator shall not require any payments of
penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for the extension period.
      (2)   If the Tax Administrator determines that an applicant is qualified
for an extension under this section, the applicant shall neither be required to
file any return, report or other tax document nor be required to pay any tax
otherwise due to the municipal corporation before the one-hundred-eighty-first
day after the applicant’s active duty or service terminates.
      (3)   Taxes paid pursuant to a contract entered into under division (O)
(1) above are not delinquent. The Tax Administrator shall not require any
payments of penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for the
extension period.
   (P)   (1)   Nothing in this division (P) denies to any person described in
this division (P) the application of divisions (N) and (O) above.
      (2)   (a)   A qualifying taxpayer who is eligible for an extension under
the Internal Revenue Code shall receive both an extension of time in which to
file any return, report or other tax document and an extension of time in which
to make any payment of taxes required by a municipal corporation in accordance
with this subchapter. The length of any extension granted under this division
(P)(2)(a) shall be equal to the length of the corresponding extension that the
taxpayer receives under the Internal Revenue Code. As used in this division (P)
(2), QUALIFYING TAXPAYER means a member of the national guard or a member of a
reserve component of the Armed Forces of the United States called to active
duty pursuant to either an executive order issued by the President of the
United States or an act of the Congress of the United States, or a civilian
serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in
support of the Armed Forces.
         (b)   Taxes whose payment is extended in accordance with division (P)
(2)(a) above are not delinquent during the extension period. Such taxes become
delinquent on the first day after the expiration of the extension period if the
taxes are not paid prior to that date. The Tax Administrator shall not require
any payment of penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for the
extension period. The Tax Administrator shall not include any period of
extension granted under division (C)(2)(a) above in calculating the penalty or
interest due on any unpaid tax.
   (Q)   For each taxable year to which division (N), (O) or (P) above applies
to a taxpayer, the provisions of divisions (O)(2) and (O)(3) above, as
applicable, apply to the spouse of that taxpayer if the filing status of the
spouse and the taxpayer is married filing jointly for that year.
   (R)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      AFFILIATED GROUP OF CORPORATIONS. An affiliated group as defined in
I.R.C. § 1504, except that, if such a group includes at least one incumbent
local exchange carrier that is primarily engaged in the business of providing
local exchange telephone service in this state, the affiliated group shall not
include any incumbent local exchange carrier that would otherwise be included
in the group.
      CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL INCOME TAX RETURN. A consolidated return filed for
federal income tax purposes pursuant to I.R.C. § 1501.
      CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME. The consolidated taxable income of
an affiliated group of corporations, as computed for the purposes of filing a
consolidated federal income tax return, before consideration of net operating
losses or special deductions. CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME does not
include income or loss of an incumbent local exchange carrier that is excluded
from the affiliated group under this division (R).
      INCUMBENT LOCAL EXCHANGE CARRIER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4927.01.
      LOCAL EXCHANGE TELEPHONE SERVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5727.01.
   (S)   (1)   For taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016, a
taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations may elect to
file a consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable year if at least
one member of the affiliated group of corporations is subject to the village’s
income tax in that taxable year, and if the affiliated group of corporations
filed a consolidated federal income tax return with respect to that taxable
year. The election is binding for a five-year period beginning with the first
taxable year of the initial election unless a change in the reporting method is
required under federal law. The election continues to be binding for each
subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing
consolidated municipal income tax returns under division (S)(2) below or a
taxpayer receives permission from the Tax Administrator. The Tax Administrator
shall approve such a request for good cause shown.
      (2)   An election to discontinue filing consolidated municipal income tax
returns under this section must be made in the first year following the last
year of a five-year consolidated municipal income tax return election period in
effect under division (S)(1) above. The election to discontinue filing a
consolidated municipal income tax return is binding for a five-year period
beginning with the first taxable year of the election.
      (3)   An election made under division (S)(1) or (S)(2) above is binding
on all members of the affiliated group of corporations subject to a municipal
income tax.
   (T)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations
that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a taxable year shall
file a consolidated village income tax return for that taxable year if the Tax
Administrator determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that intercompany
transactions have not been conducted at arm’s length and that there has been a
distortive shifting of income or expenses with regard to allocation of net
profits to the village. A taxpayer that is required to file a consolidated
village income tax return for a taxable year shall file a consolidated village
income tax return for all subsequent taxable years, unless the taxpayer
requests and receives written permission from the Tax Administrator to file a
separate return or a taxpayer has experienced a change in circumstances.
   (U)   A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated village income tax return in
the same manner as is required under the United States Department of Treasury
regulations that prescribe procedures for the preparation of the consolidated
federal income tax return required to be filed by the common parent of the
affiliated group of which the taxpayer is a member.
   (V)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (V)(2) through (V)(4)
below, corporations that file a consolidated municipal income tax return shall
compute adjusted federal taxable income, as defined in §
39.02, by substituting “consolidated federal taxable income” for “federal
taxable income” wherever “federal taxable income” appears in that division and
by substituting “an affiliated group of corporation’s” for “a C corporation’s”
wherever “a C corporation’s” appears in that division.
      (2)   No corporation filing a consolidated village income tax return
shall make any adjustment otherwise required under §
39.02 to the extent that the item of income or deduction otherwise subject to
the adjustment has been eliminated or consolidated in the computation of
consolidated federal taxable income.
      (3)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having at least
80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly or
indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group’s consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, the
corporation filing a consolidated village income tax return shall do one of the
following with respect to that pass-through entity’s net profit or loss for
that taxable year:
         (a)   Exclude the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in divisions (R) through (Y) of
this section, exclude the property, payroll and gross receipts of the pass-
through entity in the computation of the affiliated group’s net profit sitused
to the village. If the entity’s net profit or loss is so excluded, the entity
shall be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the
entity’s net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group; and
         (b)   Include the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss in the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in divisions (R) through (Y) of
this section, include the property, payroll and gross receipts of the pass-
through entity in the computation of the affiliated group’s net profit sitused
to the village. If the entity’s net profit or loss is so included, the entity
shall not be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the
entity’s net profits that are included in the consolidated federal taxable
income of the affiliated group.
      (4)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having less than
80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly or
indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group’s consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, all
of the following shall apply:
         (a)   The corporation filing the consolidated municipal income tax
return shall exclude the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purposes of making the computations required in divisions (R) through (Y) of
this section, exclude the property, payroll and gross receipts of the pass-
through entity in the computation of the affiliated group’s net profit sitused
to the village; and/or
         (b)   The pass-through entity shall be subject to the village income
taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with this subchapter on the basis
of the entity’s net profits that would otherwise be included in the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
   (W)   Corporations filing a consolidated village income tax return shall
make the computations required under divisions (R) through (Y) of this section
by substituting “consolidated federal taxable income attributable to” for “net
profit from” wherever “net profit from” appears in that section and by
substituting “affiliated group of corporations” for “taxpayer” wherever
“taxpayer” appears in that section.
   (X)   Each corporation filing a consolidated village income tax return is
jointly and severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties, fines, charges
or other amounts imposed by the village in accordance with this subchapter on
the corporation, an affiliated group of which the corporation is a member for
any portion of the taxable year, or any one or more members of such an
affiliated group.
   (Y)   Corporations and their affiliates that made an election or entered
into an agreement with the village before January 1, 2016, to file a
consolidated or combined tax return with the village may continue to file
consolidated or combined tax returns in accordance with such election or
agreement for taxable years beginning on and after January 1, 2016.
(Ord. 2009-54, passed 11-24-2009; Ord. 2015-22, passed 11-24-2015; Ord. 2024-
01, passed 1-9-2024)
§ 39.06 CREDIT FOR TAX PAID TO OTHER MUNICIPALITIES.
   (A)   Every individual taxpayer domiciled in the village who is required to
and does pay, or has acknowledged liability for, a municipal tax to another
municipality on or measured by the same income, qualifying wages, commissions,
net profits or other compensation taxable under this subchapter, may claim a
nonrefundable credit against the tax imposed by this subchapter upon
satisfactory evidence that tax has been paid to another municipality. Subject
to division (C) below, the credit shall not exceed 50% of the amount obtained
by multiplying the income, qualifying wages, commissions, net profits or other
compensation subject to tax in the other municipality by the lower of the tax
rate in such other municipality or the tax rate imposed under this subchapter.
   (B)   The village shall grant a credit against its tax on income to a
resident of the village who works in a joint economic development zone created
under R.C. § 715.691 or a joint economic development district created under
R.C. §§ 715.70 through 715.72 to the same extent that it grants a credit
against its tax on income to its residents who are employed in another
municipal corporation.
   (C)   If the amount of tax withheld or paid to the other municipality is
less than the amount of tax required to be withheld or paid to the other
municipality, then, for purposes of division (A) above, the income, qualifying
wages, commissions, net profits or other compensation subject to tax in the
other municipality shall be limited to the amount computed by dividing the tax
withheld or paid to the other municipality by the tax rate for that
municipality.
   (D)   The village shall grant a credit against its tax on income to a
resident of the village, who works in a county that imposes an income tax, to
the same extent that it grants a credit against its tax on income to its
residents who are employed in a municipal corporation.
(Ord. 2009-54, passed 11-24-2009; Ord. 2015-4, passed 4-14-2015; Ord. 2015-22,
passed 11-24-2015)
§ 39.07 ESTIMATED TAXES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ESTIMATED TAXES. The amount that the taxpayer reasonably estimates to be
the taxpayer’s tax liability for the village’s income tax for the current
taxable year.
      TAX LIABILITY. The total taxes due to the village for the taxable year,
after allowing any credit to which the taxpayer is entitled, and after applying
any estimated tax payment, withholding payment or credit from another taxable
year.
   (B)   (1)   Every taxpayer shall make a declaration of estimated taxes for
the current taxable year, on the form prescribed by the Tax Administrator, if
the amount payable as estimated taxes is at least $200. For the purposes of
this section:
         (a)   Taxes withheld for the village from qualifying wages shall be
considered as paid to the village in equal amounts on each payment date unless
the taxpayer establishes the dates on which all amounts were actually withheld,
in which case, they shall be considered as paid on the dates on which the
amounts were actually withheld; and
         (b)   An overpayment of tax applied as a credit to a subsequent
taxable year is deemed to be paid on the date of the postmark stamped on the
cover in which the payment is mailed or, if the payment is made by electronic
funds transfer, the date the payment is submitted. As used in this division (B)
(1)(b), DATE OF THE POSTMARK means, in the event there is more than one date on
the cover, the earliest date imprinted on the cover by the postal service.
      (2)   Taxpayers filing joint returns shall file joint declarations of
estimated taxes. A taxpayer may amend a declaration under rules prescribed by
the Tax Administrator. A taxpayer having a taxable year of less than 12 months
shall make a declaration under rules prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
      (3)   The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or before the
date prescribed for the filing of municipal income tax returns under §
39.05(G) or on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the
taxpayer becomes subject to tax for the first time.
      (4)   Taxpayers reporting on a fiscal year basis shall file a declaration
on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the beginning of each
fiscal year or period.
      (5)   The original declaration or any subsequent amendment may be
increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment day as
provided in this section.
   (C)   (1)   The required portion of the tax liability for the taxable year
that shall be paid through estimated taxes made payable to the village,
including the application of tax refunds to estimated taxes and withholding on
or before the applicable payment date, shall be as follows:
         (a)   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 22.5% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         (b)   On or before the fifteenth day of the sixth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 45% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         (c)   On or before the fifteenth day of the ninth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 67.5% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
and
         (d)   On or before the fifteenth day of the twelfth month of the
taxable year, 90% of the tax liability for the taxable year.
      (2)   When an amended declaration has been filed, the unpaid balance
shown due on the amended declaration shall be paid in equal installments on or
before the remaining payment dates.
      (3)   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month of the year
following that for which the declaration or amended declaration was filed, an
annual return shall be filed and any balance which may be due shall be paid
with the return in accordance with §
39.05.
   (D)   (1)   In the case of any underpayment of any portion of a tax
liability, penalty and interest may be imposed pursuant to §
39.18 upon the amount of underpayment for the period of underpayment, unless
the underpayment is due to reasonable cause as described in division (E) below.
The amount of the underpayment shall be determined as follows:
         (a)   For the first payment of estimated taxes each year, 22.5% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         (b)   For the second payment of estimated taxes each year, 45% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         (c)   For the third payment of estimated taxes each year, 67.5% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment; and
         (d)   For the fourth payment of estimated taxes each year, 90% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment.
      (2)   The period of the underpayment shall run from the day the estimated
payment was required to be made to the date on which the payment is made. For
purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes on or before any payment
date shall be considered a payment of any previous underpayment only to the
extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the amount of the payment
presently required to be paid to avoid any penalty.
   (E)   An underpayment of any portion of tax liability determined under
division (D) above shall be due to reasonable cause and the penalty imposed by
this section shall not be added to the taxes for the taxable year if any of the
following apply:
      (1)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 90% of
the tax liability for the current taxable year, determined by annualizing the
income received during the year up to the end of the month immediately
preceding the month in which the payment is due;
      (2)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 100%
of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer for the preceding
taxable year, provided that the immediately preceding taxable year reflected a
period of 12 months and the taxpayer filed a return with the village under §
39.05 for that year; and/or
      (3)   The taxpayer is an individual who resides in the village but was
not domiciled there on the first day of January of the calendar year that
includes the first day of the taxable year.
(Ord. 2009-54, passed 11-24-2009; Ord. 2015-22, passed 11-24-2015)
§ 39.08 ROUNDING OF AMOUNTS.
   A person may round to the nearest whole dollar all amounts the person is
required to enter on any return, report, voucher or other document required
under this subchapter. Any fractional part of a dollar that equals or exceeds
$0.50 shall be rounded to the next whole dollar, and any fractional part of a
dollar that is less than $0.50 shall be dropped. If a person chooses to round
amounts entered on a document, the person shall round all amounts entered on
the document.
(Ord. 2009-54, passed 11-24-2009; Ord. 2015-22, passed 11-24-2015)
§ 39.09 REQUESTS FOR REFUNDS.
   (A)   As used in this section, WITHHOLDING TAX has the same meaning as in §
39.18.
   (B)   Upon receipt of a request for a refund, the Tax Administrator, in
accordance with this section, shall refund to employers, agents of employers,
other payers or taxpayers, with respect to any income or withholding tax levied
by the municipal corporation:
      (1)   Overpayments of $10 or more; or
      (2)   Amounts paid erroneously if the refund requested is $10 or more.
   (C)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, requests for
refund shall be filed with the Tax Administrator, on the form prescribed by the
Tax Administrator within three years after the tax was due or paid, whichever
is later. The Tax Administrator may require the requestor to file with the
request any documentation that substantiates the requestor’s claim for a
refund.
      (2)   On filing of the refund request, the Tax Administrator shall
determine the amount of refund due and certify such amount for payment. Except
as provided in division (C)(3) below, the Tax Administrator shall issue an
assessment to any taxpayer whose request for refund is fully or partially
denied. The assessment shall state the amount of the refund that was denied,
the reasons for the denial and instructions for appealing the assessment.
      (3)   If a Tax Administrator denies, in whole or in part, a refund
request included within the taxpayer’s originally filed annual income tax
return, the Tax Administrator shall notify the taxpayer, in writing, of the
amount of the refund that was denied, the reasons for the denial and
instructions for requesting an assessment that may be appealed under §
39.21.
   (D)   A request for a refund that is received after the last day for filing
specified in division (C) above shall be considered to have been filed in a
timely manner if any of the following situations exist.
      (1)   The request is delivered by the postal service, and the earliest
postal service postmark on the cover in which the request is enclosed is not
later than the last day for filing the request.
      (2)   The request is delivered by the postal service, the only postmark
on the cover in which the request is enclosed was affixed by a private postal
meter, the date of that postmark is not later than the last day for filing the
request, and the request is received within seven days of such last day.
      (3)   The request is delivered by the postal service, no postmark date
was affixed to the cover in which the request is enclosed or the date of the
postmark so affixed is not legible, and the request is received within seven
days of the last day for making the request.
   (E)   Interest shall be allowed and paid on any overpayment by a taxpayer of
any municipal income tax obligation from the date of the overpayment until the
date of the refund of the overpayment, except that if any overpayment is
refunded within 90 days after the final filing date of the annual return or 90
days after the completed return is filed, whichever is later, no interest shall
be allowed on the refund. For the purpose of computing the payment of interest
on amounts overpaid, no amount of tax for any taxable year shall be considered
to have been paid before the date on which the return on which the tax is
reported is due, without regard to any extension of time for filing that
return. Interest shall be paid at the interest rate described in §
39.18(A)(4).
(Ord. 2009-54, passed 11-24-2009; Ord. 2015-22, passed 11-24-2015)
§ 39.10 SECOND MUNICIPALITY IMPOSING TAX AFTER TIME PERIOD ALLOWED FOR REFUND.
   (A)   Income tax that has been deposited with the village, but should have
been deposited with another municipality, is allowable by the village as a
refund but is subject to the three-year limitation on refunds.
   (B)   Income tax that was deposited with another municipality but should
have been deposited with the village is subject to recovery by the village. If
the village’s tax on that income is imposed after the time period allowed for a
refund of the tax or withholding paid to the other municipality, the village
shall allow a nonrefundable credit against the tax or withholding village
claims is due with respect to such income or wages, equal to the tax or
withholding paid to the first municipality with respect to such income or
wages.
   (C)   If the village’s tax rate is less than the tax rate in the other
municipality, then the nonrefundable credit shall be calculated using the
village’s tax rate. However, if the village’s tax rate is greater than the tax
rate in the other municipality, the tax due in excess of the nonrefundable
credit is to be paid to the village, along with any penalty and interest that
accrued during the period of nonpayment.
   (D)   Nothing in this section permits any credit carryforward.
(Ord. 2009-54, passed 11-24-2009; Ord. 2015-22, passed 11-24-2015)
§ 39.11 AMENDED RETURNS.
   (A)   (1)   If a taxpayer’s tax liability shown on the annual tax return for
the village changes as a result of an adjustment to the taxpayer’s federal or
state income tax return, the taxpayer shall file an amended return with the
village. The amended return shall be filed on a form required by the Tax
Administrator.
      (2)   If a taxpayer intends to file an amended consolidated municipal
income tax return, or to amend its type of return from a separate return to a
consolidated return, based on the taxpayer’s consolidated federal income tax
return, the taxpayer shall notify the Tax Administrator before filing the
amended return.
   (B)   (1)   In the case of an underpayment, the amended return shall be
accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due, together with any
penalty and interest thereon. If the combined tax shown to be due is $10 or
less, no payment need be made. The amended return shall reopen those facts,
figures, computations or attachments from a previously filed return that are
not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the
taxpayer’s federal or state income tax return only:
         (a)   To determine the amount of tax that would be due if all facts,
figures, computations and attachments were reopened; or
         (b)   If the applicable statute of limitations for civil actions or
prosecutions under §
39.12 has not expired for a previously filed return.
      (2)   The additional tax to be paid shall not exceed the amount of tax
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations and attachments were
reopened; i.e., the payment shall be the lesser of the two amounts.
   (C)   (1)   In the case of an overpayment, a request for refund may be filed
under this division (C) within the period prescribed by division (D) below for
filing the amended return, even if it is filed beyond the period prescribed in
that division (E) if it otherwise conforms to the requirements of that
division. If the amount of the refund is less than $10, no refund need be paid
by the village. A request filed under this division (C) shall claim refund of
overpayments resulting from alterations only to those facts, figures,
computations or attachments required in the taxpayer’s annual return that are
affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer’s
federal or state income tax return, unless it is also filed within the time
prescribed in §
39.09.
      (2)   The amount to be refunded shall not exceed the amount of refund
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations and attachments were
reopened. All facts, figures, computations and attachments may be reopened to
determine the refund amount due by inclusion of all facts, figures,
computations and attachments.
   (D)   Within 60 days after the final determination of any federal or state
tax liability affecting the taxpayer’s village’s tax liability, that taxpayer
shall make and file an amended village return showing income subject to the
village income tax based upon such final determination of federal or state tax
liability. The taxpayer shall pay any additional village income tax shown due
thereon or make a claim for refund of any overpayment, unless the tax or
overpayment is less than $10.
(Ord. 2009-54, passed 11-24-2009; Ord. 2015-22, passed 11-24-2015)
§ 39.12 LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   (a)   Civil actions to recover municipal income taxes and
penalties and interest on municipal income taxes shall be brought within the
later of:
            1.   Three years after the tax was due or the return was filed,
whichever is later; or
            2.   One year after the conclusion of the qualifying deferral
period, if any.
         (b)   The time limit described in division (A)(1)(a) above may be
extended at any time if both the Tax Administrator and the employer, agent of
the employer, other payer or taxpayer consent in writing to the extension. Any
extension shall also extend for the same period of time the time limit
described in division (C) below.
      (2)   As used in this section, QUALIFYING DEFERRAL PERIOD means a period
of time beginning and ending as follows:
         (a)   Beginning on the date a person who is aggrieved by an assessment
files with the Board of Tax Review the request described in §
39.21. That date shall not be affected by any subsequent decision, finding or
holding by any administrative body or court that the Board of Tax Review did
not have jurisdiction to affirm, reverse or modify the assessment or any part
of that assessment; and
         (b)   Ending the later of the sixtieth day after the date on which the
final determination of the Board of Tax Review becomes final or, if any party
appeals from the determination of the Board of Tax Review, the sixtieth day
after the date on which the final determination of the Board of Tax Review is
either ultimately affirmed in whole or in part or ultimately reversed and no
further appeal of either that affirmation, in whole or in part, or that
reversal is available or taken.
   (B)   Prosecutions for an offense made punishable under a resolution or
ordinance imposing an income tax shall be commenced within three years after
the commission of the offense, provided that in the case of fraud, failure to
file a return or the omission of 25% or more of income required to be reported,
prosecutions may be commenced within six years after the commission of the
offense.
   (C)   A claim for a refund of municipal income taxes shall be brought within
the time limitation provided in §
39.09.
   (D)   (1)   Notwithstanding the fact that an appeal is pending, the
petitioner may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the subject of
the appeal. The acceptance of a payment by the village does not prejudice any
claim for refund upon final determination of the appeal.
      (2)   If upon final determination of the appeal an error in the
assessment is corrected by the Tax Administrator, upon an appeal so filed or
pursuant to a final determination of the Board of Tax Review, of the State
Board of Tax Appeals, or any court to which the decision of the State Board of
Tax Appeals has been appealed, so that the resultant amount due is less than
the amount paid, a refund will be paid in the amount of the overpayment as
provided by §
39.09, with interest on that amount as provided by §
39.09(E).
   (E)   No civil action to recover village income tax or related penalties or
interest shall be brought during either of the following time periods:
      (1)   The period during which a taxpayer has a right to appeal the
imposition of that tax or interest or those penalties; or
      (2)   The period during which an appeal related to the imposition of that
tax or interest or those penalties is pending.
(Ord. 2009-54, passed 11-24-2009; Ord. 2015-22, passed 11-24-2015) Penalty, see
§
39.99
§ 39.13 AUDITS.
   (A)   At or before the commencement of an audit, the Tax Administrator shall
provide to the taxpayer a written description of the roles of the Tax
Administrator and of the taxpayer during the audit and a statement of the
taxpayer’s rights, including any right to obtain a refund of an overpayment of
a tax. At or before the commencement of an audit, the Tax Administrator shall
inform the taxpayer when the audit is considered to have commenced.
   (B)   Except in cases involving suspected criminal activity, the Tax
Administrator shall conduct an audit of a taxpayer during regular business
hours and after providing reasonable notice to the taxpayer. A taxpayer who is
unable to comply with a proposed time for an audit on the grounds that the
proposed time would cause inconvenience or hardship must offer reasonable
alternative dates for the audit.
   (C)   (1)   At all stages of an audit by the Tax Administrator, a taxpayer
is entitled to be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant,
bookkeeper or other tax practitioner. The Tax Administrator shall prescribe a
form by which a taxpayer may designate such a person to assist or represent the
taxpayer in the conduct of any proceedings resulting from actions by the Tax
Administrator. If a taxpayer has not submitted such a form, the Tax
Administrator may accept other evidence, as the Tax Administrator considers
appropriate, that a person is the authorized representative of a taxpayer.
      (2)   A taxpayer may refuse to answer any questions asked by the person
conducting an audit until the taxpayer has an opportunity to consult with the
taxpayer’s attorney, accountant, bookkeeper or other tax practitioner.
      (3)   This division (C) does not authorize the practice of law by a
person who is not an attorney.
   (D)   A taxpayer may record, electronically or otherwise, the audit
examination.
   (E)   The failure of the Tax Administrator to comply with a provision of
this section shall neither excuse a taxpayer from payment of any taxes owed by
the taxpayer nor cure any procedural defect in a taxpayer’s case.
   (F)   If the Tax Administrator fails to substantially comply with the
provisions of this section, the Tax Administrator, upon application by the
taxpayer, shall excuse the taxpayer from penalties and interest.
(Ord. 2009-54, passed 11-24-2009; Ord. 2015-22, passed 11-24-2015)
§ 39.14 SERVICE OF ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      LAST KNOWN ADDRESS. The address the Tax Administrator has at the time a
document is originally sent by certified mail, or any address the Tax
Administrator can ascertain using reasonable means such as the use of a change
of address service offered by the postal service or an authorized delivery
service under R.C. § 5703.056.
      UNDELIVERABLE ADDRESS. An address to which the postal service or an
authorized delivery service under R.C. § 5703.056 is not able to deliver an
assessment of the Tax Administrator, except when the reason for non-delivery is
because the addressee fails to acknowledge or accept the assessment.
   (B)   Subject to division (C) below, a copy of each assessment shall be
served upon the person affected thereby either by personal service, by
certified mail or by a delivery service authorized under R.C. § 5703.056. With
the permission of the person affected by an assessment, the Tax Administrator
may deliver the assessment through alternative means as provided in this
section, including, but not limited to, delivery by secure electronic mail.
   (C)   (1)   (a)   If certified mail is returned because of an undeliverable
address, a Tax Administrator shall utilize reasonable means to ascertain a new
last known address, including the use of a change of address service offered by
the postal service or an authorized delivery service under R.C. § 5703.056. If
the Tax Administrator is unable to ascertain a new last known address, the
assessment shall be sent by ordinary mail and considered served. If the
ordinary mail is subsequently returned because of an undeliverable address, the
assessment remains appealable within 60 days after the assessment’s postmark.
         (b)   Once the Tax Administrator or other village official, or the
designee of either, serves an assessment on the person to whom the assessment
is directed, the person may protest the ruling of that assessment by filing an
appeal with the local Board of Tax Review within 60 days after the receipt of
service. The delivery of an assessment of the Tax Administrator under division
(C)(1)(a) above is prima facie evidence that delivery is complete and that the
assessment is served.
      (2)   (a)   If mailing of an assessment by a Tax Administrator by
certified mail is returned for some cause other than an undeliverable address,
the Tax Administrator shall resend the assessment by ordinary mail. The
assessment shall show the date the Tax Administrator sends the assessment and
include the following statement: “This assessment is deemed to be served on the
addressee under applicable law ten days from the date this assessment was
mailed by the Tax Administrator as shown on the assessment, and all periods
within which an appeal may be filed apply from and after that date”.
         (b)   Unless the mailing is returned because of an undeliverable
address, the mailing of that information is prima facie evidence that delivery
of the assessment was completed ten days after the Tax Administrator sent the
assessment by ordinary mail and that the assessment was served.
         (c)   If the ordinary mail is subsequently returned because of an
undeliverable address, the Tax Administrator shall proceed under division (C)
(1)(a) of this section. A person may challenge the presumption of delivery and
service under this division (C) in accordance with division (D) below.
   (D)   (1)   A person disputing the presumption of delivery and service under
division (C) above bears the burden of proving by a preponderance of the
evidence that the address to which the assessment was sent by certified mail
was not an address with which the person was associated at the time the Tax
Administrator originally mailed the assessment. For the purposes of this
section, a person is associated with an address at the time the Tax
Administrator originally mailed the assessment if, at that time, the person was
residing, receiving legal documents, or conducting business at the address; or
if, before that time, the person had conducted business at the address and,
when the assessment was mailed, the person’s agent or the person’s affiliate
was conducting business at the address. For the purposes of this section, a
person’s AFFILIATE is any other person that, at the time the assessment was
mailed, owned or controlled at least 20%, as determined by voting rights, of
the addressee’s business.
      (2)   If a person elects to appeal an assessment on the basis described
in division (D)(1) above, and if that assessment is subject to collection and
is not otherwise appealable, the person must do so within 60 days after the
initial contact by the Tax Administrator or other village official, or the
designee of either, with the person. Nothing in this division (D)(2) prevents
the Tax Administrator or other official from entering into a compromise with
the person if the person does not actually file such an appeal with the local
Board of Tax Review.
   (E)   Nothing in this section prohibits the Tax Administrator or the Tax
Administrator’s designee from delivering an assessment by a Tax Administrator
by personal service.
   (F)   Collection actions taken upon any assessment being appealed under
division (C)(1)(b) above, including those on which a claim has been delivered
for collection, shall be stayed upon the pendency of an appeal under this
section.
   (G)   Additional regulations as detailed in the rules and regulations shall
apply.
(Ord. 2009-54, passed 11-24-2009; Ord. 2015-22, passed 11-24-2015)
§ 39.15 ADMINISTRATION OF CLAIMS.
   (A)   As used in this section, CLAIM means a claim for an amount payable to
the village that arises pursuant to the village’s income tax imposed in
accordance with this subchapter.
   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter prohibits a Tax Administrator from doing
either of the following if such action is in the best interests of the
municipal corporation:
      (1)   Compromise a claim; or
      (2)   Extend for a reasonable period the time for payment of a claim by
agreeing to accept monthly or other periodic payments.
   (C)   The Tax Administrator’s rejection of a compromise or payment-over-time
agreement proposed by a person with respect to a claim shall not be appealable.
   (D)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim
shall be binding upon and shall be to the benefit of only the parties to the
compromise or agreement, and shall not eliminate or otherwise affect the
liability of any other person.
   (E)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim
shall be void if the taxpayer defaults under the compromise or agreement or if
the compromise or agreement was obtained by fraud or by misrepresentation of a
material fact. Any amount that was due before the compromise or agreement and
that is unpaid shall remain due, and any penalties or interest that would have
accrued in the absence of the compromise or agreement shall continue to accrue
and be due.
(Ord. 2009-54, passed 11-24-2009; Ord. 2015-22, passed 11-24-2015)
§ 39.16 TAX INFORMATION CONFIDENTIAL.
   (A)   Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations,
hearings or verifications required or authorized by this subchapter is
confidential, and no person shall access or disclose such information except in
accordance with a proper judicial order or in connection with the performance
of that person’s official duties or the official business of the village as
authorized by this subchapter. The Tax Administrator, or a designee thereof,
may furnish copies of returns filed or otherwise received under this subchapter
and other related tax information to the Internal Revenue Service, the Tax
Commissioner and tax administrators of other municipal corporations.
   (B)   This section does not prohibit the village from publishing or
disclosing statistics in a form that does not disclose information with respect
to particular taxpayers.
(Ord. 2009-54, passed 11-24-2009; Ord. 2015-22, passed 11-24-2015)
§ 39.17 FRAUD.
   No person shall knowingly make, present, aid or assist in the preparation or
presentation of a false or fraudulent report, return, schedule, statement,
claim or document authorized or required by a village ordinance or state law to
be filed with a the Tax Administrator, or knowingly procure, counsel or advise
the preparation or presentation of such report, return, schedule, statement,
claim or document, or knowingly change, alter or amend, or knowingly procure,
counsel or advise such change, alteration or amendment of the records upon
which such report, return, schedule, statement, claim or document is based with
intent to defraud the village or the Tax Administrator.
(Ord. 2009-54, passed 11-24-2009; Ord. 2015-22, passed 11-24-2015) Penalty, see
§
39.99
§ 39.18 INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      APPLICABLE LAW. This subchapter, the resolutions, ordinances, codes,
directives, instructions, and rules adopted by the village; provided, they
impose or directly or indirectly address the levy, payment, remittance or
filing requirements of the village.
      FEDERAL SHORT-TERM RATE. The rate of the average market yield on
outstanding marketable obligations of the United States with remaining periods
to maturity of three years or less, as determined under I.R.C. § 1274, for July
of the current year.
      INCOME TAX, ESTIMATED INCOME TAX and WITHHOLDING TAX. Any income tax,
estimated income tax, and withholding tax imposed by the village pursuant to
applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016.
      INTEREST RATE. The federal short-term rate, rounded to the nearest whole
number percent, plus 5%. The rate shall apply for the calendar year next
following the July of the year in which the federal short-term rate is
determined in accordance with division (A)(2) below.
      RETURN. Includes any tax return, report, reconciliation, schedule and
other document required to be filed with a the Tax Administrator or the village
by a taxpayer, employer, any agent of the employer or any other payer pursuant
to applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016.
      UNPAID ESTIMATED INCOME TAX. Estimated income tax due but not paid by the
date the tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      UNPAID INCOME TAX. Income tax due but not paid by the date the income tax
is required to be paid under applicable law.
      UNPAID WITHHOLDING TAX. Withholding tax due but not paid by the date the
withholding tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      WITHHOLDING TAX. Includes amounts an employer, any agent of an employer
or any other payer did not withhold, in whole or in part, from an employee’s
qualifying wages, but that, under applicable law, the employer, agent or other
payer is required to withhold from an employee’s qualifying wages.
   (B)   (1)   This section applies to the following:
         (a)   Any return required to be filed under applicable law for taxable
years beginning on or after January 1, 2016; and
         (b)   Income tax, estimated income tax and withholding tax required to
be paid or remitted to the village on or after January 1, 2016.
      (2)   This section does not apply to returns required to be filed or
payments required to be made before January 1, 2016, regardless of the filing
or payment date. Returns required to be filed or payments required to be made
before January 1, 2016, but filed or paid after that date shall be subject to
the ordinances or rules and regulations, as adopted before January 1, 2016, of
the village to which the return is to be filed or the payment is to be made.
   (C)   Should any taxpayer, employer, agent of the employer or other payer
for any reason fails, in whole or in part, to make timely and full payment or
remittance of income tax, estimated income tax or withholding tax or to file
timely with the village any return required to be filed, the following
penalties and interest shall apply.
      (1)   Interest shall be imposed at the rate described in division (A)
above, per annum, on all unpaid income tax, unpaid estimated income tax and
unpaid withholding tax.
      (2)   (a)   With respect to unpaid income tax and unpaid estimated income
tax, the village may impose a penalty equal to 15% of the amount not timely
paid.
         (b)   With respect to any unpaid withholding tax, the village may
impose a penalty equal to 50% of the amount not timely paid.
      (3)   (a)   For tax years ending on or before December 31, 2022, with
respect to returns other than estimated income tax returns, the village may
impose a penalty of $25 for each failure to timely file each return, regardless
of the liability shown thereon for each month, or any fraction thereof, during
which the return remains unfiled regardless of the liability shown thereon. The
penalty shall not exceed $150 for each failure.
         (b)   For tax years ending on or after January 1, 2023, with respect
to returns other than estimated income tax returns, the village may impose a
penalty not exceeding $25 for each failure to timely file each return,
regardless of the liability shown thereon, except that the village shall abate
or refund the penalty assessed on a taxpayer’s first failure to timely file a
return after the taxpayer files that return.
   (D)   Nothing in this section requires the village to refund or credit any
penalty, amount of interest, charges or additional fees that the village has
properly imposed or collected before January 1, 2016.
   (E)   Nothing in this section limits the authority of the village to abate
or partially abate penalties or interest imposed under this section when the
Tax Administrator determines, in the Tax Administrator’s sole discretion, that
such abatement is appropriate.
   (F)   By October 31 of each year, the village shall publish the rate
described in division (A) above applicable to the next succeeding calendar
year.
   (G)   The village may impose on the taxpayer, employer, any agent of the
employer or any other payer, the village’s post-judgment collection costs and
fees, including attorney’s fees.
(Ord. 2009-54, passed 11-24-2009; Ord. 2015-22, passed 11-24-2015; Ord. 2024-
01, passed 1-9-2024)
§ 39.19 AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; VERIFICATION OF INFORMATION.
   (A)   Authority. Nothing in this subchapter shall limit the authority of the
Tax Administrator to perform any of the following duties or functions, unless
the performance of such duties or functions is expressly limited by a provision
of the state statutes:
      (1)   (a)   Exercise all powers whatsoever of a query nature as provided
by law, including the right to inspect books, accounts, records, memorandums
and federal and state income tax returns, to examine persons under oath, to
issue orders or subpoenas for the production of books, accounts, papers,
records, documents and testimony, to take depositions, to apply to a court for
attachment proceedings as for contempt, to approve vouchers for the fees of
officers and witnesses, and to administer oaths.
         (b)   The powers referred to in this division (A) shall be exercised
by the Tax Administrator only in connection with the performance of the duties
respectively assigned to the Tax Administrator under the village’s income tax
ordinance.
      (2)   Appoint agents and prescribe their powers and duties;
      (3)   Confer and meet with officers of other municipal corporations and
states and officers of the United States on any matters pertaining to their
respective official duties as provided by law;
      (4)   Exercise the authority provided by law, including orders from
bankruptcy courts, relative to remitting or refunding taxes, including
penalties and interest thereon, for any reason overpaid. In addition, the Tax
Administrator may investigate any claim of overpayment and, if the Tax
Administrator finds that there has been an overpayment, make a written
statement of the Tax Administrator’s findings and approve and issue a refund
payable to the taxpayer, the taxpayer’s assigns or legal representative as
provided in this subchapter;
      (5)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to consenting to
the compromise and settlement of tax claims;
      (6)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to the use of
alternative apportionment methods by taxpayers in accordance with §
39.03;
      (7)   (a)   Make all tax findings, determinations, computations and
orders the Tax Administrator is by law authorized and required to make and,
pursuant to time limitations provided by law, on the Tax Administrator’s own
motion, review, re-determine or correct any tax findings, determinations,
computations or orders the Tax Administrator has made.
         (b)   If an appeal has been filed with the Board of Tax Review or
other appropriate tribunal, the Tax Administrator shall not review, re-
determine or correct any tax finding, determination, computation or order which
the Tax Administrator has made, unless such appeal or application is withdrawn
by the appellant or applicant, is dismissed, or is otherwise final;
      (8)   Destroy any or all returns or other tax documents in the manner
authorized by law; and/or
      (9)   Enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to simplify the withholding
obligations described in §
39.04.
   (B)   Verification of accuracy of returns and determination of liability.
      (1)   A Tax Administrator, or any authorized agent or employee thereof,
may examine the books, papers, records and federal and state income tax returns
of any employer, taxpayer or other person that is subject to, or that the Tax
Administrator believes is subject to, the provisions of this subchapter for the
purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made or, if no return was
filed, to ascertain the tax due under this subchapter. Upon written request by
the Tax Administrator or a duly authorized agent or employee thereof, every
employer, taxpayer or other person subject to this section is required to
furnish the opportunity for the Tax Administrator, authorized agent or employee
to investigate and examine such books, papers, records and federal and state
income tax returns at a reasonable time and place designated in the request.
      (2)   The records and other documents of any taxpayer, employer or other
person that is subject to, or that a Tax Administrator believes is subject to,
the provisions of this subchapter shall be open to the Tax Administrator’s
inspection during business hours and shall be preserved for a period of six
years following the end of the taxable year to which the records or documents
relate, unless the Tax Administrator, in writing, consents to their destruction
within that period, or by order requires that they be kept longer. The Tax
Administrator may require any person, by notice served on that person, to keep
such records as the Tax Administrator determines necessary to show whether or
not that person is liable, and the extent of such liability, for the income tax
levied by the village or for the withholding of such tax.
      (3)   The Tax Administrator may examine under oath any person that the
Tax Administrator reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income that
was or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to
affect such income. The Tax Administrator may, for this purpose, compel any
such person to attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books,
papers, records and federal and state income tax returns in such person’s
possession or control. The person may be assisted or represented by an
attorney, accountant, bookkeeper or other tax practitioner at any such hearing
or examination. This division (B)(3) does not authorize the practice of law by
a person who is not an attorney.
      (4)   No person issued written notice by the Tax Administrator compelling
attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books, papers,
records or federal or state income tax returns under this section shall fail to
comply.
   (C)   Identification information.
      (1)   Nothing in this subchapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from
requiring any person filing a tax document with the Tax Administrator to
provide identifying information, which may include the person’s Social Security
number, federal employer identification number or other identification number
requested by the Tax Administrator. A person required by the Tax Administrator
to provide identifying information, that has experienced any change with
respect to that information, shall notify the Tax Administrator of the change
before or upon filing the next tax document requiring the identifying
information.
      (2)   (a)   If the Tax Administrator makes a request for identifying
information and the Tax Administrator does not receive valid identifying
information within 30 days of making the request, nothing in this subchapter
prohibits the Tax Administrator from imposing a penalty upon the person to whom
the request was directed pursuant to §
39.18, in addition to any applicable penalty described in §
39.99.
         (b)   If a person required by the Tax Administrator to provide
identifying information does not notify the Tax Administrator of a change with
respect to that information as required under this division (C) within 30 days
after filing the next tax document requiring such identifying information,
nothing in this subchapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from imposing a
penalty pursuant to §
39.18.
         (c)   The penalties provided for under divisions (C)(2)(a) and (C)(2)
(b) above may be billed and imposed in the same manner as the tax or fee with
respect to which the identifying information is sought and are in addition to
any applicable criminal penalties described in §
39.99 for a violation of §
39.17 and any other penalties that may be imposed by the Tax Administrator by
law.
(Ord. 2009-54, passed 11-24-2009; Ord. 2015-22, passed 11-24-2015) Penalty, see
§
39.99
§ 39.20 REQUEST FOR OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   An OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR means an opinion issued under this
section with respect to prospective municipal income tax liability. It does not
include ordinary correspondence of the Tax Administrator.
   (B)   A taxpayer may submit a written request for an opinion of the Tax
Administrator in accordance with the rules and regulations.
   (C)   A taxpayer is not relieved of tax liability for any activity or
transaction related to a request for an opinion that contained any
misrepresentation or omission of one or more material facts.
   (D)   A Tax Administrator may refuse to offer an opinion on any request
received under this section. Such refusal is not subject to appeal.
   (E)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator binds the Tax Administrator only
with respect to the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and does not
bind the Tax Administrator of any other municipal corporation.
   (F)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator issued under this section is not
subject to appeal.
(Ord. 2009-54, passed 11-24-2009; Ord. 2015-22, passed 11-24-2015)
§ 39.21 BOARD OF TAX REVIEW.
   (A)   (1)   The Board of Tax Review shall consist of three members. Two
members shall be appointed by the Legislative Authority of the village, but
such appointees may not be employees, elected officials or contractors with the
village at any time during their term or in the five years immediately
preceding the date of appointment. One member shall be appointed by the Mayor
of the village. This member may be an employee of the village, but may not be
the Director of Finance or equivalent officer, or the Tax Administrator or
other similar official or an employee directly involved in municipal tax
matters, or any direct subordinate thereof.
      (2)   The term for members of the Village Board of Tax Review shall be
two years. There is no limit on the number of terms that a member may serve if
the member is reappointed by the Legislative Authority. The Board member
appointed by the Mayor of the village shall serve at the discretion of the
administrative official.
      (3)   Members of the Board of Tax Review appointed by the Legislative
Authority may be removed by the Legislative Authority by majority vote for
malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office. To remove such a member, the
Legislative Authority must give the member a copy of the charges against the
member and afford the member an opportunity to be publicly heard in person or
by counsel in the member’s own defense upon not less than ten days’ notice. The
decision by the Legislative Authority on the charges is final and not
appealable.
      (4)   A member of the Board of Tax Review who, for any reason, ceases to
meet the qualifications for the position prescribed by this section shall
resign immediately by operation of law.
      (5)   A vacancy in an unexpired term shall be filled in the same manner
as the original appointment within 60 days of when the vacancy was created. Any
member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the
term for which the member’s predecessor was appointed shall hold office for the
remainder of such term. No vacancy on the Board of Tax Review shall impair the
power and authority of the remaining members to exercise all the powers of the
Board of Tax Review.
      (6)   If a member is temporarily unable to serve on the Board of Tax
Review due to a conflict of interest, illness, absence or similar reason, the
Legislative Authority or top administrative official that appointed the member
shall appoint another individual to temporarily serve on the Board of Tax
Review in the member’s place. The appointment of such an individual shall be
subject to the same requirements and limitations as are applicable to the
appointment of the member temporarily unable to serve.
   (B)   Whenever a Tax Administrator issues an assessment, the Tax
Administrator shall notify the taxpayer in writing at the same time of the
taxpayer’s right to appeal the assessment, the manner in which the taxpayer may
appeal the assessment, and the address to which the appeal should be directed.
   (C)   Any person who has been issued an assessment may appeal the assessment
to the Board of Tax Review by filing a request with the Board of Tax Review.
The request shall be in writing, shall specify the reason or reasons why the
assessment should be deemed incorrect or unlawful and shall be filed within 60
days after the taxpayer receives the assessment.
   (D)   The Board of Tax Review shall schedule a hearing to be held within 60
days after receiving an appeal of an assessment under division (C) above,
unless the taxpayer requests additional time to prepare or waives a hearing. If
the taxpayer does not waive the hearing, the taxpayer may appear before the
Board of Tax Review and may be represented by an attorney at law, certified
public accountant or other representative. The Board of Tax Review may allow a
hearing to be continued as jointly agreed to by the parties. In such a case,
the hearing must be completed within 120 days after the first day of the
hearing, unless the parties agree otherwise.
   (E)   The Board of Tax Review may affirm, reverse or modify the Tax
Administrator’s assessment or any part of that assessment. The Board of Tax
Review shall issue a final determination on the appeal within 90 days after the
Board of Tax Review’s final hearing on the appeal, and send a copy of its final
determination by ordinary mail to all of the parties to the appeal within 15
days after issuing the final determination. The taxpayer or the Tax
Administrator may appeal the Board of Tax Review’s final determination, as
provided in R.C. § 5717.011.
   (F)   The Board of Tax Review created pursuant to this section shall adopt
rules governing its procedures and shall keep a record of its transactions.
Such records are not public records available for inspection under R.C. §
149.43. Hearings requested by a taxpayer before a Board of Tax Review created
pursuant to this section are not meetings of a public body subject to R.C. §
121.22.
(Ord. 2009-54, passed 11-24-2009; Ord. 2015-22, passed 11-24-2015)
§ 39.22 AUTHORITY TO CREATE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   Nothing in this subchapter prohibits the Legislative Authority of the
village, or a Tax Administrator pursuant to authority granted to the Tax
Administrator by resolution or ordinance, to adopt rules to administer an
income tax imposed by the village in accordance with this subchapter. Such
rules shall not conflict with or be inconsistent with any provision of this
subchapter. Taxpayers are required to comply not only with the requirements of
this subchapter, but also to comply with the rules and regulations. All rules
adopted under this section shall be published and posted on the internet.
(Ord. 2009-54, passed 11-24-2009; Ord. 2015-22, passed 11-24-2015)
§ 39.23 RENTAL AND LEASED PROPERTY.
   (A)   All property owners of real property located in the village, who rent
or otherwise lease the same, or any part thereof, to any person for residential
dwelling purposes, including apartments, rooms and other rental accommodations,
during any calendar year, or part thereof, commencing with the effective date
of this section, shall file with the Tax Administrator on or before the January
31 first following such calendar year a written report disclosing the name,
address and also telephone number, if available, of each tenant known to have
occupied on December 31 during such calendar year such apartment, room or other
residential dwelling rental property.
   (B)   The Tax Administrator may order the appearance before him or her, or
his or her duly authorized agent, of any person whom he or she believes to have
any knowledge of the name, address and telephone number of any tenant of
residential rental real property in the village. The Tax Administrator, or his
or her duly authorized agent, is authorized to examine any person, under oath,
concerning the name, address and telephone number of any tenant of residential
real property located in the village. The Tax Administrator, or his or her duly
authorized agent, may compel the production of papers and records and the
attendance of all personal before him or her, whether as parties or witnesses,
whenever he or she believes such person has knowledge of the name, address and
telephone number of any tenant of residential real property in the village.
   (C)   Any property owner or person that violates one or more of the
following shall be subject to §
39.99:
      (1)   Fails, refuses or neglects to timely file a written report required
by division (A) above;
      (2)   Makes an incomplete or intentionally false written report required
by division (A) above;
      (3)   Fails to appear before the Tax Administrator or any duly authorized
agent and to produce and disclose any tenant information pursuant to any order
or subpoena of the Tax Administrator as authorized in this section; or
      (4)   Fails to comply with the provisions of this section or any order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator.
(Ord. 2009-54, passed 11-24-2009; Ord. 2015-22, passed 11-24-2015) Penalty, see
§
39.99
§ 39.24 COLLECTION OF TAX AFTER TERMINATION OF SUBCHAPTER.
   This subchapter shall continue effective insofar as the levy of taxes is
concerned until repealed, and insofar as the collection of taxes levied
hereunder and actions or proceedings for collecting any tax so levied or
enforcing any provisions of this subchapter are concerned, it shall continue
effective until all of said taxes levied hereunder in the aforesaid periods are
fully paid and any and all suits and prosecutions for the collection of said
taxes or for the punishment of violations of this subchapter shall have been
fully terminated, subject to the limitations contained in §§
39.12 and
39.99 hereof.
(Ord. 2009-54, passed 11-24-2009; Ord. 2015-22, passed 11-24-2015)
§ 39.25 ELECTION TO BE SUBJECT TO R.C. 718.80 TO 718.95.
   (A)   The village adopts and incorporates herein, by reference, R.C. §§
718.80 to 718.95 for tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2018.
   (B)   A taxpayer, as defined in division (C) below, may elect to be subject
to R.C. §§ 718.80 to 718.95 in lieu of the provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   TAXPAYER has the same meaning as in R.C. § 718.01, except that
TAXPAYER does not include natural persons or entities subject to the tax
imposed under R.C. Chapter 5745. TAXPAYER may include receivers, assignees or
trustees in bankruptcy when such persons are required to assume the role of a
taxpayer.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 1-9-2024)
§ 39.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of §
39.12, and/or violates any of the provisions of §§
39.01 through
39.25 for which no penalty is otherwise provided, shall be deemed guilty of a
first degree misdemeanor and fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more
than six months, or both, for each offense.
(Ord. 2009-54, passed 11-24-2009)
CHAPTER 40: FEES AND FUNDS
Section
Fee Schedules
   
40.01   Mayor’s Court fee schedule
   
40.02   Emergency medical services fee schedule
   
40.03   Community development fee schedule
   
40.04   Employee and equipment rates
   
40.05   Fees for law enforcement services
   
40.06   Record inspection fees
Funds
   
40.20   Creation of funds
FEE SCHEDULES
§ 40.01 MAYOR’S COURT FEE SCHEDULE.
   The following fee schedule for the Mayor’s Court are effective as of January
1, 2012:
   (A)   Court costs (traffic): $75;
   (B)   Court costs (criminal): $75; and
   (C)   Bench warrants: $50.
(Prior Code, § 30.52) (Ord. 1980-1, passed 1-14-1980; Ord. 1989-13, passed 4-
11-1989; Ord. 1997-10, passed 5-27-1997; Ord. 2002-11, passed 2-12-2002; Ord.
2002-16, passed 3-12-2002; Ord. 2006-10, passed 3-14-2006; Ord. 2009-2, passed
10-13-2009; Ord. 2011-33, passed 12-13-2011)
§ 40.02 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES FEE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   Fee schedule. The following fee schedule for emergency medical
services are effective as of January 1, 2012:
      (1)   Basic life support: $575;
      (2)   Advanced life support 1: $885;
      (3)   Advanced life support 2: $975; and
      (4)   Loaded mileage: $14.40 per mile.
   (B)   User fee recovery. 
      (1)   The village shall initiate user fees for the delivery of personnel,
supplies and equipment to the scene of:
         (a)   Motor vehicle accidents;
         (b)   Motorized or non-motorized vehicle fires;
         (c)   Structure fires;
         (d)   Structural collapse or damage to a structure;
         (e)   Ground cover or vegetation fires;
         (f)   Hazardous material releases;
         (g)   Basement flooding/cellar flooding/water “pump-outs”; and
         (h)   Fire alarm activations in excess of three per calendar year to
any single street address.
      (2)   User fees shall be based upon that which is the usual, customary
and reasonable costs (UCR), which includes any services, personnel, supplies
and equipment and may fluctuate based on the needs of the accident.
      (3)   User fees shall not be charged where the village is legally or by
agreement, prohibited from assessing such fees.
(Prior Code, § 30.53) (Ord. 1996-10, passed - -; Ord. 1993-26, passed - -; Ord.
2004-44, passed 11-9-2004; Ord. 2006-41, passed 12-12-2006; Ord. 2007-54,
passed 12-11-2007; Ord. 2008-10, passed 3-11-2008; Ord. 2008-37, passed 11-18-
2008; Ord. 2009-14, passed 3-24-2009; Ord. 2010-43, passed 12-14-2010; Ord.
2011-30, passed 12-13-2011)
§ 40.03 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT FEE SCHEDULE.
   The following community development fee schedule is effective as of March
26, 2013:
Permit Type Fee Additional Information
Permit Type                Fee                       Additional Information
Addition/alteration        $100
residential
Addition/alteration        $150
commercial
Accessory permit (includes
pools, fences, electrical,
donation drop-off          $20
receptacle portable
storage units)
Cemetery grave sites:
   Grave site           $600
   Maintenance care fee $200
   Transfer fee         $25
Change of occupancy and    $25
home occupation
Communication (cell)       $1,000 for new tower
towers                     $500 for relocation, plus See Ord. 1998-20
                           $8,500 escrow deposit
Decks and porches          $50
Driveway permit            $50
(commercial)
Driveway permit            $25
(residential)
Fill permit                $500 escrow deposit       See Ord. 1996-15
Minor subdivision approval $50
New commercial/industrial
building
   5,000 sq. ft. or less$400
   5,001 to 10,000 sq. f$600
   10,001 to 15,000 sq. $800
ft.
   15,001 to 20,000 sq. $1,000
ft.
   20,001 or more       $1,200
                                                     Includes Police
New residence: multiple-                             Development Fund: $250,
family (first unit)        $800                      Fire Development Fund:
                                                     $250, Tree Fund: $75 and
                                                     Park Fund: $50
   Each additional unit:$75
                                                     Includes Police
New residence: single-                               Development Fund: $250,
family (includes driveway  $800                      Fire Development Fund:
permit)                                              $250, Tree Fund: $75 and
                                                     Park Fund: $50
Park permits               $25 resident
                           $50 non-resident
Planned unit development   $1,000, plus $25 per unit
(PUD) fee                  on plan
Preliminary subdivision    $500 + $10 per lot
review
Record plat fee            $500 + $10 per lot
Rental housing inspection  $5 per unit
Right-of-way permit        $500 escrow deposit       See Ord. 2002-22
                                                     Permit fees are doubled
Sidewalk café (annually)  $25                       for construction or any
                                                     activity listed starting
                                                     prior to permitting
Signs
   Permanent            $20 plus $1 per sq. ft.
   Temporary            $20
Subdivision inspection     3.25% of total
                           construction costs
Yard sale permits          $5                        Limit 3 per year
Zoning amendment           $400
Zoning/floodplain variance $200
Zoning or floodplain       $10 paper copy
ordinance                  $5 compact disk
 
(Ord. 2007-4, passed 2-27-2007; Ord. 2008-36, passed 12-9-2008; Ord. 2009-35,
passed 7-15-2009; Ord. 2009-53, passed 11-24-2009; Ord. 2010-21, passed 8-10-
2010; Ord. 2013-9, passed 3-26-2013; Ord. 2013-33, passed 12-10-2013)
§ 40.04 EMPLOYEE AND EQUIPMENT RATES.
Equipment Cost Code Specification Capacity/Size HP Notes Unit Rate
Equipment   Cost Code Specification Capacity/ HP       Notes        Unit Rate
                                    Size
Aerial                Max. platform                    Articulated,
lift, self- 8490      height        37 ft.    to 15    telescoping, Hour $8.25
propell ed
Aerial                Max. platform                    Articulated,
lift, self- 8491      height        60 ft.    to 30    telescoping  Hour $12.25
propell ed
Aerial                Max. platform                    Articulated,
lift, self- 8492      height        70 ft.    to 50    telescoping  Hour $22.50
propell ed
Aerial                Max. platform                    Articulated
lift, self- 8493      height        125 ft.   to 85    and          Hour $60
propell ed                                             telescoping
Aerial                Max. platform                    Articulated
lift, self- 8494      height        150 ft.   to 130   and          Hour $70
propell ed                                             telescoping
                                                       Articulated
Aerial                                                 and
lift, truck 8486      Max. platform 40 ft.             telescoping. Hour $6.75
mntd.                 height                           Add to truck
                                                       rate for
                                                       total rate
                                                       Articulated
Aerial                                                 and
lift, truck 848 7     Max. platform 61 ft.             telescoping. Hour $12.25
mntd.                 height                           Add to truck
                                                       rate for
                                                       total rate
                                                       Articulated
Aerial                                                 and
lift, truck 848 8     Max. platform 80 ft.             telescoping. Hour $23.50
mntd.                 height                           Add to truck
                                                       rate for
                                                       total rate
                                                       Articulated
Aerial                                                 and
lift, truck 8489      Max. platform 100 ft.            telescoping. Hour $34
mntd.                 height                           Add to truck
                                                       rate for
                                                       total rate.
Air         8010      Air delivery  41 cfm.   to 10    Hoses        Hour $1.50
compressor                                             included
Air         8011      Air delivery  103 cfm.  to 30    Hoses        Hour $8.75
compressor                                             included
Air         8012      Air delivery  130 cfm.  to 50    Hoses        Hour $11.25
compressor                                             included
Air         8013      Air delivery  175 cfm.  to 90    Hoses        Hour $26
compressor                                             included
Air         8014      Air delivery  400 cfm.  to 145   Hoses        Hour $35
compressor                                             included
Air         8015      Air delivery  575 cfm.  to 230   Hoses        Hour $48
compressor                                             included
Air         8016      Air delivery  1,100     to 355   Hoses        Hour $65
compressor                          cfm.               included
Air         8017      Air delivery  1,600     to 500   Hoses        Hour $105
compressor                          cfm.               included
Ambulance   8040                              to 150                Hour $33
Ambulance   8041                              to 210                Hour $41
Auger,      8060      Hole diameter 16 in.    to 6                  Hour $1.60
portable
Auger,      8061      Hole diameter 18 in.    to 13                 Hour $4.10
portable
                                                       Includes
                                                       digger, boom
Auger,                                                 and mounting
tractor     8062      Max. auger    36 in.    to 13    hardware.    Hour $1.30
mntd.                 diameter                         Add to
                                                       tractor rate
                                                       for total
                                                       rate
                                                       Includes
                                                       digger, boom
Auger,                Max. auger                       and mounting
truck mntd. 8063      size          24 in     to 100   hardware.    Hour $35
                                                       Add to truck
                                                       rate for
                                                       total rate
Automobil e 8070                              to 130   Transporting Mile $0.56
                                                       people
Automobil e 6071                              to 130   Transporting Hour $16.50
                                                       cargo
Automobil   8072                              to 250   Patrolling   Mile $0.63
e, police
Automobil                                              Stationary
e, police   8073                              to 250   with engine  Hour $18
                                                       running
                                    50 ft. x
Barge, deck 8110      Size          35 ft. x                        Hour $34
                                    7.25 ft.
                                    50 ft. x
Barge, deck 8111      Size          35 ft. x                        Hour $49
                                    9 ft.
                                    120 ft. x
Barge, deck 8112      Size          45 ft. x                        Hour $60
                                    10 ft.
                                    160 ft. x
Barge, deck 8113      Size          45 ft. x                        Hour $75
                                    1 ft.
Board,      8050                              to 8     Trailer      Hour $3.40
arrow                                                  mounted
Board,      8051                              to 5     Trailer      Hour $8.75
message                                                mounted
                                    45 ft. x
Boat, push  8133      Size          21 ft. x  to 435   Flat hull    Hour $180
                                    6 ft.
                                    54 ft. x
Boat, push  8134      Size          21 ft. x  to 525   Flat hull    Hour $235
                                    6 ft.
                                    58 ft. x
Boat, push  8135      Size          24 ft. x  to 705   Flat hull    Hour $300
                                    7.5 ft.
                                    64 ft. x
Boat, push  8136      Size          25 ft. x  to 870   Flat hull    Hour $345
                                    8 ft.
Boat, tow   8130                                       Heavy duty   Hour $0.85
Boat,       8131      Size          13 ft. x  to 50    Outboard     Hour $18.50
runabout                            5 ft.
Boat,                               14 ft. x           Inboard with
tender      8132      Size          7 ft.     to 100   360 degree   Hour $33
                                                       drive
                                    55 ft. x
Boat, tow   8120      Size          20 ft. x  to 870   Steel        Hour $315
                                    5 ft.
                                    60 ft. x
Boat, tow   8121      Size          21 ft. x  to 1,050 Steel        Hour $370
                                    5 ft.
                                    70 ft. x
Boat, tow   8122      Size          30 ft. x  to 1,350 Steel        Hour $540
                                    7.5 ft.
                                    120 ft. x
Boat, tow   8123      Size          34 ft. x  to 2,000 Steel        Hour $980
                                    8 ft.
Boat, tug   8140      Length        16 ft.    to 100                Hour $42
Boat, tug   8141      Length        18 ft.    to 175                Hour $70
Boat, tug   8142      Length        26 ft.    to 250                Hour $90
Boat, tug   8143      Length        40 ft.    to 380                Hour $185
Boat, tug   8144      Length        5l ft.    to 700                Hour $285
Breaker,
pavement,   8419      Weight        25-90 lb.                       Hour $0.65
hand-held
Breaker,    8420                              to 70                 Hour $35
pavement
Broom,      8150      Broom length  72 in.    to 35                 Hour $14
pavement
Broom,      8151      Broom length  96 in.    to 100                Hour $23
pavement
Broom,                                                 Add to prime
pavement,   8158      Broom length  72 in.    to 18    mover rate   Hour $6.50
mntd.                                                  for
Broom,                                                 Add to prime
pavement,   8154      Broom length  84 in.    to 20    mover rate   Hour $11.25
pull                                                   for
                                                       Includes
Bucket,                                                teeth. Does
clamshell   8270      Capacity      1.0 cy.            not include  Hour $3.60
                                                       clamshell
                                                       and dragline
                                                       Includes
Bucket,                                                teeth. Does
clamshell   8271      Capacity      2.5 cy.            not include  Hour $6.75
                                                       clamshell
                                                       and dragline
                                                       Includes
Bucket,                                                teeth. Does
clamshell   8272      Capacity      5.0 cy.            not include  Hour $11.25
                                                       clamshell
                                                       and dragline
                                                       Includes
Bucket,                                                teeth. Does
clamshell   8273      Capacity      7.5 cy.            not include  Hour $14.50
                                                       clamshell
                                                       and dragline
                                                       Does not
Bucket,     8275      Capacity      2.0 cy.            include      Hour $2.90
dragline                                               clamshell
                                                       and
                                                       Does not
Bucket,     8276      Capacity      5.0 cy.            include      Hour $6.50
dragline                                               clamshell
                                                       and
                                                       Does not
Bucket,     8277      Capacity      10 cy.             include      Hour $10.50
dragline                                               clamshell
                                                       and
                                                       Does not
Bucket,     8278      Capacity      14 cy.             include      Hour $13.50
dragline                                               clamshell
                                                       and
Bus         8180                              to 150                Hour $26
Bus         8181                              to 210                Hour $29
Bus         8182                              to 300                Hour $33
Chain saw   8190      Bar length    16 in.                          Hour $2
Chain saw   8191      Bar length    25 in.                          Hour $3.70
Chain saw,  8192      Bar size      18 in.                          Hour $1.60
pole
Chipper,    8200      Chipping      6 in.     to 35    Trailer      Hour $8.50
brush                 capacity                         mounted
Chipper,    8201      Chipping      9 in.     to 65    Trailer      Hour $18.50
brush                 capacity                         mounted
Chipper,    8202      Chipping      12 in.    to 100   Trailer      Hour $26
brush                 capacity                         mounted
Chipper,    8203      Chipping      15 in.    to 125   Trailer      Hour $37
brush                 capacity                         mounted
Chipper,    8204      Chipping      18 in.    to 200   Trailer      Hour $55
brush                 capacity                         mounted
Clamshell                                              Bucket not
and         8210                    149,999   to 235   included in  Hour $100
dragline,                           lb.                rate
crawler
Clamshell                                              Bucket not
and         8211                    250,000   to 520   included in  Hour $145
dragline,                           lb.                rate
crawler
Clamshell                                              Bucket not
and         8212                              to 240   included in  Hour $145
dragline,                                              rate
truck
                                                       Truck
Cleaner,              Hopper                           mounted. Add
sewer/catch 8712      capacity      5 cy.              to truck     Hour $16
basin                                                  rate for
                                                       total rate
                                                       Truck
Cleaner,              Hopper                           mounted. Add
sewer/catc  8713      capacity      14 cy.             to truck     Hour $21.50
h basin                                                rate for
                                                       total rate
Compactor   8220                              to 10                 Hour $11.75
Compactor ,
lowed,      8221                              to 45                 Hour $19
vibratory
drum
Compactor ,
vibratory,  8222                              to 75                 Hour $28
drum
Compactor ,
pneumatic,  8223                              to 100                Hour $33
wheel
Compactor , 8225                              to 300                Hour $110
sanitation
Compactor , 8226                              to 400                Hour $185
sanitation
Compactor , 8227                              to 535                Hour $260
sanitation
Compactor ,                                            Add to home
lowed,      8228                    10,000             mover rate   Hour $7.50
pneumatic,                          lb.                for total
wheel                                                  rate
Compactor ,                                            Add to home
lowed, drum 8229                    20,000             mover rate   Hour $12.25
static                              lb.                for total
                                                       rate
Crane       8500      Max. lift     8 MT      to 80                 Hour $31
                      capacity
Crane       8501      Max. lift     15 MT     to 150                Hour $65
                      capacity
Crane       8502      Max. lift     50 MT     to 200                Hour $100
                      capacity
Crane       8503      Max. lift     70 MT     to 300                Hour $175
                      capacity
Crane       8504      Max. lift     110 MT    to 350                Hour $230
                      capacity
Crane,                Max. lift     240,00             Add to truck
truck mntd. 8496      capacity      lb.                rate for     Hour $10
                                                       total rate
Crane,                Max. lift     36,000             Add to truck
truck mntd. 8497      capacity      lb.                rate for     Hour $16
                                                       total rate
Crane,                Max. lift     60,000             Add to truck
truck mntd. 8498      capacity      lb.                rate for     Hour $30
                                                       total rate
Cutter,     8195      Cutter size   8 ft.     to 150                Hour $100
brush
Cutter,     8196      Cutter size   8 ft.     to 190                Hour $110
brush
Cutter,     8197      Cutter size   10 ft.    to 245                Hour $130
brush
                                                       Includes
Derrick,                                               hydraulic
hydraulic   8670      Max. boom     60 ft.             pole         Hour $21
digger                length                           alignment
                                                       attachment.
                                                       Add to
                                                       Includes
Derrick,                                               hydraulic
hydraulic   8671      Max. boom     90 ft.             pole         Hour $39
digger                length                           alignment
                                                       attachment.
                                                       Add to
                                                       Trailer
                                                       mounted,
Distributor 8580      Tank capacity 500 gal.           includes     Hour $13
, asphalt                                              burners,
                                                       insulated
                                                       tank, and
                                                       Truck
                                                       mounted.
                                                       Includes
Distributor                         1,000              burners,
, asphalt   8581      Tank capacity gal.               insulated    Hour $20
                                                       tank, and
                                                       circulating
                                                       spray bar.
                                                       Add to
                                                       Truck
                                                       mounted.
                                                       Includes
Distributor                         4,000              burners,
, asphalt   8582      Tank capacity gal.               insulated    Hour $25
                                                       tank, and
                                                       circulating
                                                       spray bar.
                                                       Add to
Dozer,      8250                              to 75                 Hour $35
crawler
Dozer,      8251                              to 105                Hour $45
crawler
Dozer,      8252                              to 160                Hour $70
crawler
Dozer,      8253                              to 250                Hour $110
crawler
Dozer,      8254                              to 360                Hour $150
crawler
Dozer,      8255                              to 565                Hour $275
crawler
Dozer,      8256                              to 850                Hour $385
crawler
Dozer,      8260                              to 300                Hour $65
wheel
Dozer,      8261                              to 400                Hour $125
wheel
Dozer,      8262                              to 500                Hour $175
wheel
Dozer,      8263                              to 625                Hour $240
wheel
                                                       Crawler,
Excavator,            Bucket                           truck and
hydraulic   8280      capacity      0.5 cy.   to 45    wheel.       Hour $21
                                                       Includes
                                                       bucket
                                                       Crawler,
Excavator,            Bucket                           truck and
hydraulic   8281      capacity      1.0 cy.   to 90    wheel.       Hour $44
                                                       Includes
                                                       bucket
                                                       Crawler,
Excavator,            Bucket                           truck and
hydraulic   8282      capacity      1.5 cy.   to 160   wheel.       Hour $75
                                                       Includes
                                                       bucket
                                                       Crawler,
Excavator,            Bucket                           truck and
hydraulic   8283      capacity      2.5 cy.   to 265   wheel.       Hour $135
                                                       Includes
                                                       bucket
                                                       Crawler,
Excavator,            Bucket                           truck and
hydraulic   8284      capacity      4.5 cy.   to 420   wheel.       Hour $220
                                                       Includes
                                                       bucket
                                                       Crawler,
Excavator,            Bucket                           truck and
hydraulic   8285      capacity      7.5 cy.   to 650   wheel.       Hour $270
                                                       Includes
                                                       bucket
                                                       Crawler,
Excavator,            Bucket                           truck and
hydraulic   8286      capacity      12 cy.    to 1,000 wheel.       Hour $465
                                                       Includes
                                                       bucket
Feeder,     8240                              to 35                 Hour $17
grizzly
Feeder,     8241                              to 55                 Hour $30
grizzly
Feeder,     8242                              to 75                 Hour $44
grizzly
Fork lift   8300      Capacity      6,000 lb. to 60                 Hour $14
Fork lift   8301      Capacity      12,000    to 90                 Hour $20.50
                                    lb.
Fork lift   8302      Capacity      18,000    to 140                Hour $28
                                    lb.
Fork lift   8303      Capacity      50,000    to 215                Hour $60
                                    lb.
Generator   8310      Prime output  5.5 kW    to 10                 Hour $4.10
Generator   8311      Prime output  16 kW     to 25                 Hour $9.75
Generator   8312      Prime output  43 kW     to 65                 Hour $22
Generator   8313      Prime output  100 kW    to 125                Hour $46
Generator   8314      Prime output  l50 kW    to 240                Hour $70
Generator   8315      Prime output  210 kW    to 300                Hour $80
Generator   8316      Prime output  280 kW    to 400                Hour $115
Generator   8317      Prime output  350 kW    to 500                Hour $130
Generator   8318      Prime output  530 kW    to 750                Hour $205
Generator   8319      Prime output  710 kW    to 1,000              Hour $270
Generator   8320      Prime output  1,100 kW  to 1,500              Hour $435
Generator   8321      Prime output  2,500 kW  to 3,000              Hour $695
Golf cart   8755      Capacity      2 person                        Hour $3.30
                      Moldboard                        Includes
Graders     8330      size          10 ft.    to 110   rigid and    Hour $40
                                                       articulate
                      Moldboard                        Includes
Graders     8331      size          12 ft.    to 150   rigid and    Hour $55
                                                       articulate
                      Moldboard                        Includes
Graders     8332      size          14 ft.    to 225   rigid and    Hour $80
                                                       articulate
Hose,                                                  Per 25-ft.
discharge   8350      Diameter      3 in.              length       Hour $0.13
                                                       includes
Hose,                                                  Per 25-ft.
discharge   8351      Diameter      4 in.              length.      Hour $0.19
                                                       Includes
Hose,                                                  Per 25-ft.
discharge   8352      Diameter      6 in.              length.      Hour $0.50
                                                       Includes
Hose,                                                  Per 25-ft.
discharge   8353      Diameter      8 in.              length.      Hour $0.75
                                                       Includes
Hose,                                                  Per 25-ft.
discharge   8354      Diameter      12 in.             length.      Hour $1.35
                                                       Includes
Hose,                                                  Per 25-ft.
discharge   8355      Diameter      16 in.             length.      Hour $2.20
                                                       Includes
Hose,                                                  Per 25-ft.
suction     8356      Diameter      3 in.              length,      Hour $0.23
                                                       Includes
Hose,                                                  Per 25-ft.
suction     8357      Diameter      4 in.              length.      Hour $0.43
                                                       Includes
Hose,                                                  Per 25-ft.
suction     8358      Diameter      6 in.              length.      Hour $0.90
                                                       Includes
Hose,                                                  Per 25-ft.
suction     8359      Diameter      8 in.              length.      Hour $1.35
                                                       Includes
Hose,                                                  Per 25-ft.
suction     8360      Diameter      12 in.             length.      Hour $2.45
                                                       Includes
Hose,                                                  Per 25-ft.
suction     836       Diameter      16 in.             length.      Hour $3.90
                                                       Includes
Jackhamme r 8517      Weight class  25-45 lb.                       Hour $1
(dry)
Jackhamme r 8518      Weight class  30-55 lb.                       Hour $1.15
(wet)
Loader,     8380      Bucket        0.5 cy.   to 32    Includes     Hour $13
crawler               capacity                         bucket
Loader,     8381      Bucket        1 cy.     to 60    Includes     Hour $22.50
crawler               capacity                         bucket
Loader,     8382      Bucket        2 cy.     to 118   Includes     Hour $48
crawler               capacity                         bucket
Loader,     8383      Bucket        3 cy.     to 178   Includes     Hour $85
crawler               capacity                         bucket
Loader,     8384      Bucket        4 cy      to 238   Includes     Hour $125
crawler               capacity                         bucket
Loader,     8540      Operating     1,000 lb. to 35                 Hour $12.25
skid-steer            capacity
Loader,     8541      Operating     2,000 lb. to 65                 Hour $21
skid-steer            capacity
Loader,     8542      Operating     3,000 lb. to 85                 Hour $26
skid-steer            capacity
Loader,
tractor,    8401                              to 81                 Hour $25
wheel
Loader,     8390      Bucket        0.5 cy.   to 38                 Hour $17.50
wheel                 capacity
Loader,     8391      Bucket        1 cy.     to 60                 Hour $25
wheel                 capacity
Loader,     8392      Bucket        2 cy.     to 105                Hour $34
wheel                 capacity
Loader,     8393      Bucket        3 cy.     to 152                Hour $47
wheel                 capacity
Loader,     8394      Bucket        4 cy.     to 200                Hour $60
wheel                 capacity
Loader,     8395      Bucket        5 cy.     to 250                Hour $80
wheel                 capacity
Loader,     8396      Bucket        6 cy.     to 305                Hour $95
wheel                 capacity
Loader,     8397      Bucket        7 cy.     to 360                Hour $110
wheel                 capacity
Loader,     8398      Bucket        8 cy.     to 530                Hour $160
wheel                 capacity
Loader-               Loader bucket                    Loader and
backhoe,    8570      capacity      0.5 cy.   to 40    backhoe      Hour $15.50
wheel                                                  buckets
Loader-               Loader bucket                    Loader and
backhoe,    8571      capacity      1 cy.     to 70    backhoe      Hour $28
wheel                                                  buckets
Loader-               Loader bucket                    Loader and
backhoe,    8572      capacity      1.5 cy.   to 95    backhoe      Hour $39
wheel                                                  buckets
Loader-               Loader bucket                    Loader and
backhoe,    8573      capacity      1.75 cy.  to 115   backhoe      Hour $44
wheel                                                  buckets
Mixer,                Batching
concrete    8410      capacity      10 cft.                         Hour $3.80
portable
Mixer,                Batching
concrete    8411      capacity      12 cft.                         Hour $5
portable
Mixer,
concrete,   8412      Batching      11 cft.   to 10                 Hour $8.75
trailer               capacity
mntd.
Mixer,
concrete,   8413      Batching      16 cft.   to 25                 Hour $17
trailer               capacity
mntd.
Motorcycle  8075                                                    Mile $0.40
, police
Mulcher,              Working
trailer     8633      capacity      7 tph.    to 35                 Hour $12
mntd.
Mulcher,              Working
trailer     8634      capacity      10 tph.   to 55                 Hour $18.50
mntd.
Mulcher,              Working
trailer     8635      capacity      20 tph.   to 120                Hour $31
mntd.
Paver,                                                 Does not
asphalt,    8430                                       include      Hour $7
towed                                                  prime mover.
Paver,                                                 Includes
asphalt     6431                              to 50    wheel and    Hour $70
                                                       crawler
Paver,                                                 Includes
asphalt     8432                              to 125   wheel and    Hour $120
                                                       crawler
Paver,                                                 Includes
asphalt     8433                              to 175   wheel and    Hour $130
                                                       crawler
Paver,                                                 Includes
asphalt     8434                              to 250   wheel and    Hour $150
                                                       crawler
Pick-up,    8436                              to 110                Hour $60
asphalt
Pick-up,    8437                              to 150                Hour $85
asphalt
Pick-up,    8438                              to 200                Hour $115
asphalt
Pick-up,    8439                              to 275                Hour $145
asphalt
Plow, cable 6660      Plow depth    24 in.    to 30                 Hour $12
Plow, cable 8661      Plow depth    36 in.    to 65                 Hour $32
Plow, cable 8662      Plow depth    48 in.    to 110                Hour $37
Plow, snow,                                            Add to
grader      6450      Width         to 10 ft.          grader for   Hour $16
mntd.                                                  total rate
Plow, snow,                                            Add to
grader      8451      Width         to 14 ft.          grader for   Hour $24
mntd.                                                  total rate
Plow, snow,                                            Add to truck
truck mntd. 8452      Width         to 15 ft.          rate tor     Hour $10.75
                                                       total rate
                                                       With
                                                       leveling
Plow, snow, 8453      Width         to 15 ft.          wing. Add to Hour $18.50
truck mntd.                                            truck rate
                                                       for total
                                                       rate
                                                       Does not
Pump        8470                              to 4     include      Hour $2.15
                                                       hoses
                                                       Does not
Pump        8471                              to 6     include      Hour $3.20
                                                       hoses
                                                       Does not
Pump        8472                              to 10    include      Hour $4.10
                                                       hoses
                                                       Does not
Pump        8473                              to 15    include      Hour $7.75
                                                       hoses
                                                       Does not
Pump        8474                              to 25    include      Hour $9.25
                                                       hoses
                                                       Does not
Pump        8475                              to 40    include      Hour $19.50
                                                       hoses
                                                       Does not
Pump        8476                              to 60    include      Hour $23
                                                       hoses
                                                       Does not
Pump        8477                              to 95    include      Hour $33
                                                       hoses
                                                       Does not
Pump        $476                              to 140   include      Hour $38
                                                       hoses
                                                       Does not
Pump        8479                              to 200   include      Hour $45
                                                       hoses
                                                       Does not
Pump        $480                              to 275   include      Hour $85
                                                       hoses
                                                       Does not
Pump        8481                              to 350   include      Hour $105
                                                       hoses
                                                       Does not
Pump        8482                              to 425   include      Hour $130
                                                       hoses
                                                       Does not
Pump        8483                              to 500   include      Hour $155
                                                       hoses
                                                       Does not
Pump        8484                              to 575   include      Hour $175
                                                       hoses
                                                       Does not
Pump        8485                              to 650   include      Hour $200
                                                       hoses
Saw,        8510      Blade         14 in.    to 14                 Hour $7
concrete              diameter
Saw,        8511      Blade         26 in.    to 35                 Hour $16.50
concrete              diameter
Saw,        8512      Blade         48 in.    to 65                 Hour $28
concrete              diameter
Saw, rock   8513                              to 100                Hour $38
Saw, rock   8514                              to 200                Hour $70
Scraper     8521      Scraper       16 cy.    to 250                Hour $105
                      capacity
Scraper     8522      Scraper       23 cy.    to 365                Hour $150
                      capacity
Scraper     8523      Scraper       34 cy.    to 475                Hour $220
                      capacity
Scraper     8524      Scraper       44 cy.    to 600                Hour $270
                      capacity
Snow blower $560      Capacity      2,000     to 400                Hour $160
                                    tph.
Snow blower 8561      Capacity      2,500     to 500                Hour $180
                                    tph.
Snow blower 8562      Capacity      3,500     to 600                Hour $200
                                    tph.
Snow                                                   Does not
blower,     8550      Capacity      600 tph.  to 75    include      Hour $42
truck                                                  truck
Snow                                1,400              Does not
blower,     8551      Capacity      tph.      to 200   include      Hour $80
truck                                                  truck
Snow                                2,000              Does not
blower,     8552      Capacity      tph.      to 340   include      Hour $125
truck                                                  truck
Snow                                2,500              Does not
blower,     8553      Capacity      tph.      to 400   include      Hour $140
truck                                                  truck
Snow
thrower,    8558      Cutting width 25 in.    to 5                  Hour $3.60
walk behind
Snow
thrower,    8559      Cutting width 60 in.    to 15                 Hour $8
walk behind
                                                       Trailer and
                                                       truck
Sprayer,    8630      Working       750 gal.  to 30    mounted.     Hour $10.75
seed                  capacity                         Does not
                                                       include
                                                       prime mover
                                                       Trailer and
                                                       truck
Sprayer,    8631      Working       1,250     to 50    mounted.     Hour $16.50
seed                  capacity      gal.               Does not
                                                       include
                                                       prime mover
                                                       Trailer and
                                                       truck
Sprayer,    8632      Working       3,500     to 115   mounted.     Hour $32
seed                  capacity      gal.               Does not
                                                       include
                                                       prime mover
                                                       Trailer and
Spreader,   8458      Capacity      5 cy.     to 4     truck        Hour $4.20
chemical                                               mounted.
                                                       Does
Spreader,   8423      Spread hopper 12.5 ft.  to 152                Hour $60
chip                  width
Spreader,   8424      Spread hopper 16.5 ft.  to 215                Hour $95
chip                  width
Spreader,                                              Trailer and
chip, mntd. 8425      Hopper size   8 ft.     to 8     truck        Hour $3.70
                                                       mounted
Spreader,   8455      Mounting      Tailgate,                       Hour $3.30
sand                                chassis
Spreader,   8456      Mounting      Dump body                       Hour $5.50
sand
Spreader,   8457      Mounting      Truck (10                       Hour $7.50
sand                                yd.)
Striper     8440      Paint         40 gal.   to 22                 Hour $9.25
                      capacity
Striper     8441      Paint         90 gal.   to 60                 Hour $21
                      capacity
Striper     8442      Paint         120 gal.  to 122                Hour $41
                      capacity
Striper,    8445      Paint         120 gal.  to 460                Hour $85
truck mntd.           capacity
Striper,              Paint
walk-behin  8446      capacity      12 gal.                         Hour $3.80
d
Sweeper,    8157                              to 110                Hour $55
pavement
Sweeper,    8158                              to 230                Hour $85
pavement
Trailer,                                               Does not
dump        8590      Capacity      20 cy.             include      Hour $8
                                                       prime mover
Trailer,                                               Does not
dump        8591      Capacity      30 cy.             include      Hour $14
                                                       prime mover
Trailer,    8600      Capacity      30 ton                          Hour $10.25
equipment
Trailer,    8601      Capacity      40 ton                          Hour $12.50
equipment
Trailer,    8602      Capacity      60 ton                          Hour $15
equipment
Trailer,    8603      Capacity      120 ton                         Hour $20.50
equipment
Trailer,    8640      Trailer size  8’ x 24’                    Hour $1.70
office
Trailer,    8641      Trailer size  8’ x 32’                    Hour $1.75
office
Trailer,    8642      Trailer size  10’ x 32’                   Hour $2.60
office
                                                       Includes a
                                                       centrifugal
Trailer,    8610      Tank capacity 4,000              pump with    Hour $11
water                               gal.               sump and a
                                                       rear
                                                       spraybar
                                                       Includes a
                                                       centrifugal
Trailer,    8611      Tank capacity 6,000              pump with    Hour $14
water                               gal.               sump and a
                                                       rear
                                                       spraybar
                                                       Includes a
                                                       centrifugal
Trailer,    8612      Tank capacity 10,000             pump with    Hour $16.50
water                               gal.               sump and a
                                                       rear
                                                       spraybar
                                                       Includes a
                                                       centrifugal
Trailer,    8613      Tank capacity 14,000             pump with    Hour $20.50
water                               gal.               sump and a
                                                       rear
                                                       spraybar
                                                       Walk-behind,
                                                       crawler and
Trencher    8650                              to 40    wheel        Hour $13
                                                       mounted.
                                                       Chain and
                                                       wheel
                                                       Walk-behind,
                                                       crawler and
Trencher    8651                              to 85    wheel        Hour $29
                                                       mounted.
                                                       Chain and
                                                       wheel
Trowel,     8290      Diameter      48 in.    to 12                 Hour $5.50
concrete
Truck,                Mixer
concrete    8680      capacity      13 cy.    to 300                Hour $90
mixer
Truck, dump 8720      Struck        8 cy.     to 220                Hour $43
                      capacity
Truck, dump 8721      Struck        10 cy.    to 320                Hour $60
                      capacity
Truck, dump 8722      Struck        12 cy.    to 400                Hour $75
                      capacity
Truck, dump 8723      Struck        18 cy.    to 400                Hour $80
                      capacity
Truck,      8724      Struck        28 cy.    to 450                Hour $115
dump, off             capacity
Truck, fire 8690      Pump capacity 1,000                           Hour $75
                                    gpm.
Truck, fire 8681      Pump capacity 1,250                           Hour $90
                                    gpm.
Truck, fire 8662      Pump capacity 1,500                           Hour $95
                                    gpm.
Truck, fire 8663      Pump capacity 2,000                           Hour $105
                                    gpm.
Truck, fire 8694      Ladder length 75 ft.                          Hour $145
ladder
Truck, fire 8695      Ladder length 160 ft.                         Hour $175
ladder
Truck,      8700      Maximum gvw   16,000    to 200                Hour $25
flatbed                             lb.
Truck,      8701      Maximum gvw   25,000    to 275                Hour $28
flatbed                             lb.
Truck,      8702      Maximum gvw   30,000    to 300                Hour $31
flatbed                             lb.
Truck,      8703      Maximum gvw   45,000    to 380                Hour $55
flatbed                             lb.
Truck,      8730      Capacity      25 cy.    to 255                Hour $55
carnage
Truck,      8731      Capacity      32 cy.    to 326                Hour $60
carnage
Truck,      8800                                       Transporting Mile $0.58
pickup                                                 people
Truck,      8801                    0.5 ton                         Hour $19
pickup
Truck,      8802                    1 ton                           Hour $25
pickup
Truck,      8803                    1.25 ton                        Hour $27
pickup
Truck,      8804                    1.5 ton                         Hour $30
pickup
Truck,      8805                    1.75 ton                        Hour $35
pickup
Truck,      8790      4 x 2         30,000    to 220                Hour $38
tractor                             lb.
Truck,      8791      4 x 2         45,000    to 310                Hour $55
tractor                             lb.
Truck,      8792      6 x 4         50,000    to 400                Hour $70
tractor                             lb.
Truck,                              2,500              Include pump
water       8780      Tank capacity gal.      to 175   and rear     Hour $38
                                                       spray
Truck,                              4,000              Include pump
water       8781      Tank capacity gal.      to 250   and rear     Hour $50
                                                       spray
Tub grinder 8620                              to 440                Hour $95
Tub grinder 8621                              to 630                Hour $140
Tub grinder 8622                              to 760                Hour $175
Tub grinder 8623                              to 1,000              Hour $275
Vehicle,
recreationa 8753                              to 10                 Hour $3.50
l
Vehicle,    8750                              to 30                 Hour $8
small
Vibrator,   8761                              to 4                  Hour $1.15
concrete
Welder,                                                Includes
portable    8770                              to 16    ground cable Hour $6.75
                                                       and lead
Welder,                                                Includes
portable    8771                              to 34    ground cable Hour $16
                                                       and lead
Welder,                                                Includes
portable    8772                              to 50    ground came  Hour $23
                                                       and lead
Welder,                                                Includes
portable    8773                              to 80    ground cable Hour $31
                                                       and lead
   Note to table: All labor rates shall be calculated at current regular or
overtime rate of pay plus a 30% benefit rate
 
(Ord. 2010-4, passed 1-12-2010; Ord. 2010-41, passed 12-14-2010)
§ 40.05 FEES FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT SERVICES.
   The following fee schedules for law enforcement services are effective as of
January 1, 2008.
   (A)   Police.
      (1)   Crash/injury severity charges summary table:
On-Scene Time 30 min. 45 min. 60 min. 75 min. 90 min. 105 min.
On-Scene Time   30 min. 45 min. 60 min. 75 min. 90 min. 105 min.
A-level
   Officers  $14     $21     $28     $35     $42     $49
   Station pr$33     $35     $37     $40     $42     $45
   Vehicles  $154    $154    $154    $154    $154    $154
B-level
   Officers  $14     $21     $28     $35     $42     $49
   Station pr$21     $23     $26     $28     $30     $33
   Vehicles  $154    $154    $154    $154    $154    $154
C-level
   Officers  $14     $21     $28     $35     $42     $49
   Station pr$21     $21     $21     $21     $21     $21
   Vehicles  $154    $154    $154    $154    $154    $154
Fatal                                               
   Officers  $14     $21     $28     $35     $42     $49
   Station pr$46     $49     $51     $54     $56     $59
   Vehicles  $154    $154    $154    $154    $154    $154
PDO
   Officers  $14     $21     $28     $35     $42     $49
   Station pr$21     $21     $21     $21     $21     $21
   Vehicles  $154    $154    $154    $154    $154    $154
Notes to table:
   A-LEVEL. Crash with one incapacitating injury
   B-LEVEL. Crash with one person with a visible injury but not
incapacitating
   C-LEVEL. Crash with one person with a possible injury
   FATAL. Crash resulting in death of an individual within 30 days of the
accident
   PDO. Property damage only with a value of $500 on any single vehicle
resulting in a claim filed to an insurance company or if cited individual is
without insurance
 
      (2)   Court time and witness interview is $80 per hour.
      (3)   Any response will receive the minimum 30-minute charge.
      (4)   Charges are additive, if two vehicles respond, the charge is twice
what is listed as well as the human power.
   (B)   MVA and structure fire.
      (1)   Charge schedule:
On Scene Time 15 min. 30 min. 45 min. 60 min. 75 min. 90+ min.
On Scene Time              15 min. 30 min. 45 min. 60 min. 75 min. 90+ min.
Equipment                                                      
   EMS vehicles (refusal$579    $581    $584    $587    $591    $594
   Engine companies     $587    $598    $609    $620    $630    $642
   HazMat               $587    $603    $620    $636    $652    $668
   Ladder towers        $598    $620    $641    $662    $684    $705
   Rescue vehicles      $577    $578    $579    $580    $581    $582
Human power
   Chief                $20     $40     $60     $80     $100    $120
   EMT’s              $12     $24     $36     $48     $60     $72
   Firefighters         $10     $20     $30     $40     $50     $60
   Lts./Assnt. Chief    $16     $32     $48     $64     $80     $96
   Shift supervisors    $14     $28     $42     $56     $60     $74
 
      (2)   Any response will receive the minimum 15-minute charge. Charges are
additive, if two vehicles respond, the charge is twice what is listed as well
as the human power.
(Ord. 2008-11, passed 3-11-2008)
§ 40.06 RECORD INSPECTION FEES.
   (A)   The definitions set forth in R.C. § 149.43 are adopted an incorporated
within this section.
   (B)   All public records shall be promptly prepared and made available to
inspection for inspection to any person at all reasonable times during regular
business hours of the village. Upon request, a person responsible for public
records shall make copies available at cost within a reasonable period of time.
No original documents maintained by any village office shall be given to the
public, however, the village official responsible for maintaining said public
record may prepare a duplicate for perusal by the general public if cost
effective.
   (C)   The following fees shall be in effect for copies of village documents:
      (1)   Fire reports: $5;
      (2)   Accident reports: $5;
      (3)   Offense reports: $5;
      (4)   Photographs: $10;
      (5)   EMS/run sheets: $10; and
      (6)   All other documents: $0.05 per page.
(Ord. 1992-34, passed - -; Ord. 1999-42, passed 9-14-1999)
FUNDS
§ 40.20 CREATION OF FUNDS.
   (A)   Creation. The following funds are established within the village.
Fund Number Fund Name
Fund Number Fund Name
-           Augusta Street Boat Dock Improvements Phase 2 Fund
-           Downtown Rehab Fund
-           Fire Act Grant Fund
-           Move Ohio Forward Grant Fund
-           Police Cruiser Fund
-           Sanitary Sewer Collection System Rehab Fund
-           Sewer Plant Clarifier Modification Fund
-           Vesper Family Park Fund
-           Willow Street Park Fund
206         12 Mile Creek Log Jam Removal Fund
207         Bulletproof Vests (Federal) Fund
210         Drug Offender Fines Fund
212         Indigent Driver’s and Education Fund
213         Enforcement and Education Fund
408         Sycamore Street Drainage and Road Improvements Fund
504         Clermont/New Richmond Water Interconnection Improvements Fund
505         Sewage Effluent Line Replacement Fund
DR-1805-OH  Public Assistance Fund
2041        Dog Park Fund
2053        Justice Assistance Grant - MDT’s Fund
2061        Bulletproof Vests Fund
2063        OPWC Water Meter Replacement Grant CJ09Z Fund
2064        ODNR Boat Launch Repair Fund
2065        ARC - Front Street Revitalization Grant Phase #2 Fund
2066        Governor’s Office of Appalachia Grant for Windows and Boiler Fund
2067        Water Treatment Plant Pump Grant Fund
2067        Bethel New Richmond Road Pump Station Fund
2068        BWC Safety Grant Fund
2082        Drug Dog Fund
2152        American Rescue Plan Fund
2905        Summer Event Grant Fund
2910-1164   Public Assistance Fund
2911        Cops Grant Fund
EM-3286-OH  Public Assistance Fund
4201        WWTP Roof Replacement Fund
4909        Flood Mitigation Assistance Program Grant Fund
4910        EMS Computer Grant Fund
4910        Disaster Recovery Initiative Grant Fund
4911        Imminent Threat - CDBG Grant Fund
4912        Sewer Line Extension, Phase I Fund
4912-1097   Mitigation Fund
4913-1164   Mitigation Fund
4915        Union Square Park, Phase I Grant Fund
4916        Susanna Park Grant Fund
4917        Design Standards Guidelines Grant Fund
4918        Birney Lane Repaving Grant Fund
4919        Sewer Line Extension, Phase II Fund
5724        Water Meter Replacement OWDA Loan Fund 9541
 
   (B)   Additional information regarding the purpose and function of funds.
      (1)   (a)   Fund 210 Drug Offender Fines is established to enable the
village to receive mandatory fines imposed upon felony drug traffic offenders
and forfeited bail from such offenders pursuant to R.C. § 2925.03 and to expend
funds in furtherance of law enforcement efforts that pertain to drug offenders.
         (b)   The proper village officials are authorized to make expenditures
from the fund for any lawful purpose which is consistent with the purpose for
which the fund is established.
      (2)   The purpose of the Rotary Fund is to allow for donations to the
village’s 2014 Bicentennial Celebration.
      (3)   The Village Council agrees to meet all applicable program
requirements as established by the State Department of Development for the
Downtown Rehab Fund.
      (4)   Fund EM-3286-OH by the village’s Fiscal Officer is to receive
public assistance funding resulting from the presidential declaration following
the March 7 to March 9, 2008 snow storm.
      (5)   Fund DR-1805-OH by the village’s Fiscal Officer is to receive
public assistance funding resulting from the presidential declaration following
the September 14, 2008 high wind event.
      (6)   (a)   There is a fund entitled “American Rescue Plan Fund”, and the
Village Fiscal Officer has issued a fund number of #2152 with respect to these
funds and such funds shall be non-reverting.
         (b)   The purpose of the funds is to be used for only the following
reasons as set forth in § 603(C) of the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 in
accordance with U.S. Treasury Guidance:
            1.   To respond to the public health emergency with respect to the
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) or its negative economic impacts, including
assistance to households, small businesses and nonprofits, or to aid the
impacted industries such as tourism, travel and hospitality;
            2.   To respond to workers performing essential work during the
COVID-19 public health emergency by providing premium pay to eligible works of
the village, non-entitlement unit of local government or county that are
performing such essential, or by providing grants to eligible employers that
eligible workers who perform essential work;
            3.   For the provision of government services to the extent of the
reduction in revenue of such village, non-entitlement unit of local government,
or county due to the COVID-19 public health emergency relative to revenues
collected in the most recent full fiscal year of the village non-entitlement
unit of local government or county prior to the emergency; or
            4.   To make necessary investments in water, sewer or broadband
infrastructure as approved by the U.S. Treasury.
         (c)   The funds shall be appropriated by the Village Fiscal Officer
and approved by Village Council before use.
         (d)   All expenditure funds shall be approved by the Village Council
with any and all claims to be paid by the village’s American Rescue Plan Fund.
         (e)   If determined necessary, the Village Council may establish a
plan, conditions and rules upon which the funds are to be requested and used.
         (f)   Any unused funds shall be paid back to the United States
Treasury when required.
         (g)   The Village Fiscal Officer shall keep accurate and complete
financial records of the receipt and expenditure of any and all funds deposited
and paid from this new American Rescue Plan Fund.
         (h)   No money received in the American Rescue Plan Fund shall be used
for any type of deposit into any pension fund.
      (7)   (a)   There is fund entitled “Dog Park Fund”, and the Village
Fiscal Officer has issued a fund number of #2041 with respect to these funds
and such funds shall be non-reverting.
         (b)   The purpose of the funds is to be used for only the following:
the planning, construction and maintenance of a dog park subject to any deed
restrictions on approximately two acres of village owned property at the corner
of Race and Willow Streets.
         (c)   The funds shall be appropriated by the Village Fiscal Officer
and approved by Village Council before use.
         (d)   All expenditure funds shall be approved by the Village Council
with any and all claims to be paid by the village’s Dog Park Fund.
         (e)   If determined necessary, the Village Council may establish a
plan, conditions and rules upon which the funds are to be requested and used.
         (f)   Any unused funds shall be paid back to the Village General Fund
when required.
         (g)   The Village Fiscal Officer shall keep accurate and complete
financial records of the receipt and expenditure of any and all funds deposited
and paid from this new Dog Park Fund.
         (h)   No money received in the Dog Park Fund shall be used for any
type of deposit into any pension fund.
(Ord. 1989-26, passed 10-10-1989; Ord. 1990-35, passed 9-11-1990; Res. 2000-09,
passed 7-25-2000; Res. 2000-10, passed 7-25-2000; Res. 2000-11, passed 7-25-
2000; Res. 2000-12, passed 7-25-2000; Res. 2000-13, passed 7-25-2000; Res.
2000-15, passed 8-8-2000; Res. 2000-15, passed 10-10-2000; Res. 2000-16, passed
10-10-2000; Res. 2000-17, passed 10-10-2000; Res. 2000-19, passed 10-10-2000;
Res. 2000-20, passed 10-10-2000; Ord. 2002-56, passed 12-30-2002; Res. 2008-10,
passed 3-25-2008; Res. 2008-14, passed 5-13-2008; Res. 2008-28, passed 11-18-
2008; Res. 2009-4, passed 2-10-2009; Res. 2009-21, passed 8-25-2009; Res. 2010-
2, passed 1-12-2010; Ord. 2010-16, passed 5-11-2010; Ord. 2010-22, passed 7-13-
2010; Res. 2011-2, passed 1-11-2011; Res. 2011-5, passed 1-25-2011; Res. 2011-
7, passed 2-22-2011; Ord. 2013-13, passed 4-9-2013; Ord. 2013-16, passed 6-11-
2013; Ord. 2013-26, passed 10-8-2013; Ord. 2013-39, passed 12-17-2013; Ord.
2014-16, passed 4-22-2014; Ord. 2014-17, passed 6-10-2014; Res. 2021-17, passed
10-12-2021; Res. 2022-01, passed 2-8-2022; Ord. 2023-06, passed 5-23-2023; Ord.
2023-07, passed 6-13-2023)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   UTILITIES GENERALLY
      
51.   SEWERS
      
52.   WATER
      
53.   GARBAGE AND REFUSE
CHAPTER 50: UTILITIES GENERALLY
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Utility rates schedule
Operation of Utilities
   
50.15   Definitions
   
50.16   Separate utilities customers
   
50.17   Application for utilities services
   
50.18   Denial of utilities service
   
50.19   Deposits for new non-owner occupied utilities customers
   
50.20   Voluntary service disconnect or shut off
   
50.21   Involuntary service disconnect
   
50.22   Service re-connect charge
   
50.23   Request for review
   
50.24   Utility connections
   
50.25   Utility meters
Utility Bills
   
50.40   Itemization and amount
   
50.41   Billing and payment dates
   
50.42   Payments, dishonored checks
   
50.43   Partial payment; interest
   
50.44   Owner liable
   
50.45   Extensions
   
50.46   Adjustments
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 UTILITY RATES SCHEDULE.
   (A)   Garbage and curbside recycling rate: $24.40 per unit.
   (B)   Residential water rates:
      (1)   Inside village corporation limits:
         (a)   Minimum zero to 300 cubic feet: $8.55;
         (b)   Anything over 300 cubic feet: $0.0285 per cubic foot; and
         (c)   Campground rate: $0.0380 per cubic foot.
      (2)   Outside village corporation limits:
         (a)   Minimum zero to 300 cubic feet: $12.81; and
         (b)   Anything over 300 cubic feet: $0.0427 per cubic foot.
      (3)   Bulk water: $0.0351 per cubic foot (7.48 gallons per cubic foot);
and
      (4)   Monthly fee (for all tapped meters): $6 per meter.
   (C)   Commercial/multi-unit water rates:
      (1)   Inside village corporation limits:
         (a)   Minimum zero to 450 cubic feet: $12.83 per unit; and
         (b)   Anything over per unit usage allowance (i.e., 450 cubic feet
times three units equals 1,350 usage allowance): $0.0285 per cubic foot.
      (2)   Outside village corporation limits:
         (a)   Minimum zero to 450 cubic feet: $25.07 per unit; and
         (b)    Anything over per unit usage allowance (i.e., 450 cubic feet
times three units equals 1,350 usage allowance): $0.0427 per cubic foot.
      (3)   Monthly fee (for all tapped meters): $6 per meter.
   (D)   Residential sewer rates (inside village residency required):
      (1)   Minimum zero to 300 cubic feet: $16.71;
      (2)   Anything over 300 cubic feet: $0.0557 per cubic foot; and
      (3)   Campground rate: $0.0612.
   (E)   Commercial/multi-unit sewer rates (inside village residency required):
      (1)   Minimum zero to 450 cubic feet: $25.07 per unit; and
      (2)   Anything over per unit usage allowance (i.e., 450 cubic feet times
three units equals 1,350 usage allowance): $0.0557 per cubic foot.
   (F)   Miscellaneous fees:
      (1)   Utilities deposit: $150;
      (2)   Involuntary disconnect/re-connect (during regular business hours 8:
00 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. Monday through Friday): $50;
      (3)   Re-connection fees (during nonbusiness hours): $100;
      (4)   Tampering of meter: $200 per offense;
      (5)   Resubmitted check: $10;
      (6)   Returned check: $25;
      (7)   Late charge: 10% minimum, $10;
      (8)   Service application fee: $40;
      (9)   Service call/work order: $10 or $15;
      (10)   Equipment damage: cost of product plus $30 per hour labor; and
      (11)   Standard meter replacement: current cost of product.
(Ord. 2024-11, passed 12-10-2024)
OPERATION OF UTILITIES
§ 50.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The Administrator of the Village of New Richmond.
   COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. Includes all non-resident public and private,
charitable or non-charitable, establishment or institutions served by the
village. The words COMMERCIAL SERVICE shall mean utility services provided to a
premises occupied by a COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Pertains to the placement of a new residential or non-
residential structure on a parcel within the village requesting the utilization
of the village’s water and or sewage service.
   OCCUPIED STRUCTURE. Any house, building, rental unit, outbuilding or other
structure, or shelter, or any portion thereof, to which any of the following
applies:
      (1)   It is maintained as a permanent or temporary dwelling, even though
it is temporarily unoccupied and whether or not any person is actually present;
and/or
      (2)   At the time, it is occupied as the permanent or temporary
habitation of any person, whether or not any person is actually present.
   PERSON. Includes individuals, partnerships, corporations and other forms of
organization.
   PREMISES. Land or buildings (including mobile homes or house trailers, where
applicable) or both, or parts of or both, receiving residence service and or
commercial establishment.
   RESIDENT. The head of a family and dependents or one maintaining his or her
separated living quarters on premises and shall include owners, tenants and
occupants of premises served by the village. The word RESIDENTIAL SERVICE shall
mean utility services provided to a premises occupied by a RESIDENT.
   RENTAL UNIT. Any house, building, outbuilding or other structure, or
shelter, or any portion thereof, to which all of the following applies:
      (1)   It is maintained as a permanent or temporary dwelling by a renter,
even though there may be times when it is temporarily unoccupied and even if no
rent is paid; and
      (2)   It serves as the permanent or temporary habitat of any person for
any period of time.
   SEASONAL CUSTOMER. Multiple unit users which annually utilize the village’s
water and sewer services for a period of six months or less.
   UNAUTHORIZED SERVICE. Connection, re-connection, meter tampering or use of
one or more utility services without authorization of the village.
   UTILITIES. The utilities services supplied by the village, and includes
water, sewer, garbage collection and any subsequent services established by
ordinance.
   UTILITIES APPLICANT. Any person applying for one or more utility services
provided by the village.
   UTILITIES CUSTOMER. Any residence or commercial establishment using
utilities services provided by the village.
   VILLAGE. The Village of New Richmond, Ohio.
(Prior Code, § 117.01) (Ord. 2013-4, passed 3-12-2013; Ord. 2014-15, passed 5-
27-2014)
§ 50.16 SEPARATE UTILITIES CUSTOMERS.
   (A)   Each residence and each commercial establishment shall be considered a
separate utilities customer notwithstanding that both may occupy the same
premises.
   (B)   Each resident shall be charged a residential rate for utilities
services and each commercial establishment shall be charged a commercial rate
for utilities services.
   (C)   Council may establish minimum rates for multiple utility customers
served by a single utility line or meter MULTIPLE USE CUSTOMER for the purposes
of this section and any rate ordinance shall include, but not be limited to,
apartment buildings, schools, mobile home parks, churches, hospitals,
commercial buildings with more than one use within a building.
   (D)   Each premises, as defined herein, shall require separate utility
connections. Said provision shall be in effect even for units located on the
same parcel.
(Prior Code, § 117.02) (Ord. 2013-4, passed 3-12-2013; Ord. 2023-05, passed 4-
11-2023)
§ 50.17 APPLICATION FOR UTILITIES SERVICES.
   (A)   Each applicant for utilities service shall make application for such
service on a form to be furnished by the Administrator.
   (B)   The Administrator may require proof of identification of any applicant
for utilities service and may require the applicant to furnish the
identification of all persons residing in the residential premises to be served
or all persons having an interest in the commercial premises to be served.
   (C)   The application shall be signed by the applicant or by a duly
authorized representative of the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 117.03) (Ord. 2013-4, passed 3-12-2013)
§ 50.18 DENIAL OF UTILITIES SERVICE.
   The Administrator may deny utilities service if:
   (A)   The premises to be served has an outstanding utility balance to the
village;
   (B)   The utilities applicant has a delinquent utility bill owing to the
village incurred at a prior premises; and/or
   (C)   The Administrator determines, based solely on the village’s past
experience with the utility applicant (or another adult resident of the utility
applicant’s household as listed on the application), that the utility applicant
is not a good credit risk; provided, however, that the Administrator shall not
deny utilities service to such applicant if the utility applicant:
      (1)   Makes an additional deposit for the utilities services sought in an
amount not to exceed three times the regular deposit; and/or
      (2)   Otherwise establishes, to the satisfaction of the Administrator,
that the applicant’s credit history has substantially improved since the time
of the past experience of the Administrator’s basis for denial.
(Prior Code, § 117.04) (Ord. 2013-4, passed 3-12-2013)
§ 50.19 DEPOSITS FOR NEW NON-OWNER OCCUPIED UTILITIES CUSTOMERS.
   (A)   The Administrator shall charge each non-owner occupied utilities
customer a deposit for each service provided by the village.
   (B)   The deposit charged and collected by the Administrator shall be
maintained as a separate identifiable account under the supervision and control
of the Fiscal Officer.
   (C)   The deposit may be applied to the payment of any arrears in the
utilities customer’s account and, in the event the utilities customer is
receiving more than one utilities service, the deposit may be applied to the
payment of an arrears for a utilities service other than the specific service
for which the deposit was made. The deposit may also be applied to cover any
damage to any utilities equipment caused by the negligent of intentional act of
the utilities customer any person under his or her control.
   (D)   The deposits to be charged and collected by the Administrator shall be
set by the utility rate ordinances.
   (E)   Upon voluntary disconnect or termination of utilities services to a
utilities customer, the deposit shall be refunded, upon surrender of the
utilities customer deposit receipt, to the person in whose name the account is
carried or to such person’s duly authorized representative, upon satisfactory
proof of identity, provided however, that the deposit shall be first applied to
any arrears which may exist in such utilities customer’s account and no refund
shall be made until such time as it is determined that no such arrears exists.
If a utilities customer is unable to produce a receipt, the Administrator may,
upon satisfactory proof of identity, require the utilities customer to sign a
statement that the utilities deposit receipt has been lost.
(Prior Code, § 117.05) (Ord. 2013-4, passed 3-12-2013)
§ 50.20 VOLUNTARY SERVICE DISCONNECT OR SHUT OFF.
   (A)   The Administrator shall disconnect utility service to any premises
only at the request of the person in whose name the account is carried or at
the request of such person’s duly authorized representative and upon
satisfactory proof of identity.
   (B)   Service disconnect/re-connect requested by customer shall be charged a
fee for service request.
(Prior Code, § 117.11) (Ord. 2013-4, passed 3-12-2013; Ord. 2023-05, passed 4-
11-2023)
§ 50.21 INVOLUNTARY SERVICE DISCONNECT.
   (A)   The Administrator may disconnect all utility service to any premises
if the utilities account, or any part thereof, for the proceeding month have
not been paid by the due date of the current month as indicated per §
50.41.
   (B)   The Administrator may disconnect all utility service to a premises if
it is determined that the utilities customer has supplied false, inaccurate or
misleading information on the application for utilities service.
   (C)   No utility service shall be terminated by the village on any day
preceding a weekend or holiday. No utility service shall be reactivated during
non-village business hours.
   (D)   Once a service has been disconnected, the full account balance and re-
connect charges must be paid in full by cash, money order or charge card,
before services will be re-connected.
(Prior Code, § 117.12) (Ord. 2013-4, passed 3-12-2013; Ord. 2013-28, passed 11-
12-2013)
§ 50.22 SERVICE RE-CONNECT CHARGE.
   (A)   The Administrator may establish a schedule of charges for re-
connection of utility services.
   (B)   The Administrator may also establish a schedule of charges for
unauthorized re-connection of service. Such charges shall not preclude criminal
prosecution for theft of services.
(Prior Code, § 117.13) (Ord. 2013-4, passed 3-12-2013)
§ 50.23 REQUEST FOR REVIEW.
   (A)   The Administrator or person designated, in writing, by the
Administrator, shall have the authority to review charges to utility customers
and to have final authority to settle or compromise disputed accounts of less
than $100 as a result of errors, omissions or other related matters.
   (B)   The Administrator shall, when requested by the utility customer, shall
review disputed accounts over $100 and other causes for termination.
   (C)   The utility customer shall have a right to be represented at any
review, have reasonable access to the records of the village and have a right
to personally address the Administrator or his or her representative.
(Prior Code, § 117.16) (Ord. 2013-4, passed 3-12-2013)
§ 50.24 UTILITY CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   All new utility connections shall be charged a utility connection fee
per the current rate schedule adopted by Village Council at the time of their
application, as defined in §
50.15.
   (B)   Special payments provisions may be arranged with the Village
Administrator and the concurrence of Village Council.
   (C)   Multiple units now utilizing single water meters are encouraged to be
separated so that each unit is placed on an individual meter. Applicants
requesting separation of units are required to complete a utility connection
application and will be charged for materials only and will not be charged a
connection fee.
   (D)   Existing sanitary sewer connections may be utilized without the
required connection fee provided that it is determined by the Utility
Foreperson that all connections and corresponding piping are satisfactory. All
required upgrades requested by the Utility Foreperson shall be at the sole
expense and responsibility of the customer. The Utility Foreperson may request
videotaping or whatever method he or she deems necessary in determining the
integrity of the existing connections. The customer will also be required to
purchase a new water meter at the pre-determined rate of the village’s utility
office if the previous connection was un-utilized for a period of greater than
three years or if the previous meter was removed. Reutilized utility
connections can not be expanded beyond the number of units previously located
at the property and can not be converted from residential usage to commercial.
   (E)   All utility service discontinued for a period greater than six months,
shall require the replacement of the metering device. Replacement requires the
payment of the metering replacement fee per the current Utility Department fee
schedule.
   (F)   All new and replacement fire hydrants shall be equipped with one,
five-inch Storz quick connect fitting and two, two and one-half inch threaded
fittings having National Standard Thread (NST). Appropriate protective caps
shall be provided.
   (G)   When service has been disconnected or shut off to any village utility
customer the service may not be restored if the property is the subject of any
village orders including nuisance resolutions or designation as an unfit
dwelling place, without the approval of the Village Administrator.
   (H)   Sewer lateral lines shall be installed so that no more than four feet
of the line is covered by anything other than soil on the property. No sewer
lateral line installations will be permitted beneath paved driveways.
(Prior Code, § 117.17) (Ord. 2013-4, passed 3-12-2013)
§ 50.25 UTILITY METERS.
   (A)   (1)   All water line curb box shut off valves will be located in the
planting strip between the back of the curb and the sidewalk.
      (2)   In cases where no sidewalk or curb exists, installation will be at
the discretion and direction of the Village Utilities Foreperson.
      (3)   No water service line installations will be permitted beneath paved
driveways.
   (B)   (1)   All water meter pits will be installed within 12 feet of the
back edge of the curb.
      (2)   In cases where no sidewalk or curb exist installation will be at
the discretion and direction of the Village Utilities Foreperson.
   (C)   All meter pits will be equipped with frost lids.
   (D)   All meter pits will be installed so that the top of the meter pit is
at finished grade.
   (E)   The setter in the meter pit shall be installed at such height as to
allow the top of the meter to be within six inches of the frost lid lip.
(Ord. 2013-4, passed 3-12-2013)
UTILITY BILLS
§ 50.40 ITEMIZATION AND AMOUNT.
   Each utility bill shall itemize the utility service provided and shall
indicate an amount, known as the GROSS AMOUNT, which shall be the total amount
for all utility services provided. Each utility bill shall also indicate an
amount, known as the NET AMOUNT, which shall be the total amount for all
utility services less 10%.
(Prior Code, § 117.06) (Ord. 2013-4, passed 3-12-2013)
§ 50.41 BILLING AND PAYMENT DATES.
   (A)   Bills for utilities service shall be calculated and mailed monthly by
the Administrator to the Utility customers on or about the first day of each
month.
   (B)   Each utility bill shall be clearly marked with a net payment amount
which shall be due by the fifteenth day of each month and a gross payment
amount which shall be due after the fifteenth day of each month. All bills
which are in arrears will be stamped “Service will be discontinued unless paid
in full by the 15th”.
   (C)   Residents of the Grays Lane/Robin Hill service area shall be billed
bi-monthly with a due date of the fifteenth of every other month. All other
conditions of division (B) above remain applicable.
   (D)   In the event it is not possible for the Administrator to mail such
utility bills or provide for payment thereof in any given month as specified in
divisions (A) and (B) above, the dates and time periods specified therein may
be altered or amended on a month by month basis by the Administrator. The
Administrator shall exercise discretion to achieve the most equitable result,
given all the circumstance known to the Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 117.07) (Ord. 2013-4, passed 3-12-2013; Ord. 2023-05, passed 4-
11-2023)
§ 50.42 PAYMENTS, DISHONORED CHECKS.
   (A)   Net payment of utility bills shall be made on or before the due date
marked on the utility bill. If paid after such date, the gross amount shall be
paid.
   (B)   Payment by check on or before the due date shall be considered timely
subject to such check being honored by the drawer’s bank.
   (C)   Any check not honored by the drawer’s bank upon presentation thereof
for collection shall result in a bad check charge being added to such utilities
customer’s account and, if such bad check charge is not immediately paid, it
shall be considered an arrears in such utilities customer’s account.
(Prior Code, § 117.08) (Ord. 2013-4, passed 3-12-2013)
§ 50.43 PARTIAL PAYMENT; INTEREST.
   (A)   The Administrator may reject partial payments or payment for less than
all utility services provided.
   (B)   In the event partial payment for utility services is made by any
utilities customer and accepted by the village, such payment shall be applied
to the account in the following order of priority:
      (1)   Fees charged to the account for dishonored and returned checks;
      (2)   Re-connection and disconnection fees charged to the utilities
customer, including unauthorized connections;
      (3)   Accrued interest charged to the account;
      (4)   To any arrearage for water service;
      (5)   To the current billing for water service;
      (6)   To any arrearage for garbage collection;
      (7)   To the current bill for garbage collection;
      (8)   To any arrearage for sewer service;
      (9)   To the current billing for sewer service; and
      (10)   Upon written authority of the Administrator, the Village Clerk
shall charge interest on unpaid utility bills beginning from the first day of
the first month following the due date of such bill. Interest shall be
uniformly charged on all past due accounts.
(Prior Code, § 117.09) (Ord. 2013-4, passed 3-12-2013)
§ 50.44 OWNER LIABLE.
   (A)   The owner, as well as the lessee or tenant, of any premises to which
utility services are provided by the village, shall be responsible and liable
to the village for all rents and charges for utilities services, including
penalties, interest, disconnect and re-connect charges, in accordance with R.C.
§ 735.29, and, when such rents and charges are not paid when due, the
Administrator may certify them to the County Auditor to be placed on the
duplicate and collected as other villages, taxes, together with interest and
penalties, pursuant to the state statutes.
   (B)   The owner, (or his or her duly authorized representative) as well as
the lessee or tenant of any non-owner occupied premises shall be required to
sign the application for utilities services provided by §
50.17 prior to any utility service being supplied to such premises.
   (C)   The Administrator shall, at the request of the owner of any non-owner
occupied premises, furnish such owner with a statement as to the current status
of the utilities account of such premises. Such statement shall be furnished
within a reasonable time after the request is made and may be given orally. The
Administrator may charge for each report to off set the costs of preparation.
(Prior Code, § 117.10) (Ord. 2013-4, passed 3-12-2013)
§ 50.45 EXTENSIONS.
   Extensions must be requested in writing or by email and shall not be granted
for more than seven days. Failure to pay by requested extension date shall
result in services being disconnected. Customers who fail to pay by requested
extension date and have services disconnected will not be eligible for another
extension during the current year.
(Prior Code, § 117.14) (Ord. 2013-4, passed 3-12-2013; Ord. 2023-05, passed 4-
11-2023)
§ 50.46 ADJUSTMENTS.
   (A)   The Administrator may grant or deny any request for an adjustment to a
utility bill. Adjustments must be made by written request and submitted along
with the proper proof of the repairs that have been made to the Administrator
for review.
   (B)   Adjustments will only be made to the current charges; no prior charges
will receive an adjustment.
   (C)   Swimming pool adjustments shall be made once per calendar year.
Customer must provide size of pool to be kept on record. New pools will also
require a copy of zoning permit.
   (D)   Adjustment requests need to be made by the tenth of each month and
will be denied or granted by the twelfth of each month. Any requests received
after the twelfth will be reviewed the following month.
   (E)   Lawn watering sewer adjustments shall be granted for two months only
to new construction homes establishing new lawns. This adjustment shall not
exceed the amount 1,500 cubic feet each of the two months.
(Prior Code, § 117.15) (Ord. 2013-4, passed 3-12-2013; Ord. 2023-05, passed 4-
11-2023)
CHAPTER 51: SEWERS
Section
   
51.01   Definitions
   
51.02   Nonacceptable wastewater and industrial pretreatment
   
51.03   Use of public sewers
   
51.04   Wastewater monitoring and public inspection
   
51.05   Protection from accidental discharge
   
51.06   Interceptors
 
   
51.99   Penalty
   
Appx. A: Installation diagrams
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of a building and conveys it to the building sewer beginning
three feet outside the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
   COMBINED SEWER. Intended to receive both wastewater and storm or surface
water.
   COMMERCIAL. Retail or wholesale business establishments that discharge
WASTEWATER, as defined in this section, into the public wastewater treatment
system, works and facility.
   FOUNDATION DRAINS. Subsurface drains laid around the foundation of a
building, either within or outside the building foundation, for the purpose of
carrying ground or subsurface water to some point of disposal.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food and from the commercial handling, storage and sale of
produce.
   INDUSTRIAL. Includes users discharging waste resulting from manufacturing
activities involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or
substances into other products. These activities occur in establishments
usually described as plants, factories or mills and characteristically use
power-driven machines and material handling equipment.
   INSTITUTIONAL/GOVERNMENTAL. Hospitals, nursing homes, schools, city, county,
state or federal buildings or facilities that discharge wastewater into the
public wastewater treatment system, works and facility.
   MAY. Is permissive.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows,
into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface groundwater.
   NPDES (NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM) PERMIT. Shall mean
the same as such is defined in the Code of Federal Regulations, and in Pub. Law
No. 92-500, § 402.
   NONSANITARY FLOW. Storm water originating from downspouts, storm and
groundwater drains and foundation drains.
   PUBLIC SEWER. Any sewer owned by the village, including storm, sanitary or
combined sewers.
   RESIDENTIAL. A principal family residence or habitation classified as a
single-family, multi-family or apartment dwelling that discharges domestic
sanitary wastewater having characteristics of 250 milligrams per liter
biochemical oxygen demand and 200 milligrams per liter suspended solids into
the public wastewater treatment system, works and facility.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sanitary and industrial wastes, and to
which storm, surface and groundwater are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. The combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions (including
polluted cooling water).
   SEWAGE SYSTEM. The structures, equipment and process required to collect,
transport and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent
and accumulated residual solids and shall be synonymous with WASTEWATER
TREATMENT SYSTEM.
   SHALL. Is mandatory.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any
given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration
longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24 hours concentration
of flows during normal operation.
   STORM SYSTEM. A pipe or conduit designed for the purpose of carrying storm,
surface, cooling and drainage water from the point of origin to some point of
disposal, but which is not intended to carry domestic or industrial sewage.
   USER. Any person who discharges, causes or permits the discharge of
wastewater into the wastewater treatment system.
   VILLAGE. The Village of New Richmond, Ohio, acting through its duly
authorized officials and employees.
   WASTEWATER. The liquid and water-carried waste from dwellings, commercial
buildings, industrial facilities and institutions, together with any
groundwater, surface water, or storm water that may be present, whether treated
or untreated, which is discharged or permitted to enter the wastewater
treatment system.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM. The structures, equipment and process required
to collect, transport, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of
the effluent and accumulated residual solids and shall be synonymous with
SEWAGE SYSTEM.
(Prior Code, § 51.01) (Ord. 1994-16, passed 6-14-1994; Ord. 2006-13, passed 4-
25-2006)
§ 51.02 NONACCEPTABLE WASTEWATER AND INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT.
   (A)   The village shall make and enforce rules and regulations establishing
the types and characteristics of sewage, industrial wastes, and other matters
which shall be discharged into the sanitary sewerage system, the types and
characteristics of sewage and industrial wastes admissible to the system only
after pretreatment, and otherwise governing the discharge of sewage, industrial
wastes and other matters into the system in the interest of safety and
efficient operation of the wastewater treatment plant. Applicable industrial
pretreatment conditions and industrial pretreatment regulations, as promulgated
under § 307(b) of the Clean Water Act, are incorporated in this chapter and
made a part thereof.
   (B)   An industry must, upon application for sewer service, present to the
village a tabulation of the chemical analysis of the wastes to be discharged to
sewerage system and the volume of such wastes, or if this is not available, the
expected waste analysis based on similar processes now in operation.
   (C)   In cases where the character of sewage or industrial waste from any
manufacturing or industrial plant, building or premises is such that it will
damage the sewerage system or cannot be treated satisfactorily at the
wastewater treatment plant, the village shall compel such users to dispose of
such waste and prevent it from entering the sewerage system.
   (D)   In cases where the character of the sewage or industrial waste from
any manufacturing or industrial plant, building or premises is such that it
imposes an unreasonable burden upon the sewage collection, pumping or treatment
works greater than that imposed by the average sewage entering the sewerage
system, the village may compel such manufacturing or industrial plant, building
or premises to pretreat such sewage in such manner as specified by the village
before discharging it into the sewerage system; require flow control or
equalization of such wastes so as to avoid any “slug” loads or excessive loads
that may be harmful to the treatment works; or require payment of a surcharge
on any excessive flows or loadings discharged to the treatment works to cover
the additional costs of having capacity for and treating such wastes.
   (E)   (1)   The discharge of nonacceptable industrial wastewater into the
sewerage system, whether directly or indirectly, is prohibited. Wastewater
shall be deemed nonacceptable when the concentration of harmful or toxic
substances in the wastewater exceeds certain prescribed tolerable limits. Toxic
or harmful substances include, but are not necessarily limited to, the
following:
Toxic or Harmful Substance Tolerable Limits
Toxic or Harmful Substance Tolerable Limits
Arsenic                    0.2 mg/l
Barium                     1.0 mg/l
Boron                      5.0 mg/l
Cadmium                    0.1 mg/l
Chromium +3                0.5 mg/l
Chromium +6                0.5 mg/l
Cobalt                     1.0 mg/l
Copper                     0.5 mg/l
Cyanide (HCN)              0.5 mg/l
Fluoride                   5.0 mg/l
Iron                       5.0 mg/l
Lead                       0.5 mg/l
Mercury                    0.2 mg/l
Molybdenum                 5.0 mg/l
Nickel                     2.0 mg/l
Phenols                    5.0 mg/l
                           Gross Beta activity (in the known absence of
Radioactive substances     strontium and Alpha emitters) - 1,000 micra micro
                           curies per liter
Selenium                   0.1 mg/l
Silver                     0.03 mg/l
Sulfides                   50.0 mg/l
Tungsten                   5.0 mg/l
Zinc                       2.0 mg/l
Total dissolved solids     1,500.0 mg/l
 
      (2)   The preceding list of harmful substances is subject to revisions as
required to meet current water quality standards or effluent standards imposed
by state or federal agencies. In special cases (low volume users), the
concentration of toxic or harmful substances in the wastewater may be exceeded
if it is determined by the village that the total pounds of toxic or harmful
substances discharged to the sewage system are not harmful to or will not
interfere with the sewage treatment process or will not violate water quality
effluent standards.
   (F)   (1)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, either
directly or indirectly to the sewerage system, any of the following described
substances, materials, waters or wastes:
         (a)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F;
         (b)   Any gasoline, benzene, naptha, fuel, oil, mineral oil or other
volatile flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas;
         (c)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or malodorous gas or substance
which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, is capable of
creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing entry into the
sewers for their maintenance and repair;
         (d)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than
9.0, or having any other corrosive property of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment or personnel of the sewerage system;
         (e)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass,
rags, feathers, tar, wood, punch manure, hair and fleshing, entrails, lime
slurry, lime, chemical or paint residues, cannery wastes, bulk solids or any
other solid objects or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the
flow operation of the sewerage system;
         (f)   Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance
in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewerage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the
receiving waters of the sewerage system;
         (g)   Any water or wastes containing emulsified oil or grease
exceeding, on analysis, an average of 50 milligrams of oil and grease per liter
determined as total soluble matter;
         (h)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded to a degree that
all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions of the sewer and
with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension;
         (i)   Any water or wastes containing suspended solids of such
character or quality that unusual attention or expense is required to handle
such materials at the sewage treatment plant, or having a chlorine demand
greater than 25 parts per million; and/or
         (j)   Any waste containing substances that would result in a violation
of the NPDES permit.
      (2)   The list in division (F)(1) above is subject to revisions as
required to meet current water quality standards imposed by the state or
federal agencies.
   (G)   No statement contained in this section shall be interpreted as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the village and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the village for treatment. In all such cases, the provisions
set forth in the village ordinance establishing sewer service charges will be
governing factors in any contracts entered into.
   (H)   (1)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the village, they are necessary for proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand and other
harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be located as
to be ready and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
      (2)   Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature.
They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily
removable covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight.
Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by
the owner at his or her expense, in continuous efficient operation at all
times.
(Prior Code, § 51.02) (Ord. 1994-16, passed 6-14-1994; Ord. 2006-13, passed 4-
25-2006) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.03 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to discharge into any natural outlet within the
village, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said village, any wastewater
or other polluted waters.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault,
septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of
wastewater without first obtaining the required permits from the village.
   (C)   No person, firm or corporation shall discharge of cause to be
discharged any storm water, groundwater roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
cooling water or unpolluted, industrial water to any sanitary sewer.
   (D)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to discharge into the building sanitary
sewer the surface water, which collects in basement or foundation excavations.
      (2)   If the building sanitary sewer is complete before the plumbing can
be connected thereto, the builder or sewer tapper shall keep the end of the
building sanitary sewer tightly closed with a plumber’s plug or other
watertight plug.
   (E)   The owner(s) of all houses, buildings or other properties used for
human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the
village and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now
located, or may in the future be located, a public sanitary or combined sewer
of the village, is required, at the owner’s expense, to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly to the proper
public sewer in accordance with the rules and regulations within 30 days after
date of official notice to do so; provided, the foundation wall of the
structure from which sewage or other wastes originated is less than 200 feet
from the nearest boundary of the right-of-way within which the sewer is
located.
   (F)   No person, firm or corporation shall be permitted to connect to or
discharge wastewater to the village sewage system unless it has been determined
by the village that there is sufficient capacity in the system to collect,
convey and treat the proposed wastewater discharge of such person, firm or
corporation.
   (G)   All new or replacement sanitary sewer connections discharging to the
village wastewater treatment plant, which don’t fall under the requirements of
the village’s subdivision regulations; shall be constructed in accordance with
Appendix A of the ordinance codified herein. Prior to installation of a new or
replacement sewer connection as detailed in the aforementioned, approval from
the Village Administrator, or his or her designee, is required.
(Prior Code, § 51.03) (Ord. 2011-20, passed 10-25-2011) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.04 WASTEWATER MONITORING AND PUBLIC INSPECTION.
   (A)   All industrial users who discharge or propose to discharge wastewaters
to the wastewater treatment system shall maintain such records of production
and related factors, effluent flows and pollutant amounts and concentrations of
such that are necessary to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this
chapter and any applicable state or federal pretreatment standards or
requirements.
   (B)   Such records shall be made available upon request by the village. All
such records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made
available to officials of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA)
upon demand.
   (C)   If so ordered by the village, the owner or operator of any premises or
facility discharging industrial wastes into the system shall install at his or
her own cost and expense suitable monitoring equipment to facilitate the
accurate observation, sampling and measurement of wastes. Such equipment shall
be maintained in proper working order and kept safe and accessible at all
times.
   (D)   The monitoring equipment shall be located and maintained on the
industrial user’s premises outside of the building. When such a location would
be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, the village may allow such
a facility to be constructed in the public right-of-way, with the approval of
the public agency having jurisdiction of such right-of-way, and located so that
it will not be obstructed by public utilities, landscaping or parked vehicles.
   (E)   When more than one user can discharge into a common sewer, the village
may require installation of separate monitoring equipment for each user. When
there is a significant difference in wastewater constituents and
characteristics produced by different operations of a single user, the village
may require that separate monitoring facilities be installed for each
discharge.
   (F)   Whether constructed on public or private property, the monitoring
facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the village requirements and
all applicable construction standards and specifications.
   (G)   Compliance determinations with respect to the prohibitions and
limitations stated in §
51.02 may be made on the basis of either instantaneous grab samples or
composite samples of wastewater. Composite samples may be taken over a 24-hour
period, or over a longer or shorter time span, as determined necessary by the
village, in order to meet the needs of specific circumstances.
   (H)   Laboratory analysis of industrial wastewater samples shall be
performed in accordance with the current edition of “Standard Methods”,
“Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Waste”, published by the U.S. EPA,
or the “Annual Book of Standards, Part 23, Water, Atmospheric Analysis”,
published by the American Society for Testing and Materials. Analysis of those
pollutants not covered by these publications shall be performed in accordance
with procedures established by the State Environmental Protection Agency (State
EPA). In addition, all measurement, tests and analysis of the characteristics
of wastewater shall also be made in conformance with the October 16, 1975
Federal Register (40 C.F.R. part 136) entitled “Guidelines for Establishing
Test Procedures for the Analysis of Pollutants”.
   (I)   Sampling of industrial wastewater for the purpose of compliance
determination, with respect to the prohibitions and limitations stated in §
51.02, will be done at such intervals as designated by the village.
   (J)   Duly authorized employees of the village bearing proper credentials
and identifications shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes
of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to
discharge to the community system in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (K)   Duly authorized village employees are authorized to obtain information
concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the wastewater collection system. The industry may
withhold information considered confidential; provided, that the industry
establishes that revealing such information to the public might result in an
advantage to competitors.
   (L)   While performing necessary work for private properties, referred to in
division (J) above, the village, or duly authorized employees of the village,
shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises.
(Prior Code, § 51.04) (Ord. 1994-16, passed 6-14-1994; Ord. 2006-13, passed 4-
25-2006) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.05 PROTECTION FROM ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE.
   (A)   Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental
discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this chapter.
Facilities to prevent accidental discharge or prohibited materials shall be
provided and maintained at the owner’s or operator’s own cost and expense.
Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this
protection shall be submitted to the village for review, and shall be approved
by the village before construction of the facility. Review and approval of such
plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the
responsibility to modify his or her facility to meet the requirements of this
chapter.
   (B)   If, for any reason, a facility does not comply with or will be unable
to comply with any prohibition or limitations in this chapter, the facility
responsible for such discharge shall immediately notify the village so that
corrective action may be taken to protect the treatment system. In addition, a
written report addressed to the village detailing the date, time and cause of
the accidental discharge; the quantity and characteristics of the discharges,
shall be filed by the responsible industrial facility with five days of the
occurrence of the noncomplying discharge.
(Prior Code, § 51.05) (Ord. 1994-16, passed 6-14-1994; Ord. 2006-13, passed 4-
25-2006) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.06 INTERCEPTORS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   (a)   Interceptors shall be provided, operated and maintained
whenever liquid or liquid wastes are received by the plumbing system which may
contain flammable, explosive, noxious, toxic, gaseous, corrosive or other
materials that may be hazardous to the building or its occupants, or that may
be harmful to the building drainage system, the wastewater system, sewage
treatment plant or its processes. Deleterious and detrimental materials
include, but are not limited to, greases, oils, sugars, paraffin or other
waxes, plastic wastes, paints and other coatings, sands, silts, clays and
similar earthly materials and will be intercepted and prevented from entering
the wastewater system.
         (b)   Businesses operating within a permanent structure(s) which are
licensed as retail food establishment (RFE), food service operation (FSO) or
temporary food service operation (FSO) operating seven consecutive days or
greater than 52 days a year shall discharge through an interceptor before
entering the public sewer system.
      (2)   Wastes from industrial processes, meat packing and food processing
industries and similar processing plants shall be handled in accordance with
plans and specifications approved by the State Environmental Protection Agency,
or the proper authority in charge of the sewage system into which the wastes
are to be discharged. The plans and specifications submitted for approval shall
include a full description of the wastes, their characteristics and volume. The
system shall be approved by the proper authority before any work or
construction is begun.
      (3)   Corrosive wastes shall be treated as provided in O.A.C. Rule 4101:
2-63-04.
      (4)   Interceptors may be pre-built or engineered units, or they may be
constructed or assembled at the site of the work and shall be designed and
installed in accordance with the accepted engineering practice.
      (5)   Where pre-built units are used, they shall be sized and installed
in accordance with the manufacturers specifications, drawing and instruction
for the intended service.
      (6)   All interceptors shall be of such capacity and volume as to retain
the liquid for a sufficient length of time to permit the deleterious and
detrimental materials to separate from the other wastes before they are
discharged into the building drain or sewer. If necessary, strainers shall be
installed, to retain and collect solid materials, one-half inch or larger in
any dimension.
      (7)   Interceptors shall be located so as to be readily accessible at all
times. All materials removed shall be disposed of in a manner that will not
permit them to enter the sewage system or wastewater plant.
      (8)   Where flammable, toxic, noxious or gaseous wastes which may be
hazardous to the building or its occupants are received by the interceptor, the
cover shall be non-absorbant, be bolted and gasketed, so as to make it
gastight.
      (9)   Where non-hazardous wastes are received by the interceptor, a solid
cover of sufficient weight to hold it in its frame or secured by suitable
fasteners shall be used. If in an area that water may pond or in a parking or
paved area, the cover shall be non-absorbant, be bolted and gasketed so no
liquids may enter the interceptor.
      (10)   Interceptors shall be constructed of suitable impervious materials
not affected by the wastes received. The interceptor shall be designed to
withstand the internal pressures and external forces to which it may be
subjected in any part of the interceptor. All piping and metals shall resist
corrosion to the same degree that soil and waste piping resist ordinary sewage
waste.
   (B)   Oil interceptors.
      (1)   Oil interceptors required. At repair garages; gasoline stations and
oil service facilities with grease racks; car washing facilities; and at
factories where oily and/or flammable liquid wastes are produced or used,
separators shall be installed into which all oil-bearing, grease-bearing or
flammable wastes shall be discharged before emptying into the building drainage
system or other point of disposal. Wastes from interceptors shall not be
discharged into any street, alley or onto the surface of the ground.
      (2)   Separation of liquids. A mixture of treated or untreated light and
heavy liquids with various specific gravities shall be separated in an approved
receptacle.
      (3)   Oil separator design. Site-built oil interceptor conforming with
the following prima facie evidence conforming to accepted engineering practice.
Oil separator shall be designed as follows.
         (a)   The interceptor shall be of sufficient size to retain the
materials and volumes of liquids and separated materials.
         (b)   The horizontal cross-sectional area of the interceptor shall be
at least 24 inches in diameter. There shall be at least 12 inches of
ventilating space above the invert of the inlet.
         (c)   The top of the outlet shall be at least 24 inches below the
invert of the inlet. The outlet shall rise adjacent to and external to the
interceptor to the outlet drain where a double tee or cross-fitting with the
run vertical shall connect to the outlet riser and the outlet drain line. The
top of the cross and the backside of the cross shall extend upward to grade
level where a clean-out plug of same size shall be installed.
         (d)   The interceptor shall have a depth at least 12 inches below the
invert of the outlet in the wall of the interceptor receiver and more if
necessary to retain the intercepted materials between cleanings.
         (e)   The outlet of the interceptor shall be at least four inches in
diameter. The outlet drain shall be vented as per the State Plumbing Code.
         (f)   The venting space in the receiver shall be vented by at least a
three-inch vent extending up from all other vents through the roof. Wash sinks
that are trapped in the service area may be permitted to discharge into the
local vent from the interceptor.
      (4)   Sizing of interceptors. Sizing of interceptors shall be based on
the liquid depth, which is the effective volume.
         (a)   Interceptors shall have a minimum capacity of five cubic feet
for the first 100 square feet of area to be drained, plus one cubic foot for
each additional 100 square feet of area to be drained into the separator.
         (b)   Interceptors for mechanical car washing installations shall be
designed on the volumes of water and wastes produced and the rates of flow
thereof.
   (C)   Grease interceptors.
      (1)   Grease interceptors for kitchen wastes shall be installed so that
they will receive all grease bearing kitchen wastes. The county’s sewer
regulations do not permit discharge of garbage disposal into the sewer system.
Grease interceptors shall be installed immediately outside the building where
there is easy access for cleaning. If outside installation is physically
prohibitive, a variance may be applied for through the authority having
jurisdiction.
      (2)   The grease interceptor shall be cleaned frequently and cleaned as
often as necessary to retain the grease wastes. The sewer district having
jurisdiction may require scavenger hauler tickets if grease is detected through
discharge into the sewer system. The materials removed in cleaning shall be
removed from the premises for disposal and not be deposited in the plumbing
system. The use of enzymes for the cleaning of grease interceptors is not
permitted.
      (3)   (a)   Pre-built interceptors eight feet in length or longer must be
equipped with openings at least 24 inches in diameter and located over the
inlet and the outlet baffles. Sizing shall conform to the U.S. EPA “Design
Manual for Onsite Waste Water Treatment and Disposal Systems”, or with accepted
engineering practice.
         (b)   The top of the outlet shall be at least 24 inches below the
invert of the inlet. The outlet shall rise adjacent to and external to the
interceptor to the outlet drain where a double tree or cross fitting with the
run vertical shall connect to the outlet riser and the outlet drain line. The
top of the cross and backside of the cross shall extend upward to grade level
where a clean-out plug of same size shall be installed.
      (4)   Grease traps installed adjacent to equipment capable of 50 gallons
per minute flow or less must conform to “PDI G-101 Standards”.
      (5)   All valves and devices included in the design of the grease
interceptors to prevent grease discharge from the interceptor shall be
installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.
      (6)   Grease interceptors are not required on apartments or kitchenette
wastes.
   (D)   Sand interceptors.
      (1)   Discharge containing sand, dirt solids or semi-solids harmful to a
drainage system shall discharge through a sand interceptor.
      (2)   Sand intercepts shall be a minimum 24 inches square with not less
than two-foot depth of sand storage below the discharge drain line.
      (3)   The inlet and outlet piping shall be a minimum three inches in
diameter. The inverts shall be at the same level.
      (4)   Baffles or tees with a turndown tailpiece providing a four-inch
minimum water seal shall be installed. However, when the sand interceptor
discharges through an oil interceptor, such as in car washes, the baffles or
turndown tailpiece shall not be installed in the sand interceptor, but shall be
installed in the oil interceptor at the inlet pipe.
      (5)   The top of the sand interceptor shall be covered with a removable
open grating set flush with the finished floor and shall be designed in
accordance with the floor loads requirements of the Building Code.
   (E)   Special use interceptors. Bottling plan wastes shall be discharged
into an interceptor capable of separating broken glass or other solids before
discharging liquid wastes into the draining system.
   (F)   Enforcement. All enforcement of the provisions of this section shall
be completed by the County Health District during plan review.
(Prior Code, § 51.06) (Ord. 2006-13, passed 4-25-2006)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whenever the village finds that any person has violated or is
violating any prohibition, limitation or provision of this chapter, they may
serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days, for a satisfactory
correction thereof. Such notice shall also state that any person in violation
of this chapter shall be liable for any resulting damages or applicable fines.
   (B)   If the violation is not corrected by timely compliance, the village
may order any person who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to show
cause before the Public Works Committee (PWC) why service should not be
terminated. A notice shall be served on the offending party, specifying the
time and place of a hearing to be held by the PWC regarding the violation, and
directing the offending party to show cause before the PWC why an order should
not be made directing the termination of service. The notice of the hearing
shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt
requested) at least 20 days before the hearing. Service may be made on any
agent or officer of a corporation.
   (C)   The PWC may, itself, conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may
designate any of its members or any officer or employee of the village to:
      (1)   Issue, in the name of PWC, notices of hearings requesting the
attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant
to any matter involved in any such hearings;
      (2)   Take the evidence; and/or
      (3)   Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the PWC for
action thereon.
   (D)   At any public hearing, testimony taken before the PWC or an person
designated by it, must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The
transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or
any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges therefor.
   (E)   After the PWC has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the
party responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time
period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities,
devices or other related appurtenances shall have been installed or existing
treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are properly
operated, and such further orders and directives are as necessary and
appropriate.
   (F)   Any discharge in violation of the substantive provisions of this
chapter or an order of the PWC shall be considered a public nuisance. If any
person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the village
treatment system contrary to the substantive provisions of this chapter, or any
order of the PWC, the PWC shall commence an action for appropriate legal and/or
equitable relief in the Village Mayor’s Court.
   (G)   Any person who is found to have violated an order of the PWC, or who
willfully or negligently failed to comply with any provision of this chapter,
and the orders, rules and regulations issued hereunder, shall be fined not less
than $50 nor more than $100 for each offense. Each day on which a violation
shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In
addition to the penalties provided herein, the village may recover reasonable
attorneys’ fees, court costs, court reporters’ fees and other expenses of
litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated
this chapter or the orders, rules and regulations issued hereunder.
   (H)   Any person found guilty by the PWC of violating any provision of this
chapter shall have the right to appeal that decision before the full Village
Council. He or she shall also have all rights of appeal available to them
through the court system.
(Prior Code, § 51.99) (Ord. 1994-16, passed 6-14-1994; Ord. 2006-13, passed 4-
25-2006)
APPENDIX A: INSTALLATION DIAGRAMS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d07f687de8879c907c641da8c51b73c06e07662c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4662.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d07f687de8879c907c641da8c51b73c06e07662c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4664.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d07f687de8879c907c641da8c51b73c06e07662c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4666.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d07f687de8879c907c641da8c51b73c06e07662c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4668.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d07f687de8879c907c641da8c51b73c06e07662c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4670.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d07f687de8879c907c641da8c51b73c06e07662c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4672.jpg]
 
CHAPTER 52: WATER
Section
General Provisions
   
52.01   Water management sediment control regulations adopted by reference
Cross-Connection Control
   
52.15   Purpose
   
52.16   Definitions
   
52.17   Water system
   
52.18   Cross-connections prohibited
   
52.19   Survey and investigations
   
52.20   Where protection is required
   
52.21   Type of protection required
   
52.22   Backflow prevention devices
   
52.23   Installation
   
52.24   Inspection and maintenance
   
52.25   Booster pumps
   
52.26   Violations
   
52.27   Approved backflow prevention devices
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 WATER MANAGEMENT SEDIMENT CONTROL REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The Water Management Sediment Control (WMSC) General Provisions, copies of
which are on file in the office of the Village Clerk, are adopted and
incorporated as part of this code of ordinances as fully as if set out at
length herein.
(Prior Code, § 52.01) (Ord. 2007-33, passed 7-10-2007; Ord. 2018-16, passed 9-
25-2018)
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
§ 52.15 PURPOSE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of these rules and regulations is:
      (1)   To protect the public potable water supply from contamination or
pollution by isolating within the consumer’s water system contamination or
pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the public
potable water system;
      (2)   To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-
connections, actual or potential, between the public or consumer’s potable
water system and non-potable water system, plumbing fixtures and sources or
systems containing process fluids; and
      (3)   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-
connection control which will systematically and effectively prevent the
contamination or pollution of the public and consumer’s potable water systems.
   (B)   Application. These rules and regulations shall apply to all premises
served by the public potable water system of the village.
   (C)   Policy. The Superintendent of Water shall be responsible for the
protection of the public potable water system from contamination due to
backflow of contaminants through the water service connection. If, in the
judgment of the Superintendent of Water, an approved backflow prevention device
is necessary at the water service connection to any consumer’s premises for the
safety of the water system, the Superintendent of Water, or his or her
authorized representative, shall give notice to the consumer to install such
approved backflow prevention device at each service connection to his or her
premises. The consumer shall immediately install such approved device or
devices at his or her own expense, and failure, refusal or inability on the
part of the consumer to install such device or devices immediately shall
constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such
device or devices have been installed.
(Ord. 1991-37, passed 2-11-1992)
§ 52.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIR GAP SEPARATION. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water
to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the flood level rim of the
receptacle.
   APPROVED. A backflow prevention device or method that has been accepted by
the supplier of water and the director as suitable for the proposed use.
   AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM. Any water system on or available to the premises
other than the public water system and includes the water supplied by the
system. These AUXILIARY WATERS may include water from another supplier’s public
water system; or water from a source such as wells, lakes or streams; or
process fluids; or used water. They may be polluted or contaminated or
objectionable or constitute a water source or system over which the supplier of
water does not have control.
   BACKFLOW. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into
the distribution pipes of a potable water supply from any source other than the
intended source of the potable water supply.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. Any device, method or type of construction
intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system.
   CONSUMER. The owner or person in control of any premises supplied by or in
any manner connected to a public water system.
   CONSUMER’S WATER SYSTEM. Any water system, located on the consumer’s
premises, supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water system. A
household plumbing system is considered to be a CONSUMER’S WATER SYSTEM.
   CONTAMINATION. An impairment of the quality of the water by sewage or
process fluid or waste to a degree which could create an actual hazard to the
public health through poisoning or through spread of disease by exposure.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any arrangement whereby backflow can occur.
   DEGREE OF HAZARD. An evaluation of the potential risk to health and the
adverse effect upon the potable water system.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the State Environmental Protection Agency or his
or her duly authorized representative.
   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY. An assembly composed of two single,
independently acting check valves including tightly closing shutoff valves
located at each end of the assembly and suitable connections for testing the
watertightness of each check valve.
   HEALTH HAZARD. Any condition, device or practice in a water system or its
operation that creates, or may create, a danger to the health and well-being of
users. The word SEVERE as used to qualify HEALTH HAZARD means a hazard to the
health of the user that could reasonably be expected to result in significant
morbidity or death.
   INTERCHANGEABLE CONNECTION. An arrangement or device that will allow
alternate, but not simultaneous, use of two sources of water.
   NON-POTABLE WATER. Water not safe for drinking, personal or culinary use.
   PERSON. The state, any political subdivision, public or private corporation,
individual, partnership or other legal entity.
   POLLUTION. The presence in water of any foreign substance that tends to
degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness or
quality of the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard to the
public health but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such waters for
domestic use.
   POTABLE WATER. Water which is satisfactory for drinking, culinary and
domestic purposes and meets the requirements of the State Environmental
Protection Agency.
   PROCESS FLUIDS. Any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically
or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would
constitute a health, pollutional or system hazard if introduced into the public
or a potable consumer’s water system. This includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   Polluted or contaminated waters;
      (2)   Process waters;
      (3)   Used waters originating from the public water system which may have
deteriorate in sanitary quality;
      (4)   Cooling waters;
      (5)   Contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes, streams or
irrigation systems;
      (6)   Chemicals in solution or suspension; and/or
      (7)   Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids
used in industrial or other processes or for fire fighting purposes.
   PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM. Has the meaning ascribed to such term in R.C. §§
6109.01 and 6109.02.
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. A device containing a
minimum of two independently acting check valves together with an automatically
operated pressure differential relief valve located between two check valves.
During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between
these two checks shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of
either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the
atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the check valves at
less than the supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff
valves located at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with
properly located test cocks.
   SERVICE CONNECTION. The terminal end of a service line from the public water
system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service, then the SERVICE
CONNECTION means the downstream end of the meter.
   SUPPLIER OF WATER. The owner or operator of a public water system
   SYSTEM HAZARD. A condition posing an actual or potential threat of damage to
the physical properties of the public water system or a potable consumer’s
water system.
   POLLUTIONAL HAZARD. A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable
or degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water system
or a potable consumer’s water system.
   USED WATER. Any water supplied by a supplier of water from a public water
system to a consumer’s water system after it has passed through the service
connection and is no longer under the control of the supplier.
(Ord. 1991-37, passed 2-11-1992)
§ 52.17 WATER SYSTEM.
   (A)   The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: the
public potable water system and the consumer’s water system.
   (B)   The public potable water system shall consist of the source facilities
and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the
potable water system under the control of the Superintendent of Water up to the
point where the consumer’s water system begins.
   (C)   The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in
the production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to the public
distribution system.
   (D)   The public distribution system shall include the network of conduits
used for delivery of water from the source to the consumer’s water system.
   (E)   The consumer’s water system shall include those parts of the
facilities beyond the service connection which are utilized in conveying water
from the public distribution system to points of use.
(Ord. 1991-37, passed 2-11-1992)
§ 52.18 CROSS-CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No water service connection shall be installed or maintained to any
premises where actual or potential cross-connections to the public potable or
consumer’s water system may exist unless such actual or potential cross-
connections are abated or controlled to the satisfaction of the Superintendent
of Water.
   (B)   No connection shall be installed or maintained whereby water from an
auxiliary water system may enter a public potable or consumer’s water system
unless such auxiliary water system and the method of connection and use of such
system shall have been approved by the Superintendent of Water and by the
Director of the State Environmental Protection Agency as required by R.C. §
6109.13.
(Ord. 1991-37, passed 2-11-1992)
§ 52.19 SURVEY AND INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   The consumer’s premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the
Superintendent of Water, or his or her authorized representative, for the
conduction of surveys and investigations of water use practices within the
consumer’s premises to determine whether there are actual or potential cross-
connections to the consumer’s water system through which contaminants or
pollutants could backflow into the public potable water system.
   (B)   On request by the Superintendent of Water, or his or her authorized
representative, the consumer shall furnish information on water use practices
within his or her premises.
   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to conduct
periodic surveys of water use practices on his or her premises to determine
whether there are actual or potential cross-connection in his or her water
system through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into his or her
or the public potable water system.
(Ord. 1991-37, passed 2-11-1992)
§ 52.20 WHERE PROTECTION IS REQUIRED.
   (A)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer’s water system serving premises where, in the
judgement of the Superintendent of Water or the Director, actual or potential
hazards to the public potable water system exist.
   (B)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer’s water system serving premises where the following
conditions exist:
      (1)   Premises having an auxiliary water system, unless such auxiliary
system is accepted as an additional source by the Superintendent of Water and
the source is approved by the Director of the State Environmental Protection
Agency;
      (2)   Premises on which any substance is handled in such a fashion as to
create an actual or potential hazard to the public potable water system. This
shall include premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or
waters originating from the public potable water system which are no longer
under the sanitary control of the Superintendent of Water;
      (3)   Premises having internal cross-connections that, in the judgement
of the Superintendent of Water, are not correctable, or intricate plumbing
arrangements which make it impractical to determine whether or not cross-
connections exist;
      (4)   Premises where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross-connection survey;
      (5)   Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections being
established or reestablished; and
      (6)   Others specified by the Superintendent of Water or the Director.
   (C)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer’s water system serving, but not necessarily limited
to, the following types of facilities unless the Superintendent of Water or the
Director determines that no actual or potential hazard to the public potable
water system exists:
      (1)   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes;
      (2)   Laboratories;
      (3)   Piers, docks, waterfront facilities;
      (4)   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or stormwater
pumping stations;
      (5)   Food or beverage processing plants;
      (6)   Chemical plants;
      (7)   Metal plating industries;
      (8)   Petroleum processing or storage plants;
      (9)   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors;
      (10)   Car washes; and
      (11)   Others specified by the Superintendent of Water or the Director.
   (D)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed at any point
of connection between the public potable or consumer’s water system and an
auxiliary water system, unless such auxiliary system is accepted as an
additional source by the Superintendent of Water and the source is approved by
the Director of the State Environmental Protection Agency.
(Ord. 1991-37, passed 2-11-1992)
§ 52.21 TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED.
   (A)   The type of protection required under §
52.20(A) through (C) shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists as
follows.
      (1)   An approved air gap separation shall be installed where the public
potable water system may be contaminated with substances that could cause a
severe health hazard.
      (2)   An approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention device or an approved double check valve assembly
shall be installed where the public potable water system may be polluted with
substances that could cause a pollutional hazard not dangerous to health.
   (B)   The type of protection required under §
52.20(D) shall be an approved air gap separation or an approved interchangeable
connection.
   (C)   Where an auxiliary water system is used as a secondary source or water
for a fire protection system, the provisions of division (B) above for an
approved air gap separation or an approved interchangeable connection may not
be required; provided:
      (1)   At premises where the auxiliary water system may be contaminated
with substances that could cause a system or health hazard, the public or
consumer’s potable water system shall be protected against backflow by
installation of an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention
device;
      (2)   At all other premises, the public or consumer’s potable water
system shall be protected against backflow by installation of either an
approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device or an approved
double check valve assembly;
      (3)   The public or consumer’s potable water system shall be the primary
source of water for the fire protection system;
      (4)   The fire protection system shall be normally filled with water from
the public or consumer’s potable water system;
      (5)   The water in the fire protection system shall be used for fire
protection only, with no regular use of water from the fire protection system
downstream from the approved backflow prevention device; and
      (6)   The water in the fire protection system shall contain no additives.
(Ord. 1991-37, passed 2-11-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.22 BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
   (A)   Any backflow prevention device required by these rules and regulations
shall be of a model or construction approved by the Superintendent of Water and
the Director and shall comply with the following.
      (1)   An air gap separation, to be approved, shall be at least twice the
diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically above the top rim of the
vessel, but in no case less than one inch.
      (2)   A double check valve assembly or a reduced pressure principle
backflow prevention device shall be approved by the Superintendent of Water,
and shall appear on the current list of approved backflow prevention devices of
the State Environmental Protection Agency.
      (3)   An interchangeable connection, to be approved, shall be either a
swing type connector or a four-way valve of the lubricated plug type that
operates through a mechanism which unseats the plug, turns it 90 degrees and
reseats the plug. Four-way valves shall not be used as stop valves but must
have separate stop valves on each pipe connected to the valve. The telltale
port on the four-way valve shall have no piping connected, and the threads or
flange on this port shall be destroyed so that a connection cannot be made.
   (B)   Existing backflow prevention devices approved by the Superintendent of
Water or the Director of the State Environmental Protection Agency at the time
of installation and properly maintained shall, except for inspection, testing
and maintenance requirements, be excluded from the requirement of division (A)
above; providing, the Superintendent of Water is assured that they will
satisfactorily protect the public potable water system. Whenever the existing
device is moved from the present location or requires more than minimum
maintenance or when the Superintendent of Water finds that the maintenance of
the device constitutes a hazard to health, the device shall be replaced by a
backflow prevention device meeting the requirements of these regulations.
(Ord. 1991-37, passed 2-11-1992)
§ 52.23 INSTALLATION.
   (A)   Backflow prevention devices required by these rules and regulations
shall be installed at a location and in a manner approved by, and at the
expense of, the water consumer. In addition, any backflow prevention device
required by §
52.21(B) and (C) shall be installed at a location and in a manner approved by
the Director of the State Environmental Protection Agency as required by R.C. §
6109.13.
   (B)   Backflow prevention devices installed on the service line to a
consumer’s water system shall be located on the consumer’s side of the water
meter, as close to the meter as is reasonably practical, and prior to any other
connection.
   (C)   Pits or vaults shall be of watertight construction, be so located and
constructed as to prevent flooding and shall be maintained free from standing
water by means of either a sump pump or a suitable drain. Such sump pump or
drain shall not connect to a sanitary sewer nor permit flooding of the pit or
vault by reverse flow from its point of discharge. An access ladder and
adequate natural or artificial lighting shall be provided to permit maintenance
inspection and testing of the backflow prevention device.
   (D)   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices must be
installed above ground level or floor level, whichever is higher.
(Ord. 1991-37, passed 2-11-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.24 INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow
prevention devices required by these regulations are installed to have
inspections, tests and overhauls made in accordance with the following
schedule, or more often where inspections indicate a need.
      (1)   Air gap separations shall be inspected at the time of installation
and at least every 12 months thereafter.
      (2)   Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested for
tightness at the time of installation and at least every 12 months thereafter.
They shall be dismantled, inspected internally, cleaned and repaired whenever
needed and at least every 30 months.
      (3)   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices shall be
inspected and tested for tightness at the time of installation and at least
every 12 months thereafter. They shall be dismantled, inspected internally,
cleaned and repaired whenever needed and at least every five years.
      (4)   Interchangeable connections shall be inspected at the time of
installation and at least every 12 months thereafter.
   (B)   Inspections, tests and overhauls of backflow prevention devices shall
be made at the expense of the water consumer and shall be performed by the
Superintendent of Water or a person approved by the Superintendent of Water as
qualified to inspect, test and overhaul backflow prevention devices.
   (C)   Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are
found to be defective, they shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the
expense of the consumer without delay.
   (D)   The water consumer must maintain a complete record of each backflow
prevention device from purchase to retirement. This shall include a
comprehensive listing that includes a record of all tests, inspections, repairs
and overhauls. Records of inspections, tests, repairs and overhaul shall be
submitted to the Superintendent of Water.
   (E)   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the
Superintendent of Water.
(Ord. 1991-37, passed 2-11-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.25 BOOSTER PUMPS.
   (A)   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or
within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cut-off
device designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the service
line on the suction side of the pump drops to ten pounds per square inch gauge
or less.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low
pressure cut-off device in proper working order and to certify to the
Superintendent of Water, at least once a year, that the device is operating
properly.
(Ord. 1991-37, passed 2-11-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.26 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The Superintendent of Water shall deny or discontinue, after
reasonable notice to the occupants thereof, the water service to any premises
wherein any backflow prevention device required by these regulations is not
installed, tested and maintained in a manner acceptable to the Superintendent
of Water, or if it is found that the backflow prevention device has been
removed or by-passed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the
premises, or if a low pressure cut-off required by these regulations is not
installed and maintained in working order
   (B)   Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the
consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance
with these regulations and to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Water.
(Ord. 1991-37, passed 2-11-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.27 APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
   (A)   General. In accordance with 3745-95-06(A), any backflow prevention
device required by rules 3745-95-04 and 3745-95-05 shall be of a model or
construction approved by the supplier of water and the Director of the State
Environmental Protection Agency.
   (B)   Device approval list. The list of state approved devices is subject to
change as new units are designed, tested and approved; therefore, a list of
approved units is not included in this policy but may be obtained by writing to
the following:
Cross-Connection Control
Division of Public Water Supply
Ohio EPA
P.O. Box 1049
Columbus, Ohio 43266-0149
(Ord. 1991-37, passed 2-11-1992)
CHAPTER 53: GARBAGE AND REFUSE
Section
   
53.01   Garbage receptacle requirements
   
53.02   Adoption of Solid Waste Management Plan by reference
 
   
53.99   Penalty
§ 53.01 GARBAGE RECEPTACLE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Each occupied building or structure shall be provided with an adequate
number of appropriate receptacles for garbage and rubbish, which are maintained
in clean condition and good repair.
   (B)   No owner, occupant, lessee, agent, tenant or person having charge of
or responsibility for any lot, or land within the village, store or allow to be
stored, garbage cans or any other waste receptacles at the curb line before 12:
00 p.m. the day before pickup day or after 7:00 p.m. on the day of pickup.
   (C)   No owner, occupant, lessee, agent, tenant or person having charge or
responsibility for any lot, or land within the village shall store garbage,
litter, rubbish (except tree clippings and brush for the chipper crew during
the last seven days of the month), building materials or scrap metal at
curbside; in or out of containers, except 12:00 p.m. the day before pickup day,
and then, always to be in containers.
(Ord. 2008-19, passed 6-10-2008) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.02 ADOPTION OF SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN BY REFERENCE.
   The revised draft Solid Waste Management Plan for the Adams-Clermont Solid
Waste Management District be approved, and the Clerk of this Village Council is
directed to deliver a certified copy of this Resolution Authorizing approval of
the draft revised Solid Waste Management Plan to the Solid Waste Management
Policy Committee of the Adams-Clermont Solid Waste Management District.
(Ord. 1992-29, passed 5-12-1992; Ord. 2000-28, passed 7-11-2000; Res. 2012-15,
passed 11-27-2012; Res. 2019-06, passed 5-14-2019)
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any owner, occupant, tenant, lessee, agent or person having charge or
responsibility of the lot or premises who fails to remove the specified
materials, as specified in §
53.01, shall be found guilty of a minor misdemeanor and fined not more than
$100 for a first offense, on a second and subsequent offense occurring within
45 days of the first offense such person shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor
of the fourth degree and fined not more than $250 and incarcerated for not more
than 30 days or both.
(Ord. 2008-19, passed 6-10-2008)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   LICENSING PROVISIONS
      
72.   TRAFFIC RULES
      
73.   MOTOR VEHICLE CRIMES
      
74.   EQUIPMENT AND LOADS
      
75.   BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES AND OFF-ROAD VEHICLES
      
76.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
77.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
78.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   Compliance with order of police officer
   
70.03   Emergency vehicles to proceed cautiously past red or stop signal
   
70.04   Exceptions generally; emergency, public safety and coroner vehicles
exempt
   
70.05   Persons riding or driving animals upon roadways
   
70.06   Prohibitions against pedestrians and slow-moving vehicles on freeways
   
70.07   Use of private property for vehicular travel
   
70.08   Names of persons damaging real property by operation of vehicle to be
provided to owner
   
70.09   Limited access highways; barriers along; vehicles to enter and leave at
designated intersections
   
70.10   Through highways
   
70.11   Officer may remove ignition key
   
70.12   Removal of vehicles after accidents
   
70.13   Repair of motor vehicle on public streets
Traffic-Control Devices
   
70.30   Obeying traffic-control devices
   
70.31   Signal lights
   
70.32   Signals over reversible lanes
   
70.33   Ambiguous or non-working traffic signals
   
70.34   Pedestrian-control signals
   
70.35   Unauthorized signs and signals prohibited
   
70.36   Alteration, defacement, or removal prohibited
   
70.37   Unauthorized possession or sale of devices
   
70.38   Signal preemption devices; prohibitions
   
70.39   Photo-monitoring devices
   
70.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Local traffic regulations, scope and authority, see R.C. § 4511.07
   Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14
   Traffic law photo-monitoring devices, state regulations, see R.C. §§
4511.092 et seq.
   Uniform application and precedence of state traffic laws, see R.C. § 4511.06
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as otherwise provided, the definitions set forth in R.C. § 4501.01
shall apply to this Title,
Chapter 95, and the penal laws of the municipality. For the purpose of this
Title and
Chapter 95, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR. Every self-propelled vehicle designed or used for
drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery, but having no provision for
carrying loads independently of such other vehicles, and used principally for
agricultural purposes.
   ALLEY. A street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or side of
lots or buildings in urban districts, and not intended for the purpose of
through vehicular traffic, and any street or highway that has been declared an
“alley” by the Legislative Authority of the municipality in which the street or
highway is located.
   ARTERIAL STREET. Any United States or state numbered route, controlled-
access highway, or other major radial or circumferential street or highway
designated by local authorities within their respective jurisdictions as part
of a major arterial system of streets or highways.
   BEACON. A highway traffic signal with one or more signal sections that
operate in a flashing mode.
   BICYCLE. Every device, other than a device that is designed solely for use
as a play vehicle by a child, that is propelled solely by human power upon
which a person may ride, and that has two or more wheels, any of which is more
than 14 inches in diameter.
   BUS. Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than nine passengers,
and used for the transportation of persons other than in a ridesharing
arrangement, and every motor vehicle, automobile for hire, or funeral car,
other than a taxicab or motor vehicle used in a ridesharing arrangement,
designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory fronting upon a street or highway,
including the street or highway, between successive intersections within the
municipality, where 50% or more of the frontage between successive
intersections is occupied by buildings in use for business, or within or
outside the municipality where 50% or more of the frontage for a distance of
300 feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business, and the
character of the territory is indicated by official traffic-control devices.
   CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE. A motor vehicle that is designed to carry nine or
fewer passengers and is operated for hire pursuant to a prearranged contract
for the transportation of passengers on public roads and highways along a route
under the control of the person hiring the vehicle and not over a defined and
regular route. “Prearranged contract” means an agreement, made in advance of
boarding, to provide transportation from a specific location in an chauffeured
limousine. The term does not include any vehicle that is used exclusively in
the business of funeral directing.
(R.C. § 4501.01(LL))
   CHILD CARE CENTER. Has the same meaning as set forth in R.C. § 5104.01.
   COMMERCIAL TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle having motive power designed or used
for drawing other vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry any load
thereon, or designed or used for drawing other vehicles while carrying a
portion of the other vehicles, or the load thereon, or both.
   CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY. Every street or highway in respect to which
owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right or
access to or from the same except at certain points only and in a manner as may
be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over the street or
highway.
   CROSSWALK.
      (1)   That part of a roadway at intersections ordinarily included within
the real or projected prolongation of property lines and curb lines or, in the
absence of curbs, the edges of the traversable roadway;
      (2)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere,
distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the
surface;
      (3)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this definition, there
shall not be a crosswalk where the Legislative Authority has placed signs
indicating no crossing.
   DRIVER. Any person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
   ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a “class 1 electric bicycle”, a “class 2 electric
bicycle”, or a “class 3 electric bicycle” as defined below.
      (1)   CLASS 1 ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that
provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling and ceases to provide
assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 20 miles per hour.
      (2)   CLASS 2 ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that may
provide assistance regardless of whether the rider is pedaling and is not
capable of providing assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 20 miles
per hour.
      (3)   CLASS 3 ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that
provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling and ceases to provide
assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 28 miles per hour.
   EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Emergency vehicles of municipal, township or county
departments or public utility corporations, when identified as such as required
by law, the Director of Public Safety, or local authorities, and motor vehicles
when commandeered by a police officer.
   EXPLOSIVES. Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is intended for
the purpose of producing an explosion that contains any oxidizing and
combustible units or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities, or
packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion, or
by a detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause a sudden
generation of highly heated gases, such that the resultant gaseous pressures
are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects, or of
destroying life or limb. Manufactured articles shall not be held to be
explosives when the individual units contain explosives in limited quantities
of such nature or in such packing that it is impossible to procure a
simultaneous or a destructive explosion of the units, to the injury of life,
limb, or property by fire, friction, concussion, percussion, or by a detonator,
such as fixed ammunition for small arms, firecrackers, or safety fuse matches.
   EXPRESSWAY. A divided arterial highway for through traffic with full or
partial control of access with an excess of 50% of all crossroads separated in
grade.
   FLAMMABLE LIQUID. Any liquid which has a flash point of 70°F or less, as
determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closed cup test device.
   FREEWAY. A divided multi-lane highway for through traffic with crossroads
separated in grade and with full control of access.
   FUNERAL ESCORT VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle, including a funeral hearse, while
used to facilitate the movement of a funeral procession.
   GROSS WEIGHT. The weight of a vehicle plus the weight of any load thereon.
   HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way open to
the use of the public as a thoroughfare for purposes of vehicular travel.
   HIGHWAY MAINTENANCE VEHICLE. A vehicle used in snow and ice removal or road
surface maintenance, including a snow plow, traffic line striper, road sweeper,
mowing machine, asphalt distributing vehicle, or other such vehicle designed
for use in specific highway maintenance activities.
   HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SIGNAL. A power-operated traffic control device by which
traffic is warned or directed to take some specific action. The term does not
include a power-operated sign, steadily illuminated pavement marker, warning
light, or steady burning electric lamp.
   HYBRID BEACON. A type of beacon that is intentionally placed in a dark mode
between periods of operation where no indications are displayed and, when in
operation, displays both steady and flashing traffic control signal
indications.
   INTERSECTION.
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of
two highways that join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or
the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways that join at
any other angle might come into conflict. The junction of an alley or driveway
with a roadway or highway does not constitute an intersection unless the
roadway or highway at the junction is controlled by a traffic control device.
      (2)   If a highway includes two roadways that are 30 feet or more apart,
then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting
highway constitutes a separate intersection. If both intersecting highways
include two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of any two
roadways of such highways constitutes a separate intersection.
      (3)   At a location controlled by a traffic control signal, regardless of
the distance between the separate intersections as described in division (2) of
this definition:
         (a)   If a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk has not been designated
on the roadway within the median between the separate intersections, the two
intersections and the roadway and median constitute one intersection.
         (b)   Where a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk line is designated
on the roadway on the intersection approach, the area within the crosswalk and
any area beyond the designated stop line or yield line constitute part of the
intersection.
         (c)   Where a crosswalk is designated on a roadway on the departure
from the intersection, the intersection includes the area that extends to the
far side of the crosswalk.
   LANED HIGHWAY. A highway the roadway of which is divided into two or more
clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
   LOCAL AUTHORITIES. Every county, municipal, and other local board or body
having authority to adopt police regulations under the Constitution and laws of
this state.
   LOW-SPEED MICROMOBILITY DEVICE. Means a device weighing less than 100 pounds
that has handlebars, is propelled by an electric motor or human power, and has
an attainable speed on a paved level surface of not more than 20 miles per hour
when propelled by the electric motor.
   MEDIAN. The area between two roadways of a divided highway, measured from
edge of traveled way to edge of traveled way, but excluding turn lanes. The
width of a median may be different between intersections, between interchanges,
and at opposite approaches of the same intersection.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle propelled or drawn by power other than muscular
power or power collected from overhead electric trolley wires, except motorized
bicycles, electric bicycles, road rollers, traction engines, power shovels,
power cranes and other equipment used in construction work, and not designed
for or employed in general highway transportation, hole-digging machinery,
well-drilling machinery, ditch-digging machinery, farm machinery, and trailers
designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage
and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or
highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per
hour or less.
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle, other than a tractor, having a seat or
saddle for the use of the operator and designed to travel on not more than
three wheels in contact with the ground, including but not limited to motor
vehicles known as “motor-driven cycle”, “motor scooter”, “autocycle”, “cab-
enclosed motorcycle”, or “motorcycle” without regard to weight or brake
horsepower.
   MOTORIZED BICYCLE or MOPED. Any vehicle having either two tandem wheels or
one wheel in the front and two wheels in the rear, that may be pedaled, and
that is equipped with a helper motor of not more than 50 cubic centimeters
piston displacement that produces not more than one brake horsepower and is
capable of propelling the vehicle at a speed of not greater than 20 miles per
hour on a level surface. The terms do not include an electric bicycle.
   MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR. Any self-propelled vehicle designed for, and used by,
a person with a disability and that is incapable of a speed in excess of eight
miles per hour.
   MULTI-WHEEL AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR. A type of agricultural tractor that has
two or more wheels or tires on each side of one axle at the rear of the
tractor, is designed or used for drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery,
has no provision for carrying loads independently of the drawn vehicles or
machinery, and is used principally for agricultural purposes.
   NATURAL RESOURCES OFFICER. An officer appointed pursuant to R.C. § 1501.24.
   OPERATE. To cause or have caused movement of a vehicle.
   OPERATOR. Any person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
   PARKED or PARKING. The standing of a vehicle upon a street, road, alley,
highway or public ground, whether accompanied or unaccompanied by a driver, but
does not include the temporary standing of a vehicle for the purpose of and
while actually engaged in loading or loading merchandise or passengers.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any natural person afoot. The term includes a personal delivery
device as defined in R.C. § 4511.513 unless the context clearly suggests
otherwise.
   PERSON. Every natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.
   POLE TRAILER. Every trailer or semitrailer attached to the towing vehicle by
means of a reach, pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing
vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregular shaped loads
such as poles, pipes, or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining
themselves as beams between the supporting connections.
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic, or
to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
   PREDICATE MOTOR VEHICLE OR TRAFFIC OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12, 4511.132,
4511.16, 4511.20, 4511.201, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.22, 4511.23,
4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32,
4511.33, 4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40,
4511.41, 4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.451,
4511.452, 4511.46, 4511.47, 4511.48, 4511.481, 4511.49, 4511.50, 4511.511,
4511.53, 4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.56, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59, 4511.60,
4511.61, 4511.64, 4511.66, 4511.661, 4511.68, 4511.70, 4511.701, 4511.71,
4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, 4511.73, 4511.763, 4511.771, 4511.78, or
4511.84;
      (2)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.17(A)(2), 4511.51(A) through (D), or
4511.74(A);
      (3)   A violation of any provision of R.C. §§ 4511.01 through 4511.76 for
which no penalty otherwise is provided in the section that contains the
provision violated;
      (4)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.214;
      (5)   A violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any section or provision set forth or described in division (1),
(2), (3), or (4) of this definition.
   PRIVATE ROAD OPEN TO PUBLIC TRAVEL. A private toll road or road, including
any adjacent sidewalks that generally run parallel to the road, within a
shopping center, airport, sports arena, or other similar business or recreation
facility that is privately owned but where the public is allowed to travel
without access restrictions. The term includes a gated toll road but does not
include a road within a private gated property where access is restricted at
all times, a parking area, a driving aisle within a parking area, or a private
grade crossing.
   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY. Every way or place in private ownership used for
vehicular travel by the owner, and those having express or implied permission
from the owner, but not by other persons.
   PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Any of the following:
      (1)   Ambulances, including private ambulance companies under contract to
a municipality, township, or county, and private ambulances and nontransport
vehicles bearing license plates issued under R.C. § 4503.49;
      (2)   Motor vehicles used by public law enforcement officers or other
persons sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state;
      (3)   Any motor vehicle when properly identified as required by the
Director of Public Safety, when used in response to fire emergency calls or to
provide emergency medical service to ill or injured persons, and when operated
by a duly qualified person who is a member of a volunteer rescue service or a
volunteer fire department, and who is on duty pursuant to the rules or
directives of that service. The State Fire Marshal shall be designated by the
Director of Public Safety as the certifying agency for all public safety
vehicles described herein;
      (4)   Vehicles used by fire departments, including motor vehicles when
used by volunteer firefighters responding to emergency calls in the fire
department service when identified as required by the Director of Public
Safety;
      (5)   Any vehicle used to transport or provide emergency medical service
to an ill or injured person, when certified as a public safety vehicle, shall
be considered such a vehicle when transporting an ill or injured person to a
hospital, regardless of whether such vehicle has already passed a hospital;
      (6)   Vehicles used by the Motor Carrier Enforcement Unit for the
enforcement of orders and rules of the Public Utilities Commission as specified
in R.C. § 5503.34.
   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property operating upon rails placed
principally on a private right-of-way.
   RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL. Any sign, signal, or device erected by authority of
a public body or official or by a railroad, and intended to give notice of the
presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train.
   RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine or an electric or other motor, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated by a railroad.
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory, not comprising a business district,
fronting on a street or highway, including the street or highway, where, for a
distance of 300 feet or more, the frontage is improved with residences or
residences and buildings in use for business.
   RIDESHARING ARRANGEMENT. Includes the transportation of persons in a motor
vehicle where the transportation is incidental to another purpose of a
volunteer driver, and includes arrangements known as carpools, vanpools, and
buspools.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Either of the following, as the context requires:
      (1)   The right of a vehicle or pedestrian to proceed uninterruptedly in
a lawful manner in the direction in which it, he or she is moving, in
preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching from a different
direction into its, his or her path;
      (2)   A general term denoting land, property, or the interest therein,
usually in the configuration of a strip, acquired for or devoted to
transportation purposes. When used in this context, “right-of-way” includes the
roadway, shoulders or berm, ditch, and slopes extending to the right-of-way
limits under the control of the state or local authority.
   ROAD SERVICE VEHICLE. Means wreckers, utility repair vehicles, and state,
county, and municipal service vehicles equipped with visual signals by means of
flashing, rotating, or oscillating lights.
   ROADWAY. That portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel, except the berm or shoulder. If a highway includes two or
more separate roadways, the term means any roadway separately, but not all the
roadways collectively.
   RURAL MAIL DELIVERY VEHICLE. Every vehicle used to deliver United States
mail on a rural mail delivery route.
   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians, and protected or marked or indicated by adequate
signs so as to be plainly visible at all times.
   SCHOOL BUS. Every bus designed for carrying more than nine passengers which
is owned by a public, private, or governmental agency or institution of
learning, and operated for the transportation of children to or from a school
session or a school function, or owned by a private person and operated for
compensation for the transportation of children to or from a school session or
a school function; provided the term does not include a bus operated by a
municipally owned transportation system, a mass transit company operating
exclusively within the territorial limits of a municipality, or within such
limits and the territorial limits of municipalities immediately contiguous to
the municipality, nor a common passenger carrier certified by the Public
Utilities Commission unless the bus is devoted exclusively to the
transportation of children to and from a school session or a school function,
and the term does not include a van or bus used by a licensed child care center
or type A family child care home to transport children from the child care
center or type A family child care home to a school if the van or bus does not
have more than 15 children in the van or bus at any time.
   SEMITRAILER. Every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or property
with another and separate motor vehicle so that in operation a part of its own
weight or that of its load, or both, rests upon and is carried by another
vehicle.
   SHARED-USE PATH. A bikeway outside the traveled way and physically separated
from motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and either within
the highway right-of-way or within an independent alignment. A shared-use path
also may be used by pedestrians, including skaters, joggers, users of manual
and motorized wheelchairs, and other authorized motorized and non-motorized
users. A shared-use path does not include any trail that is intended to be used
primarily for mountain biking, hiking, equestrian use, or other similar uses,
or any other single track or natural surface trail that has historically been
reserved for non-motorized use.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
line of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of
pedestrians.
   STANDING. When prohibited, means any halting of a vehicle, even momentarily,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device.
   STATE HIGHWAY. A highway under the jurisdiction of the Department of
Transportation, outside the limits of municipalities, provided that the
authority conferred upon the Director of Transportation in R.C. § 5511.01 to
erect state highway route markers and signs directing traffic shall not be
modified by R.C. §§ 4511.01 through 4511.79 and 4511.99.
   STATE ROUTE. Every highway which is designated with an official state route
number and so marked.
   STOP. When required, means a complete cessation of movement.
   STOP INTERSECTION. Any intersection at one or more entrances of which stop
signs are erected.
   STOPPING. When prohibited, means any halting of a vehicle, even momentarily,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device.
   STREET. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way open to the
use of the public as a thoroughfare for purposes of vehicular travel.
   THROUGH HIGHWAY. Every street or highway as provided in R.C. § 4511.65, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   THRUWAY. A through highway whose entire roadway is reserved for through
traffic and on which roadway parking is prohibited.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars, and
other devices, either singly or together, while using for purposes of travel
any highway or private road open to public travel.
   TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE. A flagger, sign, signal, marking, or other device
used to regulate, warn, or guide traffic, placed on, over, or adjacent to a
street, highway, private road open to public travel, pedestrian facility, or
shared-use path by authority of a public agency or official having
jurisdiction, or, in the case of a private road open to public travel, by
authority of the private owner or private official having jurisdiction.
   TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL. Any highway traffic signal by which traffic is
alternately directed to stop and permitted to proceed.
   TRAILER. Every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or property
wholly on its own structure, and for being drawn by a motor vehicle, including
any vehicle when formed by or operated as a combination of a semitrailer and a
vehicle of the dolly type, such as that commonly known as a trailer dolly, a
vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production
materials between a local place of storage or supply and the farm when drawn or
towed on a street or highway at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour and a
vehicle designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of
storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a
street or highway for a distance of more than ten miles or at a speed of more
than 25 miles per hour.
   TRUCK. Every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers, designed and
used to carry property.
   TYPE A FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME. Has the same meaning as set forth in R.C. §
5104.01.
   URBAN DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including any street or
highway which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry, or
dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of
one-quarter of a mile or more, and the character of the territory is indicated
by official traffic-control devices.
   VEHICLE. Every device, including a motorized bicycle and an electric
bicycle, in, upon, or by which any person or property may be transported or
drawn upon a highway, except that the term does not include any motorized
wheelchair, any electric personal assistive mobility device, any low-speed
micromobility device, any personal delivery device as defined in R.C. §
4511.513, any device that is moved by power collected from overhead electric
trolley wires or that is used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, or
any device, other than a bicycle, that is moved by human power.
   WASTE COLLECTION VEHICLE. A vehicle used in the collection of garbage,
refuse, trash, or recyclable materials.
   WILDLIFE OFFICER. An officer designated pursuant to R.C. § 1531.13.
(R.C. § 4511.01)
§ 70.02 COMPLIANCE WITH ORDER OF POLICE OFFICER.
   (A)   No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of
any police officer invested with authority to direct, control, or regulate
traffic.
   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle so as willfully to elude or
flee a police officer after receiving a visible or audible signal from a police
officer to bring the person’s motor vehicle to a stop.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to comply
with an order or signal of a police officer.
      (2)   A violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (C)(4) and (C)(5) of this section,
a violation of division (B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   A violation of division (B) of this section is a felony and shall
be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier of fact
finds by proof beyond a reasonable doubt that in committing the offense, the
offender was fleeing immediately after the commission of a felony.
      (5)   (a)   A violation of division (B) of this section is a felony and
shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier
of fact finds any of the following by proof beyond a reasonable doubt:
            1.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender was a
proximate cause of serious physical harm to persons or property.
            2.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender caused a
substantial risk of serious physical harm to persons or property.
         (b)   If a police officer pursues an offender who is violating
division (B) of this section and division (C)(5)(a) of this section applies,
the sentencing court, in determining the seriousness of an offender’s conduct
for purposes of sentencing the offender for a violation of division (B) of this
section, shall consider, along with the factors set forth in R.C. §§ 2929.12
and 2929.13 that are required to be considered, all of the following:
            1.   The duration of the pursuit;
            2.   The distance of the pursuit;
            3.   The rate of speed at which the offender operated the motor
vehicle during the pursuit;
            4.   Whether the offender failed to stop for traffic lights or stop
signs during the pursuit;
            5.   The number of traffic lights or stop signs for which the
offender failed to stop during the pursuit;
            6.   Whether the offender operated the motor vehicle during the
pursuit without lighted lights during a time when lighted lights are required;
            7.   Whether the offender committed a moving violation during the
pursuit;
            8.   The number of moving violations the offender committed during
the pursuit;
            9.   Any other relevant factors indicating that the offender’s
conduct is more serious than conduct normally constituting the offense.
   (D)   In addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of division
(A) of this section, the court shall impose a class five suspension from the
range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). If the offender previously has been
found guilty of an offense under this section or under R.C. § 2921.331 or any
other substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, in addition to any other
sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class one suspension
as described in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(1). The court may grant limited driving
privileges to the offender on a suspension imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of this section as set forth in R.C. § 4510.021. No judge shall suspend any
portion of the suspension under a class one suspension of an offender’s
license, permit, or privilege required by this division.
   (E)   As used in this section:
      MOVING VIOLATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2743.70.
      POLICE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(R.C. § 2921.331(A) - (C), (E), (F))
§ 70.03 EMERGENCY VEHICLES TO PROCEED CAUTIOUSLY PAST RED OR STOP SIGNAL.
   (A)   The driver of any emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, upon approaching a red or stop signal or any
stop sign, shall slow down as necessary for safety to traffic, but may proceed
cautiously past the red or stop sign or signal with due regard for the safety
of all persons using the street or highway.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.03)
§ 70.04 EXCEPTIONS GENERALLY; EMERGENCY, PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORONER VEHICLES
EXEMPT.
   (A)   The provisions of this traffic code, except for §§
73.01 and
73.02, do not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles, and other equipment
while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a highway within an area
designated by traffic-control devices, but apply to those persons and vehicles
when traveling to or from such work.
   (B)   The driver of a highway maintenance vehicle owned by this state or any
political subdivision of this state, while the driver is engaged in the
performance of official duties upon a street or highway, provided the highway
maintenance vehicle is equipped with flashing lights and such other markings as
are required by law and such lights are in operation when the driver and
vehicle are so engaged, shall be exempt from criminal prosecution for
violations of R.C. §§ 4511.22, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30,
4511.31, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.66, and 4513.02, and R.C. §§ 5577.01 through
5577.09, and any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (C)   (1)   This section does not exempt a driver of a highway maintenance
vehicle from civil liability arising from a violation of R.C. § 4511.22,
4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.33, 4511.35,
4511.66, or 4513.02 or R.C. §§ 5577.01 through 5577.09, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   This section does not exempt a driver of a vehicle who is not a
state employee and who is engaged in the transport of highway maintenance
equipment from criminal liability for a violation of R.C. §§ 5577.01 through
5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (D)   As used in this section, ENGAGED IN THE PERFORMANCE OF OFFICIAL DUTIES
includes driving a highway maintenance vehicle to and from the manufacturer or
vehicle maintenance provider and transporting a highway maintenance vehicle,
equipment, or materials to and from a work location.
(R.C. § 4511.04)
   (E)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 4511.12, 4511.13, 4511.131, 4511.132,
4511.14, 4511.202, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25, 4511.26,
4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.34,
4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41, 4511.42,
4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59,
4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.62, 4511.66, 4511.68, 4511.681, and 4511.69, and any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, do not apply to the driver of an
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle if the emergency vehicle or public
safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and
displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the
vehicle and if the driver of the vehicles is giving an audible signal by siren,
exhaust whistle, or bell. This section does not relieve the driver of an
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
(R.C. § 4511.041)
   (F)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29,
4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, and
4511.66, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, do not apply to
a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator operating a motor vehicle
in accordance with R.C. § 4513.171 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance. This division does not relieve a coroner, deputy coroner or
coroner’s investigator operating a motor vehicle from the duty to drive with
due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
(R.C. § 4511.042)
§ 70.05 PERSONS RIDING OR DRIVING ANIMALS UPON ROADWAYS.
   Every person riding, driving, or leading an animal upon a roadway is subject
to the provisions of this traffic code, applicable to the driver of a vehicle,
except those provisions of this traffic code which by their nature are
inapplicable.
(R.C. § 4511.05)
§ 70.06 PROHIBITIONS AGAINST PEDESTRIANS AND SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES ON FREEWAYS.
   (A)   No person, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, shall:
      (1)   As a pedestrian, occupy any space within the limits of the right-
of-way of a freeway, except: in a rest area; on a facility that is separated
from the roadway and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately
marked for pedestrian use; in the performance of public works or official
duties; as a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of a
motor vehicle; or to obtain assistance;
      (2)   Occupy any space within the limits of the right-of-way of a
freeway, with: an animal-drawn vehicle; a ridden or led animal; herded animals;
a pushcart; a bicycle, except on a facility that is separated from the roadway
and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately marked for
bicycle use; an electric bicycle; a bicycle with motor attached; a motor-driven
cycle with a motor which produces not to exceed five brake horsepower; an
agricultural tractor; farm machinery; except in the performance of public works
or official duties.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.051)
Statutory reference:
   Designation of a freeway, see R.C. § 4511.011
§ 70.07 USE OF PRIVATE PROPERTY FOR VEHICULAR TRAVEL.
   The provisions of this traffic code do not prevent the owner of real
property, used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel by permission of
the owner and not as a matter of right, from prohibiting such use or from
requiring additional conditions to those specified in this traffic code, or
otherwise regulating such use as may seem best to the owner.
(R.C. § 4511.08)
§ 70.08 NAMES OF PERSONS DAMAGING REAL PROPERTY BY OPERATION OF VEHICLE TO BE
PROVIDED TO OWNER.
   (A)   As used in this section, MOTOR VEHICLE has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 4501.01.
   (B)   If damage is caused to real property by the operation of a motor
vehicle in, or during the, violation of any section of the Ohio Revised Code or
of any municipal ordinance, the law enforcement agency that investigates the
case, upon request of the real property owner, shall provide the owner with the
names of the persons who are charged with the commission of the offense. If a
request for the names is made, the agency shall provide the names as soon as
possible after the persons are charged with the offense.
   (C)   The personnel of law enforcement agencies who act pursuant to division
(B) of this section in good faith are not liable in damages in a civil action
allegedly arising from their actions taken pursuant to that division. Political
subdivisions and the state are not liable in damages in a civil action
allegedly arising from the actions of personnel of their law enforcement
agencies if the personnel have immunity under this division.
(R.C. § 2935.28)
§ 70.09 LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAYS; BARRIERS ALONG; VEHICLES TO ENTER AND LEAVE AT
DESIGNATED INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall cut, injure, remove, or destroy
any fence or other barrier designed and erected to prevent traffic from
entering or leaving a limited access highway without the permission of the
Director of Transportation, except in a case of emergency where life or
property is in danger. No person, firm or corporation shall cause a vehicle of
any character to enter or leave a limited access highway at any point other
than intersections designated by the Director for such purposes, except in a
case of emergency where life or property is in danger.
(R.C. § 3767.201)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3767.99(D))
§ 70.10 THROUGH HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   All state routes are hereby designated as through highways, provided
that stop signs, yield signs, or traffic-control signals shall be erected at
all intersections with such through highways by the Department of
Transportation as to highways under its jurisdiction and by local authorities
as to highways under their jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this
section. Where two or more state routes that are through highways intersect,
and no traffic-control signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall
be erected at one or more entrances thereto by the Department or by local
authorities having jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section.
Whenever the Director of Transportation determines on the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation that stop signs are necessary to stop
traffic on a through highway for safe and efficient operation, nothing in this
section shall be construed to prevent such installations. When circumstances
warrant, the Director also may omit stop signs on roadways intersecting through
highways under his or her jurisdiction. Before the Director either installs or
removes a stop sign under this division, he or she shall give notice, in
writing, of that proposed action to the affected local authority at least 30
days before installing or removing the stop sign.
   (B)   Other streets or highways, or portions thereof, are hereby designated
as through highways if they are within the municipality, if they have a
continuous length of more than one mile between the limits of the street or
highway or portion thereof, and if they have stop or yield signs or traffic-
control signals at the entrances of the majority of intersecting streets or
highways. For purposes of this section, the limits of the street or highway, or
portion thereof, shall be the municipal corporation line, the physical terminus
of the street or highway, or any point on the streets or highway at which
vehicular traffic thereon is required by regulatory signs to stop or yield to
traffic on the intersecting street, provided, that in residence districts, the
municipality may by ordinance designate such street or highway, or portion
thereof, not to be a through highway and thereafter the affected residence
district shall be indicated by official traffic-control devices. Where two or
more through highways designated under this division intersect and no traffic-
control signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall be erected at
one or more entrances thereto by the Department or by local authorities having
jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section.
   (C)   The Department or local authorities having jurisdiction need not erect
stop signs at intersections they find to be so constructed as to permit traffic
to safely enter a through highway without coming to a stop. Signs shall be
erected at such intersections indicating that the operator of a vehicle shall
yield the right-of-way to or merge with all traffic proceeding on the through
highway.
   (D)   Local authorities, with reference to highways under their
jurisdiction, may designate additional through highways, and shall erect stop
signs, yield signs, or traffic-control signals at all streets and highways
intersecting such through highways, or may designate any intersection as a stop
or yield intersection, and shall erect like signs at one or more entrances to
the intersection.
(R.C. § 4511.65)
§ 70.11 OFFICER MAY REMOVE IGNITION KEY.
   A law enforcement officer may remove the ignition key left in the ignition
switch of an unlocked and unattended motor vehicle parked on a street or
highway. The officer removing the key shall place notification upon the vehicle
detailing his or her name and badge number, the place where the key may be
reclaimed, and the procedure for reclaiming the key. The key shall be returned
to the owner of the motor vehicle upon presentation of proof of ownership.
(R.C. § 4549.05)
§ 70.12 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES AFTER ACCIDENTS.
   (A)   If a motor vehicle accident occurs on any highway, public street, or
other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel and if any
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property that has been damaged or spilled as
a result of the motor vehicle accident is blocking the highway, street, or
other property or is otherwise endangering public safety, a public safety
official may do either of the following without the consent of the owner but
with the approval of the law enforcement agency conducting any investigation of
the accident:
      (1)   Remove, or order the removal of, the motor vehicle if the motor
vehicle is unoccupied, cargo, or personal property from the portion of the
highway, public street, or property ordinarily used for vehicular travel on the
highway, public street, or other property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel.
      (2)   If the motor vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle, allow the owner
or operator of the vehicle the opportunity to arrange for the removal of the
motor vehicle within a period of time specified by the public safety official.
If the public safety official determines that the motor vehicle cannot be
removed within the specified period of time, the public safety official shall
remove or order the removal of the motor vehicle.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, the
Department of Transportation, any employee of the Department of Transportation,
or a public safety official who authorizes or participates in the removal of
any unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property as authorized by
division (A) of this section, regardless of whether the removal is executed by
a private towing service, is not liable for civil damages for any injury,
death, or loss to person or property that results from the removal of that
unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property. Further, except as
provided in division (B)(2) of this section, if a public safety official
authorizes, employs, or arranges to have a private towing service remove any
unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property as authorized by division
(A) of this section, that private towing service is not liable for civil
damages for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that results from
the removal of that unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
         (a)   Any person or entity involved in the removal of an unoccupied
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property pursuant to division (A) of this
section if that removal causes or contributes to the release of a hazardous
material or to structural damage to the roadway;
         (b)   A private towing service that was not authorized, employed, or
arranged by a public safety official to remove an unoccupied motor vehicle,
cargo, or personal property under this section;
         (c)   Except as provided in division (B)(2)(d) of this section, a
private towing service that was authorized, employed, or arranged by a public
safety official to perform the removal of the unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo,
or personal property but the private towing service performed the removal in a
negligent manner;
         (d)   A private towing service that was authorized, employed, or
arranged by a public safety official to perform the removal of the unoccupied
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property that was endangering public safety
but the private towing service performed the removal in a reckless manner.
   (C)   As used in divisions (A) and (B) of this section:
      HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.232.
      PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICIAL. Means any of the following:
         (a)   The sheriff of the county, or the chief of a law enforcement
agency in the municipal corporation, township, port authority, conservancy
district, university campus police department, park district police force, or
township or joint police district, in which the accident occurred;
         (b)   A state highway patrol trooper;
         (c)   The chief of the fire department having jurisdiction where the
accident occurred;
         (d)   A duly authorized subordinate acting on behalf of an official
specified in divisions (a) to (c) of this definition.
         (e)   A natural resources officer or a wildlife officer.
(R.C. § 4513.66)
   (D)   If a towing service is removing a motor vehicle, and the removal was
not authorized under R.C. § 4513.60, 4513.601, 4513.61, or 4513.66, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, prior to removing the motor
vehicle, the towing service shall provide a written estimate of the price for
the removal to the operator of the motor vehicle, if requested.
   (E)   The towing service shall ensure that any estimate provided under
division (D) of this section includes the fees, services to be rendered, and
destination of the vehicle.
   (F)   If a towing service fails to provide a written estimate as required by
this section, the towing service shall not charge fees for the towing and
storage of the motor vehicle that exceed 25% of any applicable fees established
by the public utilities commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25(B)(4)
or, if the vehicle was towed within a municipal corporation that has
established vehicle removal and storage fees, 25% of the fees established by
the municipal corporation.
   (G)   Any storage facility that accepts towed vehicles shall conspicuously
post a notice at the entrance to the storage facility that states the
limitation on fees established under division (F) of this section.
(R.C. § 4513.68)
§ 70.13 REPAIR OF MOTOR VEHICLE ON PUBLIC STREETS.
   (A)   No person, being a owner of a motor vehicle, shall park, store or
otherwise leave a motor vehicle, as defined by R.C. Title 45, upon any street,
public right-of-way or public property for the purposes of affecting repairs to
the motor vehicle, excepting emergency repairs, for more than 24 hours.
   (B)   This section shall not prohibit emergency repairs by the owner of the
motor vehicle or persons hired by the owner to effect such repairs; standard
maintenance of the automobile such as oil changes, addition of fluids, tune-
ups, washing and minor repairs; provided, such activities are completed within
24 hours.
   (C)   This section specifically prohibits the following activities to be
performed on streets, rights-of-way and public places:
      (1)   Removal or replacements of engines or engine parts;
      (2)   Major body repair or replacements of body parts;
      (3)   Painting of motor vehicles;
      (4)   Removal or replacement of transmission, drive shaft, rear end or
trans-axle; and/or
      (5)   Any repair requiring the vehicle to be jacked or stored in an
elevated condition with two or more tires off the ground for a period exceeding
24 hours.
   (D)   Any person found in violation of this section shall be fined not more
than $100, and each 24-hour period shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 70.50) (Ord. 1986-12, passed 4-8-1986)
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
§ 70.30 OBEYING TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   (1)   No pedestrian or driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
instructions of any traffic-control device placed in accordance with the
provisions of this traffic code, unless at the time otherwise directed by a
police officer.
      (2)   No provision of this traffic code for which signs are required
shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the
alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular
section of this traffic code does not state that signs are required, that
section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place.
(R.C. § 4511.12(A))
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (C) of this section, any operator
of a commercial motor vehicle, upon approaching a scale location established
for the purpose of determining the weight of the vehicle and its load, shall
comply with any traffic control device or the order of a peace officer
directing the vehicle to proceed to be weighed or otherwise inspected.
      (2)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle, upon bypassing a scale
location in accordance with division (C) of this section, shall comply with an
order of a peace officer to stop the vehicle to verify the use and operation of
an electronic clearance device.
   (C)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle that is equipped with an
electronic clearance device authorized by the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol under R.C. § 4549.081 may bypass a scale location, regardless of
the instruction of a traffic control device to enter the scale facility, if
either of the following apply:
      (1)   The in-cab transponder displays a green light or other affirmative
visual signal and also sounds an affirmative audible signal;
      (2)   Any other criterion established by the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol is met.
   (D)   Any peace officer may order the operator of a commercial motor vehicle
that bypasses a scale location to stop the vehicle to verify the use and
operation of an electronic clearance device.
   (E)   As used in this section, COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE means any
combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating or an actual gross
vehicle weight of more than 10,000 pounds if the vehicle is used in interstate
or intrastate commerce to transport property and also means any vehicle that is
transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is required pursuant to
49 C.F.R. parts 100 through 180.
(R.C. § 4511.121(A) - (C), (E))
   (F)   No person shall use an electronic clearance device if the device or
its use is not in compliance with rules of the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol.
(R.C. § 4549.081(B))
   (G)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. If
the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting activity
is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the offender is
subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.12(B))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (B) of this
section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (B)
of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender commits the offense while
distracted and the distracting activity is a contributing factor to the
commission of the offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine
established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.121(D))
      (3)   Whoever violates division (F) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
third degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4549.081(C))
Statutory reference:
   Placing traffic-control devices on state highways, permission required, see
R.C. § 4511.10
   Traffic-control devices to conform to the state manual and specifications,
see R.C. § 4511.11
   Uniform system of traffic-control devices, see R.C. § 4511.09
§ 70.31 SIGNAL LIGHTS.
   Highway traffic signal indications for vehicles and pedestrians shall have
the following meanings:
   (A)   Steady green signal indication.
      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal indication
is permitted to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a u-turn
movement except as such movement is modified by a lane-use sign, turn
prohibition sign, lane marking, roadway design, separate turn signal
indication, or other traffic control device. Such vehicular traffic, including
vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn movement, shall yield the
right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn
movement to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching
from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard
during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the
intersection.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal indication, displayed
alone or in combination with another signal indication, is permitted to
cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such
arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications displayed at
the same time. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left
or making a u-turn movement, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the
following:
         (a)   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
         (b)   Other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      (3)   (a)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication,
as provided in R.C. § 4511.14, pedestrians facing a circular green signal
indication are permitted to proceed across the roadway within any marked or
unmarked associated crosswalk. The pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection or so close as to create an immediate
hazard at the time that the green signal indication is first displayed.
         (b)   Pedestrians facing a green arrow signal indication, unless
otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or other traffic control
device, shall not cross the roadway.
   (B)   Steady yellow signal indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow signal indication
is thereby warned that the related green movement or the related flashing arrow
movement is being terminated or that a steady red signal indication will be
exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the
intersection. The provisions governing vehicular operation under the movement
being terminated shall continue to apply while the steady circular yellow
signal indication is displayed.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow arrow signal indication is
thereby warned that the related green arrow movement or the related flashing
arrow movement is being terminated. The provisions governing vehicular
operation under the movement being terminated shall continue to apply while the
steady yellow arrow signal indication is displayed.
      (3)   Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal
indication, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as
provided in R.C. § 4511.14 or other traffic control device, shall not start to
cross the roadway.
   (C)   Steady red signal indication.
      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal
indication, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted
by another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if
there is no stop line, traffic shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before
entering the intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication
to proceed is displayed except as provided in divisions (C)(1), (C)(2), and (C)
(3) of this section.
         (b)   Except when a traffic control device is in place prohibiting a
turn on red or a steady red arrow signal indication is displayed, vehicular
traffic facing a steady circular red signal indication is permitted, after
stopping, to enter the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-
way street into a one-way street. The right to proceed with the turn shall be
subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a stop
sign.
      (2)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow signal indication
shall not enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by the arrow
and, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted by
another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if
there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before entering the
intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication or other
traffic control device permitting the movement indicated by such red arrow is
displayed.
         (b)   When a traffic control device is in place permitting a turn on a
steady red arrow signal indication, vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow
indication is permitted, after stopping, to enter the intersection to turn
right, or to turn left from a one-way street into a one-way street. The right
to proceed with the turn shall be limited to the direction indicated by the
arrow and shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a
stop at a stop sign.
      (3)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as
provided in R.C. § 4511.14 or other traffic control device, pedestrians facing
a steady circular red or steady red arrow signal indication shall not enter the
roadway.
      (4)   Local authorities by ordinance, or the Director of Transportation
on state highways, may prohibit a right or a left turn against a steady red
signal at any intersection, which shall be effective when signs giving notice
thereof are posted at the intersection.
   (D)   Flashing green signal indication. A flashing green signal indication
has no meaning and shall not be used.
   (E)   Flashing yellow signal indication.
      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing
a flashing circular yellow signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter
the intersection to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a u-
turn movement except as such movement is modified by lane-use signs, turn
prohibition signs, lane markings, roadway design, separate turn signal
indications, or other traffic control devices. Such vehicular traffic,
including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn movement, shall
yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn
to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the
opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the
time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
      (2)   (a)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing
a flashing yellow arrow signal indication, displayed alone or in combination
with another signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or other such
movement as is permitted by other signal indications displayed at the same
time. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or
making a u-turn, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn
to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the
opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the
time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
      (3)   Pedestrians facing any flashing yellow signal indication at an
intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the
right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing yellow signal indication is first displayed.
      (4)   When a flashing circular yellow signal indication is displayed as a
beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road users are notified
that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained
thereon or that the regulatory or warning requirements of the other traffic
control device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently
applicable.
   (F)   Flashing red signal indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing circular red signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near
side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. The right to proceed
shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a
stop sign.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing any flashing red signal indication at an
intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the
right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing red signal indication is first displayed.
      (3)   When a flashing circular red signal indication is displayed as a
beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road users are notified
that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained
thereon or that the regulatory requirements of the other traffic control
device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently applicable.
Use of this signal indication shall be limited to supplementing stop, do not
enter, or wrong way signs, and to applications where compliance with the
supplemented traffic control device requires a stop at a designated point.
   (G)   In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature
can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking
on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of
any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.
   (H)   This section does not apply at railroad grade- crossings. Conduct of
drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by
R.C. §§ 4511.61 and 4511.62.
(R.C. § 4511.13)
§ 70.32 SIGNALS OVER REVERSIBLE LANES.
   The meanings of lane-use control signal indications are as follows:
   (A)   A steady downward green arrow. A road user is permitted to drive in
the lane over which the arrow signal indication is located.
   (B)   A steady yellow “X”. A road user is to prepare to vacate the lane over
which the signal indication is located because a lane control change is being
made to a steady red “X” signal indication.
   (C)   A steady white two-way left-turn arrow. A road user is permitted to
use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a left turn, but not
for through travel, with the understanding that common use of the lane by
oncoming road users for left turns also is permitted.
   (D)   A steady white one-way left-turn arrow. A road user is permitted to
use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a left turn, without
opposing turns in the same lane, but not for through travel.
   (E)   A steady red “X”. A road user is not permitted to use the lane over
which the signal indication is located and that this signal indication shall
modify accordingly the meaning of other traffic controls present.
(R.C. § 4511.131)
§ 70.33 AMBIGUOUS OR NON-WORKING TRAFFIC SIGNALS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle who approaches an intersection where traffic
is controlled by traffic control signals shall do all of the following if the
signal facing the driver exhibits no colored lights or colored lighted arrows,
exhibits a combination of such lights or arrows that fails to clearly indicate
the assignment of right-of-way, or, if the vehicle is a bicycle or an electric
bicycle, the signals are otherwise malfunctioning due to the failure of a
vehicle detector to detect the presence of the bicycle or electric bicycle:
      (1)   Stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, stop before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, stop
before entering the intersection;
      (2)   Yield the right-of-way to all vehicles in the intersection or
approaching on an intersecting road, if the vehicles will constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways;
      (3)   Exercise ordinary care while proceeding through the intersection.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.132)
§ 70.34 PEDESTRIAN-CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words “walk” or
“don’t walk”, or the symbol of a walking person or an upraised palm are in
place, these signals shall indicate the following instructions:
   (A)   A steady walking person signal indication, which symbolizes “walk”,
means that a pedestrian facing the signal indication is permitted to start to
cross the roadway in the direction of the signal indication, possibly in
conflict with turning vehicles. The pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the walking person
signal indication is first shown.
   (B)   A flashing upraised hand signal indication, which symbolizes “don’t
walk”, means that a pedestrian shall not start to cross the roadway in the
direction of the signal indication, but that any pedestrian who has already
started to cross on a steady walking person signal indication shall proceed to
the far side of the traveled way of the street or highway, unless otherwise
directed by a traffic control device to proceed only to the median of a divided
highway or only to some other island or pedestrian refuge area.
   (C)   A steady upraised hand signal indication means that a pedestrian shall
not enter the roadway in the direction of the signal indication.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the continued
use of pedestrian control signals utilizing the word “wait” if those signals
were installed prior to March 28, 1985.
   (E)   A flashing walking person signal indication has no meaning and shall
not be used.
(R.C. § 4511.14)
§ 70.35 UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS AND SIGNALS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of
any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to
be, is an imitation of, or resembles a traffic-control device or railroad sign
or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or hides from
view or interferes with the effectiveness of any traffic-control device or any
railroad sign or signal, and no person shall place or maintain, nor shall any
public authority permit, upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing
thereon any commercial advertising. This section does not prohibit either the
erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful
directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for traffic-
control devices, or the erection upon private property of traffic-control
devices by the owner of real property in accordance with R.C. §§ 4511.211 and
4511.432.
      (2)   Every prohibited sign, signal, marking, or device is a public
nuisance, and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway may remove the
same or cause it to be removed.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.16)
§ 70.36 ALTERATION, DEFACEMENT OR REMOVAL PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person, without lawful authority, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly
tamper with any traffic-control device, any railroad sign or signal, or any
inscription, shield, or insignia on the device, sign, or signal, or any part of
the device, sign, or signal;
      (2)   Knowingly drive upon or over any freshly applied pavement marking
material on the surface of a roadway while the marking material is in an
undried condition, and is marked by flags, markers, signs, or other devices
intended to protect it;
      (3)   Knowingly move, damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper
with a manhole cover.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A)(1) or (A)(3) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
third degree. If a violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(3) of this section
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If a violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(3) of
this section causes serious physical harm to property that is owned, leased, or
controlled by a state or local authority, the offender is guilty of a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.17)
§ 70.37 UNAUTHORIZED POSSESSION OR SALE OF DEVICES.
   (A)   As used in this section, TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE means any sign,
traffic control signal or other device conforming to and placed or erected in
accordance with the manual adopted under R.C. § 4511.09 by authority of a
public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic, including signs denoting the names of streets and
highways, but does not mean any pavement marking.
   (B)   No individual shall buy or otherwise possess, or sell, a traffic
control device, except when one of the following applies:
      (1)   In the course of the individual’s employment by the state or a
local authority for the express or implied purpose of manufacturing, providing,
erecting, moving or removing such a traffic control device;
      (2)   In the course of the individual’s employment by any manufacturer of
traffic control devices other than a state or local authority;
      (3)   For the purpose of demonstrating the design and function of a
traffic control device to state or local officials;
      (4)   When the traffic control device has been purchased from the state
or a local authority at a sale of property that is no longer needed or is unfit
for use; or
      (5)   When the traffic control device has been properly purchased from a
manufacturer for use on private property and the person possessing the device
has a sales receipt for the device or other acknowledgment of sale issued by
the manufacturer.
   (C)   This section does not preclude, and shall not be construed as
precluding, prosecution for theft in violation of R.C. § 2913.02, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or for receiving stolen property
in violation of R.C. § 2913.51, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 4511.18)
§ 70.38 SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICES; PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall possess a portable signal preemption device.
      (2)   No person shall use a portable signal preemption device to affect
the operation of a traffic-control device.
   (B)   Division (A)(1) of this section does not apply to any of the following
persons and division (A)(2) of this section does not apply to any of the
following persons when responding to an emergency call:
      (1)   A peace officer, as defined in R.C. § 109.71(A)(1), (A)(12), (A)
(14), or (A)(19);
      (2)   A state highway patrol officer;
      (3)   A person while occupying a public safety vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 4511.01(E)(1), (E)(3), or (E)(4).
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (D)   As used in this section, PORTABLE SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICE means a
device that, if activated by a person, is capable of changing a traffic-control
signal to green out of sequence.
(R.C. § 4511.031)
§ 70.39 PHOTO-MONITORING DEVICES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      AUTOMATED SPEED ENFORCEMENT PROGRAM. A program intended to reduce
speeding violations using an automated speed enforcement system.
      AUTOMATED SPEED ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM. A system with one or more sensors
working in conjunction with a speed measuring device to produce recorded images
of motor vehicles traveling at a prohibited rate of speed.
      DATE OF ISSUANCE OF NOTICE OF LIABILITY. The date printed on the notice
of liability immediately prior to its mailing.
      HEARING OFFICER. The independent third party appointed by, but not an
employee of, the Village Mayor or other office of the village, and who is an
active, registered attorney in good standing with the State Supreme Court.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same definition as in the Village Basic Code
Section 301.20, as amended from time to time.
      VEHICLE OWNER. The person or entity identified by the State Bureau of
Motor Vehicles, or registered with any other state vehicle registration office,
as the registered owner of a vehicle or a lessee of a motor vehicle under a
lease of six months or more, or the renter of a vehicle during the period of
infraction pursuant to a written rental agreement with a motor vehicle renting
dealer.
      RECORDED IMAGES. Images recorded by an automated speed enforcement system
photographic system on any of the following:
         (a)   Two or more photographs;
         (b)   Two or more microphotographs;
         (c)   Two or more electronic images;
         (d)   Two or more digital images;
         (e)   Videotape or video recording;
         (f)   Any other medium; and
         (g)   Showing the front or rear of a motor vehicle and on at least one
image or portion of tape, clearly identifying the license plate number of the
motor vehicle.
   (B)   General provisions.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision of the traffic code ordinances
of the village, the village adopts a civil enforcement program for automated
speed enforcement system violations as outlined in this section and village
ordinances 2018-14 and 2019-06. This program imposes monetary liability on the
owner of a vehicle for failure of an operator thereof to strictly comply with
the posted speed limit in school zones or streets or highways within the
village. The imposition of liability under this section and village ordinances
2018-14 and 2019-06 shall not be deemed a conviction for any purpose and shall
not be made part of the operating record of any person upon whom the liability
is imposed.
      (2)   The Chief of Police shall be responsible for administering the
automated speed enforcement program.
      (3)   Any citation for an automated speed system violation pursuant to
this section, known as a NOTICE OF LIABILITY shall:
         (a)   Be approved by a law enforcement officer of the Village Police
Department, or under contract with the village, in either case, such individual
having been certified by the State Peace Officer Training Academy and who
shall:
            1.   Examine evidence of an alleged violation recorded by the
automated speed enforcement system to determine whether a speeding infraction
has occurred; and
            2.   Determine whether the recorded images in connection with an
alleged violation shows an infraction, contains a date and time of the alleged
violation, shows the letters and numbers on the vehicle’s license plate and
shows the state in which the license plate was issued.
         (b)   Be forwarded by first-class mail or personal service to the
vehicle owner’s address as given on the state’s motor vehicle registration; and
         (c)   Clearly state the manner in which the violation may be appealed.
   (C)   Offense.
      (1)   The vehicle owner shall be liable for a penalty imposed pursuant to
this section if such vehicle is operated at a speed in excess of those set
forth in R.C. § 4511.21 as each may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   The vehicle owner shall not be responsible for the violation if,
within 30 calendar days from the date of issuance of the notice of liability,
the owner furnishes the village, or its designee, with:
         (a)   The name and address of the person who leased, rented, borrowed
or otherwise had the care, custody and control of the motor vehicle at the time
of the violation, a signed affidavit sworn to before a notary public that the
affiant was operating the motor vehicle; or
         (b)   An affidavit by the vehicle owner stating that, at the time of
the violation, the motor vehicle or the license plates of the motor vehicle
involved were stolen or were in the care, custody and control of some person
who did not have the owner’s permission to use the motor vehicle, or that the
motor vehicle or license plates of the motor vehicle were stolen before the
violation occurred and were not under the control or possession of the owner at
the time of the violation. In order to demonstrate that the motor vehicle or
license plates were stolen before the violation occurred and were not under the
control or possession of the vehicle owner at the time of the violation, the
vehicle owner must submit proof that a police report, incident report/general
offense report about the stolen motor vehicle or license plates was filed prior
to the violation or within 48 hours after the violation occurred.
      (3)   A certified copy of the notice of liability alleging the violation
of this section and ordinance 2019-06 occurred, sworn to or affirmed by a law
enforcement officer of the Village Police Department, or under contract with
the village, with the recorded images produced by an automated speed
enforcement system photographic system shall be prima facie evidence of the
facts contained therein and shall be admissible in a proceeding alleging a
violation under this section and ordinance 2019-06.
      (4)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to emergency
vehicles or public safety vehicles when those vehicles are responding to
emergency or call for emergency service.
   (D)   Notice of liability.
      (1)   The notice of liability shall be processed by the village or its
designee and shall be served by ordinary mail to the owner’s address as given
on the motor vehicle registration from the Bureau of Motor Vehicles, or its
equivalent of the state in which it is registered. The notice of liability
shall include:
         (a)   The name and address of the vehicle owner;
         (b)   The license plate number of the motor vehicle involved in the
violation;
         (c)   The violation charged;
         (d)   The location of the violation;
         (e)   The date and time of the violation;
         (f)   A copy of the recorded image(s);
         (g)   The amount of the civil penalty imposed and the date by which
the civil penalty should be paid and where the payment should be made;
         (h)   Information advising the person alleged to be liable of the
options as provided in division (C)(2) above;
         (i)   The time, place and manner in which an administrative appeal can
be initiated and a warning that failure to exercise the options provided under
§
70.99 in a timely manner is an admission of liability; and
         (j)   The date of issuance of the notice of liability.
      (2)   A notice of liability issued under this section and ordinance 2019-
06 shall be mailed no later than 30 calendar days after the alleged violation.
      (3)   Except as provided under division (C)(2) above, the village or its
designee may not mail a notice of liability to a person who is not the vehicle
owner.
      (4)   It is prima facie evidence that the person registered as the owner
of the vehicle with the State Bureau of Motor Vehicles (or with any other state
vehicle registration office) was operating the vehicle at the time of the
offense set out in division (C) above. This evidence and presumption may be
rebutted in accordance with division (C)(2) above.
      (5)   Nothing in this division (D) shall be construed to limit the
liability of an owner of a vehicle for any violation of division (C) above.
   (E)   Civil penalties.
      (1)   Unless the driver of the motor vehicle received a citation from a
police officer at the time of the violation, or unless the exception or defense
to liability set forth in division (C)(4) above, the owner or responsible party
for the motor vehicle is subject to a civil penalty if the motor vehicle is
recorded by an automated speed enforcement system while being operated in
violation of this section.
      (2)   (a)   The civil penalty under this section shall be in accordance
with the following fines which correspond with the speed limit violations:
 
6-15 mph over the posted limit  $85 fine
16-20 mph over the posted limit $100 fine
21+ mph over the posted limit   $115 fine
 
         (b)   The failure to respond to a notice of liability in a timely
fashion as set forth in this section shall constitute a waiver of the right to
contest liability for the violation under division (C)(2) above.
         (c)   Persons who choose to pay the civil penalty without appearing
before a Hearing Officer may do so in the manner indicated on the notice of
liability.
         (d)   A violation for which a civil penalty is imposed under this
section is not a moving violation for the purpose of assessing points under
R.C. § 4510.036 for minor misdemeanor moving traffic offenses and may not be
recorded on the driving record of the owner or operator of the motor vehicle
and shall not be reported to Bureau of Motor Vehicles.
   (F)   Collection of civil penalty. If the civil penalty is not paid, the
civil penalty imposed under the provisions of this section shall be
collectable, together with any interest and penalties thereon, in any manner
authorized by law including, but not limited to, civil suit. In addition to any
other fees or charges authorized by this section in relation to the commission
of a violation of this section, a person liable for the penalties established
under this section may be assessed a fee under this section in an amount equal
to the costs of collection of the debt.
   (G)   Administrative appeal.
      (1)   A vehicle owner or responsible party who receives a notice of
liability under this section may do one of the following:
         (a)   Pay the civil penalty, in accordance with the instructions on
the notice of liability;
         (b)   Within 30 calendar days of the date of issuance of the notice of
liability, submit to the Village Police Department, or its designee, one of the
affidavits described in division (C)(2) above. Upon receipt of such an
affidavit timely submitted, the village shall suspend further action against
the owner of the vehicle and instead direct notices and collection efforts to
the person identified in the affidavit submitted by the owner of the motor
vehicle. If the person named in the affidavit, when notified, denies being the
driver or denies liability, then the village shall resume the notice and
collection process against the vehicle owner, the same as if no affidavit had
been submitted, and if the violation is found to have been committed by a
preponderance of evidence, the vehicle owner shall be liable for any penalties
imposed for the violation; or
         (c)   1.   Contest the notice of liability by filing a written request
for a hearing to review of the notice of liability with the Village Police
Department, or its designee. A written notice of request for review must be
received by the Village Police Department, or its designee, within 30 calendar
days after the date of issuance of the notice of liability. The failure to give
notice of request for review within this time period shall constitute a waiver
of the right to contest the notice of liability. A Hearing Officer shall hear
reviews. Hearings shall be held within 45 business days of the date received by
the village, or its designee, of the request for review; this time may be
extended upon a written reasonable request for additional time or upon
reasonable notification of the Hearing Officer or local authority with prior
notice to all parties. If the owner or responsible party requests a review of
the notice of liability and a hearing, a $25 fee per notice of liability for
such review and hearing shall be assessed to the applicant. The Hearing Officer
may waive this administrative hearing fee only if the owner or responsible
person pleads liable and pays the full amount of the civil penalty prior to
commencement of the hearing.
            2.   The hearing shall be open to the public, and a docket shall be
posted in a conspicuous place near the entrance to the hearing room that shall
identify, by alleged violator, the hearings scheduled for that day and the time
of each hearing. More than one hearing may be scheduled for the same time to
allow for such things as non-appearances or admissions of liability.
            3.   The Hearing Officer shall determine whether a preponderance of
evidence establishes that a violation of this section occurred and the person
requesting the review is the party operating the vehicle at the time of the
violation. The Hearing Officer shall advise the person or entity on the day of
the hearing of the Hearing Officer’s decision. A certified copy of the notice
of liability alleging the violation of this section occurred, sworn to or
affirmed by a duly authorized official or agent of the village, or its
designee, with the recorded images or data produced by an automated speed
enforcement system shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein
and shall be admissible in a proceeding alleging a violation under this
section. Adjudication of liability shall be based on a preponderance of the
evidence.
            4.   If the Hearing Officer finds a sufficient evidence of a
violation, but the vehicle owner or responsible party is not liable, the
Hearing Officer shall, in writing, issue a decision finding the vehicle owner
and/or responsible party not liable and submit it to the village, or its
designee.
      (2)   If the owner or responsible party chooses to contest the notice of
liability, the Hearing Officer may consider any of the following as an
affirmative defense to a violation upon the defense being established by a
preponderance of the evidence by the vehicle owner or responsible party that:
         (a)   The motor vehicle or license plates of the motor vehicle were
stolen before the violation occurred and were not under control or possession
of the owner at the time of the violation. In order to demonstrate that the
motor vehicle or license plates were stolen before the violation occurred and
were not under the control or possession of the owner at the time of the
violation, the owner must submit proof that a police report about the stolen
motor vehicle or license plates was filed prior to the violation or within 48
hours after the violation occurred;
         (b)   The motor vehicle was under the custody and/or control of
another person at the time of the violation. In order to establish this, the
owner or responsible person must provide the name and address of the person who
had custody and/or control of the motor vehicle at the time of the violation;
         (c)   This section is unenforceable because the recorded image is not
legible enough to determine the information needed;
         (d)   Evidence, other than that adduced pursuant to division (G)(2)(a)
above, that the vehicle owner or person named in the notice of liability was
not operating the motor vehicle at the time of the violation. To satisfy the
evidentiary burden under this division (G)(2) , the owner or person named in
the notice of liability shall provide to the Hearing Officer evidence showing
the identity of the person who was operating the motor vehicle at the time of
the violation, including, but not limited to, the operator’s name and current
address, and any other evidence the Hearing Officer deems pertinent;
         (e)   The motor vehicle operator was yielding the right-of-way to an
emergency vehicle in accordance with state law or to a funeral procession; and/
or
         (f)   Under consideration of the totality of the circumstances the
person or entity named in the notice of liability is not liable.
      (3)   If the Hearing Officer finds that the person or entity named in the
notice of liability was not operating the motor vehicle at the time of the
violation or receives evidence under division (G)(2)(d) above identifying the
person driving the motor vehicle at the time of the violation, the Hearing
Officer shall provide it to the village or its designee within five calendar
days, a copy of any evidence substantiating who was operating the motor vehicle
at the time of the violation.
         (a)   Upon receipt of evidence of the responsible party pursuant to
this division (G)(3) or pursuant to division (C)(2) above, the village, or its
designee, may issue a notice of liability, with the name and address of the
responsible party and the information required by division (D) above, to the
person that the evidence indicates was operating the motor vehicle at the time
of the violation.
         (b)   A notice of liability issued under this division (G)(3), shall
be sent by the village, or its designee, by ordinary mail no later than 21
business days after the receipt of the evidence from the Hearing Officer. The
content of a notice of liability issued under this division (G)(3) shall be the
same as set forth in division (D)(1) above.
   (H)   The village shall not issue a violation, as described in this section,
using an automated speed enforcement system that is not located in a school
zone, as described in R.C. § 4511.21, or in a residential area, or within 900
feet of the boundaries of a state or local park or recreation area or facility,
unless the vehicle involved in the violation is traveling at least ten mph over
the posted speed limit.
   (I)   The manufacturer or operator of the automated speed enforcement system
used by the village, or an independent calibration laboratory, shall calibrate
said device before it is used by the village. The manufacturer or operator of
the automated speed enforcement system shall certify to the accuracy of each
traffic law photo-monitoring device in accordance with applicable federal law,
if any. For each traffic law photo-monitoring device that is considered MOBILE
or PORTABLE, meaning it is attached to a trailer, vehicle or other apparatus
that is easily transported to different the automated speed enforcement system
locations, the village shall perform, or cause to be performed, a system self-
test and calibration verification of said traffic law photo-monitoring device
in accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications prior to its use at each
the automated speed enforcement system location. For each device that is
considered MOBILE or PORTABLE, meaning it is attached to a trailer, vehicle or
other apparatus that is easily transported to different system locations, the
Village Police Department, or its designee, shall clearly and conspicuously
mark on the outside of the trailer, vehicle, or apparatus that contains the
traffic law photo-monitoring device that the device is the property or under
the control of the village.
   (J)   If any section, division, paragraph, clause or provision or any part
thereof of this section and/or ordinance 2019-06 shall be finally adjudicated
by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the remainder of this
section and/or ordinance 2019-06 shall be unaffected by such adjudication and
all the remaining provisions of this section and/or ordinance 2019-06 shall
remain in full force and effect as though such section, subsection, paragraph,
clause or provision or any part thereof so adjudicated to be invalid had not,
to the extent of such invalidity, been included herein.
   (K)   It is found and determined that all formal actions of this Council
concerning and relating to the passage of this section were taken in
conformance with applicable open meetings laws and that all deliberations of
this Council and of any committees that resulted in those formal actions were
in compliance with all legal requirements including any applicable open
meetings requirements.
   (L)   This Legislative Authority determines that it is necessary and a
proper municipal public purpose and in the best interest of the village to
proceed with this section.
   (M)   It is found and determined that all formal actions of the village
concerning and relating to the passage of this section and/or ordinance 2019-06
were taken in an open meeting, and that all deliberations of this Village
Council and of any of its committees that resulted in those formal actions were
in meetings open to the public and in compliance with all legal requirements,
including R.C. § 121.22.
(Ord. 2019-07, passed 5-28-2019)
§ 70.99 PENALTY
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this traffic code for which no
penalty otherwise is provided in the section violated is guilty of one of the
following:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this
section, a minor misdemeanor;
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
      (3)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more predicate motor vehicle or
traffic offenses, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.99)
   (B)   (1)   As used in this section and each section referenced in division
(B)(2) of this section, all of the following apply:
         (a)   “Distracted” means doing either of the following while operating
a vehicle:
            1.   Using an electronic wireless communications device, as defined
in R.C. § 4511.204, in violation of that section;
            2.   Engaging in any activity that is not necessary to the
operation of a vehicle and impairs, or reasonably would be expected to impair,
the ability of the operator to drive the vehicle safely.
         (b)   “Distracted” does not include operating a motor vehicle while
wearing an earphone or earplug over or in both ears at the same time. A person
who so wears earphones or earplugs may be charged with a violation of R.C. §
4511.84, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
         (c)   “Distracted” does not include conducting any activity while
operating a utility service vehicle or a vehicle for or on behalf of a utility,
provided that the driver of the vehicle is acting in response to an emergency,
power outage, or a circumstance affecting the health or safety of individuals.
As used in this division (B)(1)(c):
            UTILITY. An entity specified in R.C. § 4905.03(A), (C), (D), (E),
or (G).
            UTILITY SERVICE VEHICLE. A vehicle owned or operated by a utility.
      (2)   If an offender violates R.C. § 4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12,
4511.121, 4511.132, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25,
4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33,
4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41,
4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.451, 4511.46, 4511.47,
4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59, 4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.64,
4511.71, 4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, or 4511.73, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
violation, the offender is subject to the applicable penalty for the violation
and, notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28, is subject to an additional fine of not
more than $100 as follows:
         (a)   1.   Subject to Traffic Rule 13, if a law enforcement officer
issues an offender a ticket, citation, or summons for a violation of any of the
aforementioned sections of the Ohio Revised Code, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that indicates that the offender was distracted
while committing the violation and that the distracting activity was a
contributing factor to the commission of the violation, the offender may enter
a written plea of guilty and waive the offender’s right to contest the ticket,
citation, or summons in a trial provided that the offender pays the total
amount of the fine established for the violation and pays the additional fine
of $100.
            2.   In lieu of payment of the additional fine of $100, the
offender instead may elect to attend a distracted driving safety course, the
duration and contents of which shall be established by the Ohio Director of
Public Safety. If the offender attends and successfully completes the course,
the offender shall be issued written evidence that the offender successfully
completed the course. The offender shall be required to pay the total amount of
the fine established for the violation, but shall not be required to pay the
additional fine of $100, so long as the offender submits to the court both the
offender’s payment in full and such written evidence within 90 days of the
underlying violation that resulted in the imposition of the additional fine
under division (B) of this section.
         (b)   1.   If the offender appears in person to contest the ticket,
citation, or summons in a trial and the offender pleads guilty to or is
convicted of the violation, the court, in addition to all other penalties
provided by law, may impose the applicable penalty for the violation and may
impose the additional fine of not more than $100.
            2.   If the court imposes upon the offender the applicable penalty
for the violation and an additional fine of not more than $100, the court shall
inform the offender that, in lieu of payment of the additional fine of not more
than $100, the offender instead may elect to attend the distracted driving
safety course described in division (B)(2)(a) of this section. If the offender
elects the course option and attends and successfully completes the course, the
offender shall be issued written evidence that the offender successfully
completed the course. The offender shall be required to pay the total amount of
the fine established for the violation, but shall not be required to pay the
additional fine of not more than $100, so long as the offender submits to the
court the offender’s payment and such written evidence within 90 days of the
underlying violation that resulted in the imposition of the additional fine
under division (B) of this section.
      (3)    If a law enforcement officer issues an offender a ticket,
citation, or summons for a violation of any of the sections of the Revised Code
listed in division (B)(2) of this section that indicates that the offender was
distracted while committing the violation and that the distracting activity was
a contributing factor to the commission of the violation, the officer shall do
both of the following:
         (a)   Report the issuance of the ticket, citation, or summons to the
officer’s law enforcement agency;
         (b)   Ensure that such report indicates the offender’s race.
(R.C. § 4511.991)
   (C)   Whoever is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor shall be sentenced in accordance with §
130.99.
Statutory reference:
   Reimbursement for costs of confinement, see R.C. §§ 2929.36 et seq.
CHAPTER 71: LICENSING PROVISIONS
Section
Motor Vehicle Licensing
   
71.01   Display of license plates or validation stickers; registration
   
71.02   Improper use of noncommercial motor vehicle
   
71.03   Operating motor vehicle ordered immobilized; forfeiture
   
71.04   Operation or sale without certificate of title
   
71.05   Display of certificate of registration
   
71.06   Use of unauthorized plates
   
71.07   Operating without dealer or manufacturer license plates
Driver’s Licenses
   
71.20   Prohibited acts
   
71.21   Permitting minor to operate vehicle prohibited; temporary instruction
permit; probationary license
   
71.22   License required as driver or commercial driver on public or private
property; nonresident exemption
   
71.23   Employment of a minor to operate a taxicab prohibited
   
71.24   Restriction against owner lending vehicle for use of another
   
71.25   Suspension of driver’s licenses; license suspended by court of record
   
71.26   Display of license
   
71.27   Prohibition against false statements
   
71.28   Driving under suspension or in violation of license restriction
   
71.29   Operating motor vehicle or motorcycle without valid license
   
71.30   Driving under OAI suspension
   
71.31   Driving under financial responsibility law suspension or cancellation;
driving under a nonpayment of judgment suspension
   
71.32   Failure to reinstate license
Commercial Driver’s Licenses
   
71.45   Definitions
   
71.46   Use of actual gross weight in lieu of rating
   
71.47   Prohibited acts
   
71.48   Prerequisites to operation of commercial motor vehicle
   
71.49   Physical qualification to operate commercial motor vehicles
   
71.50   Criminal offenses
   
71.51   Application of federal regulations
   
71.52   Employment of drivers of commercial vehicles
 
   
71.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Commercial driver’s licenses, see R.C. Chapter 4506
   Driver’s licenses, see R.C. Chapter 4507
   Motor vehicle licensing, see R.C. Chapter 4504
   Municipal motor vehicle license tax, see R.C. § 4504.06
   Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14
   Proof of financial responsibility required; civil penalties; peace officers
as agents of Registrar of
    Motor Vehicles; procedures and rules, see R.C. §§ 4509.101 et seq.
   Suspension and revocation of driver’s licenses, see R.C. Chapter 4510
   Suspension of driver’s licenses; municipal power to suspend for a period not
to exceed time
    permitted or required by state law, see R.C. § 4510.05
MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSING
§ 71.01 DISPLAY OF LICENSE PLATES OR VALIDATION STICKERS; REGISTRATION.
   (A)   (1)   No person who is the owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall
fail to display in plain view on the rear of the motor vehicle a license plate
that displays the distinctive number and registration mark assigned to the
motor vehicle by the Ohio Director of Public Safety, including any county
identification sticker and any validation sticker when required by and issued
under R.C. §§ 4503.19 and 4503.191. However, a commercial tractor shall display
the license plate on the front of the commercial tractor.
      (2)   The license plate shall be securely fastened so as not to swing,
and shall not be covered by any material that obstructs its visibility.
      (3)   No person to whom a temporary motor vehicle license registration
has been issued for the use of a motor vehicle under R.C. § 4503.182, and no
operator of that motor vehicle, shall fail to display the temporary motor
vehicle license registration in plain view from the rear of the vehicle either
in the rear window or on an external rear surface of the motor vehicle.
      (4)   No person shall cover a temporary motor vehicle license
registration by any material that obstructs its visibility.
(R.C. § 4503.21(A))
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided by R.C. §§ 4503.103, 4503.107, 4503.173,
4503.41, 4503.43, and 4503.46, no person who is the owner or chauffeur of a
motor vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads or highways shall fail
to file annually the application for registration or to pay the tax therefor.
(R.C. § 4503.11(A))
   (C)    (1)   Within 30 days of becoming a resident of this state, any person
who owns a motor vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads or highways
shall register the vehicle in this state. If such a person fails to register a
vehicle owned by the person, the person shall not operate any motor vehicle in
this state under a license issued by another state.
      (2)   For purposes of division (C)(1) of this section, RESIDENT means any
person to whom any of the following applies:
         (a)   The person maintains their principal residence in this state and
does not reside in this state as a result of the person’s active service in the
United States armed forces.
         (b)   The person is determined by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles to
be a resident in accordance with standards adopted by the Registrar under R.C.
§ 4507.01.
(R.C. § 4503.111(A), (C))
   (D)   Upon the transfer of ownership of a motor vehicle, the registration of
the motor vehicle expires, and the original owner immediately shall remove the
license plates from the motor vehicle, except as otherwise provided in R.C. §
4503.12.
(R.C. § 4503.12(A))
   (E)   No person shall operate or drive upon the highways of this
municipality a motor vehicle acquired from a former owner who has registered
the motor vehicle, while the motor vehicle displays the distinctive number or
identification mark assigned to it upon its original registration.
(R.C. § 4549.11(A))
   (F)   No person who is the owner of a motor vehicle and a resident of this
state shall operate or drive the motor vehicle upon the highways of this
municipality while it displays a distinctive number or identification mark
issued by or under the authority of another state, without complying with the
laws of this state relating to the registration and identification of motor
vehicles.
(R.C. § 4549.12(A))
   (G)   (1)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   The offenses established under division (A) of this section are
strict liability offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of
these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be construed to imply
that any other offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability,
is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. § 4503.21(B), (C))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4503.11(D))
      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   The offense established under division (G)(3)(a) of this section
is a strict liability offense and strict liability is a culpable mental state
for purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of this offense as a strict
liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
(R.C. § 4503.111(B))
      (4)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4503.12(D))
      (5)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section is guilty of
operation of a motor vehicle bearing license plates or an identification mark
issued to another, a minor misdemeanor on a first offense and a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4549.11(B))
      (6)   Whoever violates division (F) of this section is guilty of illegal
operation by a resident of this state of a motor vehicle bearing the
distinctive number or identification mark issued by a foreign jurisdiction, a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4549.12(B))
§ 71.02 IMPROPER USE OF NONCOMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person shall use a motor vehicle registered as a noncommercial
motor vehicle for other than the purposes set forth in R.C. § 4501.01.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 4503.05)
§ 71.03 OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE ORDERED IMMOBILIZED; FORFEITURE.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or permit the operation of a
motor vehicle upon any public or private property used by the public for
vehicular travel or parking knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that
the motor vehicle has been ordered immobilized pursuant to an immobilization
order issued under R.C. § 4503.233.
   (B)   A motor vehicle that is operated by a person during a violation of
division (A) of this section shall be criminally forfeited to the state in
accordance with the procedures contained in R.C. § 4503.234.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 4503.236)
§ 71.04 OPERATION OR SALE WITHOUT CERTIFICATE OF TITLE.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in this municipality a motor vehicle for which a
certificate of title is required without having that certificate in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 4505 or, if a physical certificate of title has not been
issued for a motor vehicle, operate the motor vehicle in this state knowing
that the ownership information relating to the vehicle has not been entered
into the automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of Common
Pleas;
      (2)   Display or display for sale or sell as a dealer or acting on behalf
of a dealer, a motor vehicle without having obtained a manufacturer’s or
importer’s certificate, a certificate of title, or an assignment of a
certificate of title for it as provided in R.C. Chapter 4505;
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title or any certificate of
registration or license plates upon cancellation of the same by the Registrar
of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed in R.C. Chapter
4505;
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas as provided in R.C. Chapter 4505 in case of the destruction or
dismantling or change of a motor vehicle in such respect that it is not the
motor vehicle described in the certificate of title;
      (5)   Violate any rules adopted pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4505;
      (6)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapters 4505 and 4517, sell
at wholesale a motor vehicle ownership of which is not evidenced by an Ohio
certificate of title, or the current certificate of title issued for the motor
vehicle, or the manufacturer’s certificate of origin, and all title assignments
that evidence the seller’s ownership of the motor vehicle, and an odometer
disclosure statement that complies with R.C. § 4505.06 and subchapter IV of the
“Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act”, 86 Stat. 961 (1972), 15
U.S.C. § 1981;
      (7)   Operate in this state a motor vehicle knowing that the certificate
of title to the vehicle or ownership of the vehicle as otherwise reflected in
the automated title processing system has been canceled.
   (B)   This section does not apply to persons engaged in the business of
warehousing or transporting motor vehicles for the purpose of salvage
disposition.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $200,
imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4505.18)
§ 71.05 DISPLAY OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   (1)   The operator of a “commercial car”, as defined in R.C. §
4501.01, when the commercial car is required to be registered under state law,
shall, when operating the commercial car, trailer or semitrailer on the
streets, roads, or highways of this municipality display inside or on the
vehicle the certificate of registration for the commercial car, trailer or
semitrailer provided for in R.C. § 4503.19, or shall carry the certificate on
the operator’s person and display it upon the demand of any peace officer.
      (2)   Every person operating a commercial car, trailer or semitrailer
required to be registered under state law shall permit the inspection of the
certificate of registration upon demand of any peace officer.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
commercial car certificate of registration violation, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4549.18)
§ 71.06 USE OF UNAUTHORIZED PLATES.
   (A)   No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle upon the public roads
and highways in this municipality if it displays a license plate or a
distinctive number or identification mark that meets any of the following
criteria:
      (1)   It is fictitious;
      (2)   It is a counterfeit or an unlawfully made copy of any distinctive
number or identification mark;
      (3)   It belongs to another motor vehicle, provided that this section
does not apply to a motor vehicle that is operated on the public roads and
highways in this municipality when the motor vehicle displays license plates
that originally were issued for a motor vehicle that previously was owned by
the same person who owns the motor vehicle that is operated on the public roads
and highways in this municipality during the 30-day period described in R.C. §
4503.12(A)(4).
   (B)   A person who fails to comply with the transfer of registration
provisions of R.C. § 4503.12 and is charged with a violation of that section
shall not be charged with a violation of this section.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3) of this section is
guilty of operating a motor vehicle bearing an invalid license plate or
identification mark, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and
a misdemeanor of the third degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4549.08)
§ 71.07 OPERATING WITHOUT DEALER OR MANUFACTURER LICENSE PLATES.
   (A)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated upon a public road or
highway a motor vehicle of a manufacturer or dealer unless the vehicle carries
and displays a placard, except as provided in R.C. § 4503.21, issued by the
Director of Public Safety that displays the registration number of its
manufacturer or dealer.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of illegal
operation of a manufacturer’s or dealer’s motor vehicle, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4549.10)
DRIVER’S LICENSES
§ 71.20 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Display or cause or permit to be displayed, or possess any
identification card, driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit
knowing the same to be fictitious, or to have been canceled, suspended, or
altered;
      (2)   Lend to a person not entitled thereto, or knowingly permit a person
not entitled thereto to use any identification card, driver’s or commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver’s license
temporary instruction permit issued to the person so lending or permitting the
use thereof;
      (3)   Display, or represent as one’s own, any identification card,
driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or
commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit not issued to the
person so displaying the same;
      (4)   Fail to surrender to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, upon the
Registrar’s demand, any identification card, driver’s or commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit that has been suspended or canceled;
      (5)   In any application for an identification card, driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit or any renewal, reprint, or
duplicate thereof, knowingly conceal a material fact or present any physician’s
statement required under R.C. § 4507.08 or 4507.081 when knowing the same to be
false or fictitious.
   (B)   Whoever violates any division of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.30)
Statutory reference:
   Use of license to violate liquor laws; suspension; procedures, see R.C. §
4510.33
§ 71.21 PERMITTING MINOR TO OPERATE VEHICLE PROHIBITED; TEMPORARY INSTRUCTION
PERMIT; PROBATIONARY LICENSE.
   (A)   No person shall cause or knowingly permit any minor to drive a motor
vehicle upon a highway as an operator, unless the minor has first obtained a
license or permit to drive a motor vehicle under R.C. Chapter 4507.
(R.C. § 4507.31(A))
   (B)   (1)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under R.C. §
4507.05(A) shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or
private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking
in violation of the conditions established under R.C. § 4507.05(A).
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (B)(2)(b) of this section, no
holder of a temporary instruction permit that is issued under R.C. § 4507.05(A)
and that is issued on or after July 1, 1998, and who has not attained the age
of 18 years, shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or
private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking
between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m.
         (b)   The holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under R.C. §
4507.05(A) on or after July 1, 1998, who has not attained the age of 18 years,
may operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property
used by the public for purposed of vehicular travel or parking between the
hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. if, at the time of such operation, the holder
is accompanied by the holder’s parent, guardian, or custodian, and the parent,
guardian, or custodian holds a current valid driver’s or commercial driver’s
license issued by this state, is actually occupying a seat beside the permit
holder, and does not have a prohibited concentration of alcohol in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as provided in R.C. § 4511.19
(A).
(R.C. § 4507.05(F))
   (C)   (1)   (a)   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held
the license for less than 12 months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a
highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. unless
the holder is accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian.
         (b)   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held the
license for 12 months or longer shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. unless the
holder is accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian.
      (2)   (a)   Subject to division (E)(1) of this section, division (C)(1)
(a) of this section does not apply to the holder of a probationary driver’s
license who is doing either of the following:
            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours of midnight and 6:
00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession
written documentation from the holder’s employer.
            2.   Traveling to or from an official function sponsored by the
school the holder attends between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided
that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession written documentation
from an appropriate official of the school;
            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious event between the
hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official
affiliated with the event.
         (b)   Division (C)(1)(b) of this section does not apply to the holder
of a probationary driver’s license who is doing either of the following:
            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
5:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession
written documentation from the holder’s employer.
            2.   Traveling to or from an official function sponsored by the
school the holder attends between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.,
provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession written
documentation from an appropriate official of the school;
            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious event between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official
affiliated with the event.
      (3)   An employer, school official, or official affiliated with a
religious event is not liable in damages in a civil action for any injury,
death, or loss to person or property that allegedly arises from, or is related
to, the fact that the employer, school official, or official affiliated with a
religious event provided the holder of a probationary driver’s license with the
written documentation described in division (C)(2) of this section. The
Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall make available at no cost a form to serve as
the written documentation described in division (C)(2) of this section, and
employers, school officials, officials affiliated with religious events, and
holders of probationary driver’s licenses may utilize that form or may choose
to utilize any other written documentation to meet the requirements of that
division.
      (4)   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held the
license for less than 12 months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking with more than one person who is not a family member
occupying the vehicle unless the probationary license holder is accompanied by
the probationary license holder’s parent, guardian, or custodian.
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of division (C)(1)(a) or
(C)(1)(b) of this section if, at the time of the violation, an emergency
existed that required the holder of the probationary driver’s license to
operate a motor vehicle in violation of division (C)(1)(a) or (C)(1)(b) of this
section or the holder was an emancipated minor.
   (E)   (1)   If a person is issued a probationary driver’s license prior to
attaining the age of 17 years and the person pleads guilty to, is convicted of,
or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a moving violation
during the six-month period commencing on the date on which the person is
issued the probationary driver’s license, the court with jurisdiction over the
violation may order that the holder must be accompanied by the holder’s parent
or guardian whenever the holder is operating a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking for a period not to exceed six months or the date the holder
attains the age of 17 years, whichever occurs first.
      (2)   Any person who is subject to the operating restrictions established
under division (E)(1) of this section as a result of a first moving violation
may petition the court for driving privileges without being accompanied by the
holder’s parent or guardian during the period of time determined by the court
under that division. In granting the driving privileges, the court shall
specify the purposes of the privileges and shall issue the person appropriate
forms setting forth the privileges granted. If a person is convicted of, pleads
guilty to, or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a second or
subsequent moving violation, the court with jurisdiction over the violation may
terminate any driving privileges previously granted under this division.
      (3)   No person shall violate any operating restriction imposed under
division (E)(1) or (E)(2) of this section.
   (F)   No holder of a probationary license shall operate a motor vehicle upon
a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking unless the total number of occupants of the vehicle
does not exceed the total number of occupant restraining devices originally
installed in the motor vehicle by its manufacturer, and each occupant of the
vehicle is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted
occupant restraining device.
   (G)   A restricted license may be issued to a person who is 14 or 15 years
of age under proof of hardship satisfactory to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles.
   (H)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether each occupant of the motor vehicle is wearing all of the
available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device as
required by division (F) of this section, or for the sole purpose of issuing a
ticket, citation or summons if that requirement has been or is being violated,
or for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a
violation of that requirement.
   (I)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (C)(1)(a) or (C)(1)(b) of this
section has been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a
ticket, citation or summons for such a violation or for causing the arrest or
commencing a prosecution of a person for such a violation.
   (J)   As used in this section:
      FAMILY MEMBER. A family member of a probationary license holder includes
any of the following:
         (a)   A spouse;
         (b)   A child or stepchild;
         (c)   A parent, stepparent, grandparent, or parent-in-law;
         (d)   An aunt or uncle;
         (e)   A sibling, whether of the whole or half blood or by adoption, a
brother-in-law, or a sister-in-law;
         (f)   A son or daughter of the probationary license holder’s
stepparent if the stepparent has not adopted the probationary license holder;
         (g)   An eligible adult, as defined in R.C. § 4507.05.
      MOVING VIOLATION. Means any violation of any statute or ordinance that
regulates the operation of vehicles on the highways or streets. The term does
not include a violation of R.C. § 4513.263 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, or a violation of any statute or ordinance regulating
pedestrians or the parking of vehicles, vehicle size or load limitations,
vehicle fitness requirements, or vehicle registration.
      OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4513.263.
(R.C. § 4507.071(B) - (I))
   (K)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.31(B))
      (2)   Whoever violates divisions (B), (C)(1), (C)(4), (E)(3), or (F) of
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. §§ 4507.05(I), 4507.071(J))
§ 71.22 LICENSE REQUIRED AS DRIVER OR COMMERCIAL DRIVER ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE
PROPERTY; NONRESIDENT EXEMPTION.
   (A)   (1)   (a)   No person shall permit the operation of a motor vehicle
upon any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking, knowing the operator does not have a valid
driver’s license issued to the operator by the Registrar of Motor Vehicle or a
deputy registrar under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid commercial driver’s license
issued under R.C. Chapter 4506. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
whoever violates this division is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When
the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
130.18, §
130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28 (A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27 (A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
130.99 (F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up
to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community
service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt
under R.C. § 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
         (b)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this
section or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   No person shall receive a driver’s license, or a motorcycle
operator’s endorsement of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card unless and until the person
surrenders to the Registrar or a deputy registrar all valid licenses, temporary
instruction permits, and identification cards issued to the person by another
jurisdiction recognized by this state.
      (3)   The Registrar shall report the cancellation of a license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card to the issuing authority, together
with information that the license, temporary instruction permit, or
identification card is now issued in this state. The Registrar or a deputy
registrar shall destroy any such license, temporary instruction permit, or
identification card that is not returned to the issuing authority.
      (4)   No person shall possess more than one valid license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card at any time.
(R.C. § 4507.02(A))
   (B)   (1)   No person shall be required to obtain a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license for the purpose of temporarily driving, operating, drawing,
moving, or propelling a road roller or road machinery upon a street or highway.
      (2)   No person shall be required to obtain a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license for the purpose of temporarily driving, operating, drawing,
moving, or propelling any agricultural tractor or implement of husbandry upon a
street or highway at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less.
      (3)   No person shall drive, operate, draw, move, or propel any
agricultural tractor or implement of husbandry upon a street or highway at a
speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the person has a current, valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license.
      (4)   No person having a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license
shall be required to have a motorcycle operator’s endorsement to operate a
motorcycle having three wheels with a motor of not more than 50 cubic
centimeters piston displacement.
      (5)   No person having a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license
shall be required to have a motorcycle operator’s endorsement to operate an
autocycle or a cab-enclosed motorcycle.
      (6)   Every person on active duty in the military or naval forces of the
United States, when furnished with a driver’s permit and when operating an
official motor vehicle in connection with such duty, is exempt from the license
requirements of R.C. Chapters 4506 and 4507. Every person on active duty in the
military or naval forces of the United States or in service with the peace
corps, volunteers in service to America, or the foreign service of the United
States, is exempt from the license requirements of such sections for the period
of the person’s active duty or service and for six months thereafter, provided
such person was a licensee under such sections at the time the person commenced
the person’s active duty or service. This section does not prevent such a
person or the person’s spouse or dependent from making an application, as
provided in R.C. § 4507.10(C), for the renewal of a driver’s license or
motorcycle operator’s endorsement or as provided in R.C. § 4506.14 for the
renewal of a commercial driver’s license during the period of the person’s
active duty or service.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (B)(3) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.03)
   (C)   Nonresidents, permitted to drive upon the highways of their own state,
may operate any motor vehicle upon any highway in this state without
examination or license under R.C. §§ 4507.01 through 4507.39, inclusive, upon
condition that such nonresident may be required at any time or place to prove
lawful possession or their right to operate such motor vehicle, and to
establish proper identity.
(R.C. § 4507.04)
   (D)   Surrender of driver’s license from another state.
      (1)   Any person who becomes a resident of this state, within 30 days of
becoming a resident, shall surrender any driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card issued by another state to the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a deputy registrar. If such a person intends to
operate a motor vehicle upon the public roads or highways, the person shall
apply for a temporary instruction permit or driver’s license in this state. If
the person fails to apply for a driver’s license or temporary instruction
permit or within 30 days of becoming a resident, the person shall not operate
any motor vehicle in this state under a license or permit issued by another
state.
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (D)(1) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   The offense established under division (D)(2)(a) of this section
is a strict liability offense and strict liability is a culpable mental state
for purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of this offense as a strict
liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
      (3)   For purposes of division (D)(1) of this section, “resident” means
any person to whom any of the following applies:
         (a)   The person maintains their principal residence in this state and
does not reside in this state as a result of the person’s active service in the
United States armed forces.
         (b)   The person is determined by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles to
be a resident in accordance with standards adopted by the Registrar under R.C.
§ 4507.01.
(R.C. § 4507.213)
§ 71.23 EMPLOYMENT OF A MINOR TO OPERATE A TAXICAB PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the definition of “chauffeur” in R.C. § 4501.01, no
person shall employ any minor for the purpose of operating a taxicab.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4507.321)
§ 71.24 RESTRICTION AGAINST OWNER LENDING VEHICLE FOR USE OF ANOTHER.
   (A)   No person shall permit a motor vehicle owned by the person or under
the person’s control to be driven by another if any of the following apply:
      (1)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person does not have a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit or valid nonresident driving privileges;
      (2)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privileges have been suspended or canceled under R.C. Chapter 4510 or
any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (3)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s act of driving the motor vehicle would violate any prohibition
contained in R.C. Chapter 4509.
      (4)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s act of driving would violate R.C. § 4511.19 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (5)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
vehicle is the subject of an immobilization waiver order issued under R.C. §
4503.235 and the other person is prohibited from operating the vehicle under
that order.
   (B)   Without limiting or precluding the consideration of any other evidence
in determining whether a violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4),
or (A)(5) of this section has occurred, it shall be prima facie evidence that
the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the operator of the
motor vehicle owned by the offender or under the offender’s control is in a
category described in division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of
this section if any of the following applies:
      (1)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (A)(1), (A)(3), or (A)(5) of this section, the offender and the
operator of the motor vehicle reside in the same household and are related by
consanguinity or affinity.
      (2)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (A)(2) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor
vehicle reside in the same household, and the offender knows or has reasonable
cause to believe that the operator has been charged with or convicted of any
violation of law or ordinance, or has committed any other act or omission, that
would or could result in the suspension or cancellation of the operator’s
license, permit, or privilege.
      (3)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (A)(4) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor
vehicle occupied the motor vehicle together at the time of the offense.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of wrongful entrustment of a
motor vehicle, and shall be punished as provided in divisions (C) to (H) of
this section.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section, whoever
violates division (A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3) of this section is guilty of an
unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the
offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
130.18, §
130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   (a)   If, within three years of a violation of division (A)(1), (A)
(2), or (A)(3) of this section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to
or been convicted of two or more violations of division (A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)
(3) of this section, R.C. § 4511.203(A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) or (A)(5) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   For any violation of this section, in addition to the penalties
imposed under this Code or R.C. Chapter 2929, the court may impose a class
seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7), and, if
the vehicle involved in the offense is registered in the name of the offender,
the court may order one of the following:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3)(b) or (C)(3)(c)
of this section, the court may order, for 30 days, the immobilization of the
vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license
plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and enforced under R.C. §
4503.233.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one violation of this section, R.C. § 4511.203, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order, for 60 days, the
immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of
that vehicle’s license plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and
enforced under R.C. § 4503.233.
         (c)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section, R.C. § 4511.203, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order the criminal
forfeiture to the state of the vehicle involved in the offense. If issued, the
order shall be issued and enforced under R.C. § 4503.234.
      (4)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order for
criminal forfeiture under division (C)(3)(c) of this section is assigned or
transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in addition to or
independent of any other penalty established by law, the court may fine the
offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the National
Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds from any fine imposed under this
division shall be distributed in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234(C)(2).
   (D)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under division
(C)(3)(a) or (C)(3)(b) of this section, the court shall not release the vehicle
from the immobilization before the termination of the period of immobilization
ordered unless the court is presented with current proof of financial
responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
   (E)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under division
(C)(3)(c) of this section, upon receipt of the order from the court, neither
the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor any deputy registrar shall accept any
application for the registration or transfer of registration of any motor
vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the order. The period of denial
shall be five years after the date the order is issued, unless, during that
five-year period, the court with jurisdiction of the offense that resulted in
the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar of the
termination. If the court terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar,
the Registrar shall take all necessary measures to permit the person to
register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to transfer the
registration of the vehicle.
   (F)   This section does not apply to motor vehicle rental dealers or motor
vehicle leasing dealers, as defined in R.C. § 4549.65.
   (G)   Evidence of a conviction of, plea of guilty to, or adjudication as a
delinquent child for a violation of this section shall not be admissible as
evidence in any civil action that involves the offender or delinquent child who
is the subject of the conviction, plea, or adjudication and that arises from
the wrongful entrustment of a motor vehicle.
   (H)   For purposes of this section, a vehicle is owned by a person if, at
the time of a violation of this section, the vehicle is registered in the
person’s name.
(R.C. § 4511.203)
§ 71.25 SUSPENSION OF DRIVER’S LICENSE; LICENSE SUSPENDED BY COURT OF RECORD.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4510.07 or in any other
provision of the Ohio Revised Code, whenever an offender is convicted of or
pleads guilty to a violation of any provision of this code that is
substantially equivalent to a provision of the Ohio Revised Code, and a court
is permitted or required to suspend a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit for a violation of that provision, a court, in addition to
any other penalties authorized by law, may suspend the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or non resident operating privileges for
the period of time the court determines appropriate, but the period of
suspension imposed for the violation of the provision of this code shall not
exceed the period of suspension that is permitted or required to be imposed for
the violation of the provision of the Ohio Revised Code to which the provision
of this code is substantially equivalent.
(R.C. § 4510.05)
   (B)   Whenever a person is found guilty under the laws of this state or any
ordinance of any political subdivision of this state, of operating a motor
vehicle in violation of any such law or ordinance relating to reckless
operation, the trial court of any court of record, in addition to or
independent of all other penalties provided by law, may impose a class five
suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit
or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02
(A)(5).
   (C)   Suspension of a commercial driver’s license under this section shall
be concurrent with any period of suspension disqualification under R.C. §
3123.58 or 4506.16. No person who is disqualified for life from holding a
commercial driver’s license under R.C. § 4506.16 shall be issued a driver’s
license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period for which the commercial
driver’s license was suspended under this section, and no person whose
commercial driver’s license is suspended under this section shall be issued a
driver’s license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period of the suspension.
(R.C. § 4510.15)
§ 71.26 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall display the operator’s driver’s
license, or furnish satisfactory proof that the operator has a driver’s
license, upon demand of any peace officer or of any person damaged or injured
in any collision in which the licensee may be involved. When a demand is
properly made, and the operator has the operator’s driver’s license on or about
the operator’s person, the operator shall not refuse to display the license. A
person’s failure to furnish satisfactory evidence that the person is licensed
under R.C. Chapter 4507 when the person does not have the person’s license on
or about the person’s person shall be prima facie evidence of the person’s not
having obtained a driver’s license.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, whoever
violates this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
130.18, §
130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and notwithstanding §
130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section,
R.C. § 4507.35, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.35)
§ 71.27 PROHIBITION AGAINST FALSE STATEMENTS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement to any matter or
thing required by the provisions of this traffic code.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4507.36)
§ 71.28 DRIVING UNDER SUSPENSION OR IN VIOLATION OF LICENSE RESTRICTION.
   (A)   Driving under suspension or in violation of license restriction.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2) of this section, division (B)
of this section, §
71.31 and in R.C. §§ 4510.111 and 4510.16, no person whose driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege has
been suspended under any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, other than R.C.
Chapter 4509, or under any applicable law in any other jurisdiction in which
the person’s license or permit was issued shall operate any motor vehicle upon
the public roads and highways or upon any public or private property used by
the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking within this municipality
during the period of suspension unless the person is granted limited driving
privileges and is operating the vehicle in accordance with the terms of the
limited driving privileges.
      (2)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking in this municipality in violation of any restriction of the person’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit imposed under R.C. § 4506.10
(D) or 4507.14.
      (3)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a non-
certified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a non-
certified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under
suspension at the time of the alleged violation of division (A)(1) of this
section or the person operated a motor vehicle in violation of a restriction at
the time of the alleged violation of division (A)(2) of this section. The
person charged with a violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section
may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
      (4)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court may impose upon the
offender a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. §
4510.02(A)(7).
         (b)   1.   Except as provided in division (A)(4)(b)2. or (A)(4)(b)3.
of this section, the court, in addition to any other penalty that it imposes on
the offender and if the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111
or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court, in
addition to or independent of any other sentence that it imposes upon the
offender, may order the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense
for 30 days and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license plates for 30 days in
accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
            2.   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to two violations of this section, or any combination of
two violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to any
other sentence that it imposes on the offender, may order the immobilization of
the vehicle involved in the offense for 60 days and the impoundment of that
vehicle’s license plates for 60 days in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
            3.   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this section, or any
combination of three or more violations of this section or R.C. § 4510.11,
4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the
court, in addition to any other sentence that it imposes on the offender, may
order the criminal forfeiture of the vehicle involved in the offense to the
state.
      (5)   Any order for immobilization and impoundment under this section
shall be issued and enforced under R.C. §§ 4503.233 and 4507.02, as applicable.
The court shall not release a vehicle from immobilization ordered under this
section unless the court is presented with current proof of financial
responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
      (6)   Any order of criminal forfeiture under this section shall be issued
and enforced under R.C. § 4503.234. Upon receipt of the copy of the order from
the court, neither the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor a deputy registrar shall
accept any application for the registration or transfer of registration of any
motor vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the declaration of
forfeiture. The period of registration denial shall be five years after the
date of the order, unless, during that period, the court having jurisdiction of
the offense that led to the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the
Registrar of the termination. The Registrar then shall take necessary measures
to permit the person to register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to
transfer registration of the vehicle.
      (7)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(R.C. § 4510.11)
   (B)   Driving under suspension in violation of other provisions.
      (1)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking in this municipality whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license
has been suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2151.354, 2151.87, 2935.27, 3123.58,
4301.99, 4510.032, 4510.22, or 4510.33, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
      (2)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a non-
certified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a non-
certified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (B)(1) of this section may be admitted into evidence as
prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under suspension at the
time of the alleged violation of division (B)(1) of this section. The person
charged with a violation of division (B)(1) of this section may offer evidence
to rebut this prima facie evidence.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section is guilty of
driving under suspension and shall be punished as provided in division (B)(3)
(a) or division (B)(3)(b) of this section.
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(3)(b) of this
section, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. The offender shall be
sentenced pursuant to §
130.18, §
130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
         (b)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously
was convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (B)(1)
of this section, or any combination of two or more violations of division (B)
(1) of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree, and the offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. § 2929.28 in
an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident
or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s
operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense for
which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(R.C. § 4510.111)
   (C)   Repeat traffic offender; point system suspension. Any person whose
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privileges are suspended as a repeat traffic offender under R.C. § 4510.037 and
who, during the suspension, operates any motor vehicle upon any public roads
and highways is guilty of driving under a twelve-point suspension, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to a
minimum term of three days in jail. No court shall suspend the first three days
of jail time imposed pursuant to this division.
(R.C. § 4510.037(J))
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
§ 71.29 OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE OR MOTORCYCLE WITHOUT VALID LICENSE.
   (A)   (1)   No person, except those expressly exempted under R.C. §§
4507.03, 4507.04, and 4507.05, shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public
road or highway or any public or private property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this municipality unless the person
has a valid driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a commercial
driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4506.
      (2)   No person, except a person expressly exempted under R.C. §§
4507.03, 4507.04, and 4507.05, shall operate any motorcycle upon a public road
or highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking in this municipality unless the person has a valid
license as a motorcycle operator that was issued upon application by the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. Chapter 4507. The license shall be in
the form of an endorsement, as determined by the Registrar, upon a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, if the person has a valid license to operate a
motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle, or in the form of a restricted
license as provided in R.C. § 4507.14, if the person does not have a valid
license to operate a motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle.
   (B)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a non-
certified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a non-
certified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the person did not have either a valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license at the time of the alleged violation of
division (A)(1) of this section or a valid license as a motorcycle operator
either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or a restricted license at the time of the alleged violation of
division (A)(2) of this section. The person charged with a violation of
division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section may offer evidence to rebut this
prima facie evidence.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle
or motorcycle without a valid license and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   If the trier of fact finds that the offender never has held a valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license issued by this state or any other
jurisdiction, or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the
offender, if the offender has never held a valid license as a motorcycle
operator, either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or in the form of a restricted license, except as otherwise
provided in this division, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
130.18, §
130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case. If the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation of this section or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
      (2)   If the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit
or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the offender, the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license bearing the motorcycle
endorsement or the offender’s restricted license was expired at the time of the
offense, except as otherwise provided in this division, the offense is a minor
misdemeanor. If within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
   (D)   The court shall not impose a license suspension for a first violation
of this section or if more than three years have passed since the offender’s
last violation of R.C. § 4510.12, this section, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (E)   If the offender is sentenced under division (C)(2) of this section, if
within three years of the offense the offender previously was convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one or more violations of R.C. § 4510.12, this section, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and if the offender’s license was
expired for more than six months at the time of the offense, the court may
impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or
nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)
(7).
(R.C. § 4510.12)
§ 71.30 DRIVING UNDER OAI SUSPENSION.
   (A)   No person whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege has been suspended under R.C. § 4511.19,
4511.191, or 4511.196 or under R.C. § 4510.07 for a conviction of a violation
of a municipal OAI ordinance shall operate any motor vehicle upon the public
roads or highways within this municipality during the period of the suspension.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of driving under OAI
suspension. The court shall sentence the offender under R.C. Chapter 2929,
subject to the differences authorized or required by this section.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this
section, driving under OAI suspension is a misdemeanor of the first degree. The
court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         (a)   A mandatory jail term of three consecutive days. The three-day
term shall be imposed, unless, subject to division (C) of this section, the
court instead imposes a sentence of not less than 30 consecutive days of house
arrest with electronic monitoring. A period of house arrest with electronic
monitoring imposed under this division shall not exceed six months. If the
court imposes a mandatory three-day jail term under this division, the court
may impose a jail term in addition to that term, provided that in no case shall
the cumulative jail term imposed for the offense exceed six months;
         (b)   A fine of not less than $250 and not more than $1,000;
         (c)   A license suspension under division (E) of this section;
         (d)   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, immobilization for 30 days of the
offender’s vehicle and impoundment for 30 days of the identification license
plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization and impoundment shall be
issued and enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
      (2)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section or one
equivalent offense, driving under OAI suspension is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         (a)   A mandatory jail term of ten consecutive days. Notwithstanding
the jail terms provided in R.C. §§ 2929.21 through 2929.28, the court may
sentence the offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year. The 10-
day mandatory jail term shall be imposed unless, subject to division (C) of
this section, the court instead imposes a sentence of not less than 90
consecutive days of house arrest with electronic monitoring. The period of
house arrest with electronic monitoring shall not exceed one year;
         (b)   Notwithstanding the fines provided for in R.C. Chapter 2929, a
fine of not less than $500 and not more than $2,500;
         (c)   A license suspension under division (E) of this section;
         (d)   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, immobilization of the offender’s
vehicle for 60 days and the impoundment for 60 days of the identification
license plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization and impoundment
shall be issued and enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
      (3)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section
or two or more equivalent offenses, driving under OAI suspension is a
misdemeanor. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         (a)   A mandatory jail term of 30 consecutive days. Notwithstanding
the jail terms provided in R.C. §§ 2929.21 through 2929.28, the court may
sentence the offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year. The
court shall not sentence the offender to a term of house arrest with electronic
monitoring in lieu of the mandatory portion of the jail term;
         (b)   Notwithstanding the fines set forth in R.C. Chapter 2929, a fine
of not less than $500 and not more than $2,500;
         (c)   A license suspension under division (E) of this section;
         (d)   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, criminal forfeiture to the state
of the offender’s vehicle. The order of criminal forfeiture shall be issued and
enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234. If title to a motor vehicle that
is subject to an order for criminal forfeiture under this division is assigned
or transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, the court may fine
the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the
National Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds from any fine so imposed
shall be distributed in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234(C)(2).
   (C)   (1)   No court shall impose an alternative sentence of house arrest
with electronic monitoring under division (B)(1) or (B)(2) of this section
unless, within 60 days of the date of sentencing, the court issues a written
finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail
where the offender is required to serve the jail term imposed, the offender
will not be able to begin serving that term within the 60-day period following
the date of sentencing.
      (2)   An offender sentenced under this section to a period of house
arrest with electronic monitoring shall be permitted work release during that
period.
   (D)   Fifty percent of any fine imposed by a court under division (B)(1),
(B)(2), or (B)(3) of this section shall be deposited into the municipal
Indigent Drivers Alcohol Treatment Fund under the control of that court, as
created by the municipality pursuant to R.C. § 4511.191(H).
   (E)   In addition to or independent of all other penalties provided by law
or ordinance, the trial judge of any court of record or the mayor of a mayor’s
court shall impose on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of this section a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
      (1)   When permitted as specified in R.C. § 4510.021, if the court grants
limited driving privileges during a suspension imposed under this section, the
privileges shall be granted on the additional condition that the offender must
display restricted license plates, issued under R.C. § 4503.231, on the vehicle
driven subject to the privileges, except as provided in R.C. § 4503.231(B).
      (2)   A suspension of a commercial driver’s license under this section
shall be concurrent with any period of suspension or disqualification under
R.C. § 3123.58 or R.C. § 4506.16. No person who is disqualified for life from
holding a commercial driver’s license under R.C. § 4506.16 shall be issued a
driver’s license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period for which the
commercial driver’s license was suspended under this section, and no person
whose commercial driver’s license is suspended under this section shall be
issued a driver’s license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period of the
suspension.
   (F)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense that is a misdemeanor of the first degree under this
section for which the offender is sentenced.
   (G)   As used in this section:
      ELECTRONIC MONITORING. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      EQUIVALENT OFFENSE. Means any of the following:
         (a)   A violation of a municipal ordinance, law of another state, or
law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to division (A) of
this section;
         (b)   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to division (A) of this section.
      JAIL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Means the mandatory term in jail of 3, 10, or 30
consecutive days that must be imposed under division (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3)
of this section upon an offender convicted of a violation of division (A) of
this section and in relation to which all of the following apply:
         (a)   Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term
must be served in a jail.
         (b)   Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term
cannot be suspended, reduced, or otherwise modified pursuant to any provision
of the Ohio Revised Code.
(R.C. § 4510.14)
   (H)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
Statutory reference:
   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal
forfeiture of vehicle, see R.C. § 4510.161
§ 71.31 DRIVING UNDER FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY LAW SUSPENSION OR CANCELLATION;
DRIVING UNDER A NONPAYMENT OF JUDGMENT SUSPENSION.
   (A)   No person, whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or temporary
instruction permit or nonresident’s operating privilege has been suspended or
canceled pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4509, shall operate any motor vehicle within
this municipality, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by the person to
be operated by another person in the municipality, during the period of the
suspension or cancellation, except as specifically authorized by R.C. Chapter
4509. No person shall operate a motor vehicle within this municipality, or
knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by the person to be operated by
another person in the municipality, during the period in which the person is
required by R.C. § 4509.45 to file and maintain proof of financial
responsibility for a violation of R.C. § 4509.101, unless proof of financial
responsibility is maintained with respect to that vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any public
or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking in this municipality if the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or temporary instruction permit or nonresident operating privilege has
been suspended pursuant to R.C. § 4509.37 or 4509.40 for nonpayment of a
judgment.
   (C)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a non-
certified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a non-
certified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (A) or (B) of this section may be admitted into evidence
as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under either a
financial responsibility law suspension at the time of the alleged violation of
division (A) of this section or a nonpayment of judgment suspension at the time
of the alleged violation of division (B) of this section. The person charged
with a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section may offer evidence to
rebut this prima facie evidence.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of driving
under financial responsibility law suspension or cancellation and shall be
punished as provided in this division (D). Whoever violates division (B) of
this section is guilty of driving under a nonpayment of judgment suspension and
shall be punished as provided in this division (D).
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(2) of this section,
the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified
misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
130.18, §
130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28 (A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27 (A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
130.99 (F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up
to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community
service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt
under R.C. § 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously was
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section, or
any combination of two violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or
4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (3)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. § 2929.28 in
an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident
or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s
operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense for
which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(R.C. § 4510.16)
   (E)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
Statutory reference:
   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal
forfeiture of vehicle, see R.C. § 4510.161
§ 71.32 FAILURE TO REINSTATE LICENSE.
   (A)   No person whose driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, or nonresident’s operating privilege has been
suspended shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public road or highway or any
public or private property after the suspension has expired unless the person
has complied with all license reinstatement requirements imposed by the court,
the bureau of motor vehicles, or another provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
   (B)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a non-
certified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a non-
certified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (A) of this section may be admitted into evidence as
prima facie evidence that the license of the person had not been reinstated by
the person at the time of the alleged violation of division (A) of this
section. The person charged with a violation of division (A) of this section
may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to reinstate a
license, and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section, whoever
violates this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
130.18, §
130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of a violation of division (A) of this
section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two
or more violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.21 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (3)   In all cases, the court may impose upon the offender a class seven
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
(R.C. § 4510.21)
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSES
§ 71.45 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOL CONCENTRATION. The concentration of alcohol in a person’s blood,
breath or urine. When expressed as a percentage, it means grams of alcohol per
the following: 100 milliliters of whole blood, blood serum, or blood plasma;
210 liters of breath; or 100 milliliters of urine.
   COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE.
      (1)   A license issued in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4506 that
authorizes an individual to drive a commercial motor vehicle. Except as
otherwise specifically provided, “commercial driver’s license” includes an
“enhanced commercial driver’s license.”
      (2)   “Enhanced commercial driver’s license” means a commercial driver’s
license issued in accordance with R.C. §§ 4507.021 and 4506.072 that denotes
citizenship and identity and is approved by the United States Secretary of
Homeland Security or other designated federal agency for purposes of entering
the United States.
   COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE INFORMATION SYSTEM. The information system
established pursuant to the requirements of the “Commercial Motor Vehicle
Safety Act of 1986”, 100 Stat. 3207-171, 49 U.S.C. App. 2701.
   COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Except when used in R.C. § 4506.25, any motor
vehicle designed or used to transport persons or property that meets any of the
following qualifications:
      (1)   Any combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight or combined
gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more, provided that the gross
vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight rating of the vehicle or vehicles being
towed is in excess of 10,000 pounds;
      (2)   Any single vehicle with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle
weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more;
      (3)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is not a Class A
or Class B vehicle, but is designed to transport 16 or more passengers
including the driver;
      (4)   Any school bus with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight
rating of less than 26,001 pounds that is designed to transport fewer than 16
passengers including the driver;
      (5)   Is transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is
required under 49 C.F.R. part 172, subpart F, as amended; or
      (6)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is designed to
be operated and to travel on a public street or highway and is considered by
the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration to be a commercial motor
vehicle, including but not limited to a motorized crane, a vehicle whose
function is to pump cement, a rig for drilling wells, and a portable crane.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Includes all of the following:
      (1)   Any substance classified as a controlled substance under the
“Controlled Substances Act”, 80 Stat. 1242 (1970), 21 U.S.C. § 802(6), as
amended;
      (2)   Any substance included in Schedules I through V of 21 C.F.R. part
1308, as amended;
      (3)   Any drug of abuse.
   CONVICTION. An unvacated adjudication of guilt or a determination that a
person has violated or failed to comply with the law in a court of original
jurisdiction or an authorized administrative tribunal, an unvacated forfeiture
of bail or collateral deposited to secure the person’s appearance in court, a
plea of guilty or nolo contendere accepted by the court, the payment of a fine
or court cost, or violation of a condition of release without bail, regardless
of whether or not the penalty is rebated, suspended or probated.
   DISQUALIFICATION. Means any of the following:
      (1)   The suspension, revocation, or cancellation of a person’s
privileges to operate a commercial motor vehicle;
      (2)   Any withdrawal of a person’s privileges to operate a commercial
motor vehicle as the result of a violation of state or local law relating to
motor vehicle traffic control other than parking, vehicle weight, or vehicle
defect violations;
      (3)   A determination by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
that a person is not qualified to operate a commercial motor vehicle under 49
C.F.R. § 391.
   DOMICILED. Having a true, fixed, principal, and permanent residence to which
an individual intends to return.
   DOWNGRADE. Any of the following, as applicable:
      (1)   A change in the commercial driver’s license, or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit, holder’s self-certified status as
described in R.C. § 4506.10(A)(1);
      (2)   A change to a lesser class of vehicle;
      (3)   Removal of commercial driver’s license privileges from the
individual’s driver’s license.
   DRIVE. To drive, operate or be in physical control of a motor vehicle.
   DRIVER. Any person who drives, operates or is in physical control of a
commercial motor vehicle or is required to have a commercial driver’s license.
   DRIVER’S LICENSE. A license issued by the Bureau of Motor Vehicles that
authorizes an individual to drive.
   DRUG OF ABUSE. Any controlled substance, dangerous drug as defined in R.C. §
4729.01, harmful intoxicant as defined in R.C. § 2925.01, or over-the-counter
medication that, when taken in quantities exceeding the recommended dosage, can
result in impairment of judgment or reflexes.
   ELECTRONIC DEVICE. Includes a cellular telephone, a personal digital
assistant, a pager, a computer, and any other device used to input, write,
send, receive, or read text.
   ELIGIBLE UNIT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. A village, township, or county that has a
population of not more than 3,000 persons according to the most recent federal
census.
   EMPLOYER. Any person, including the federal government, any state, and a
political subdivision of any state, that owns or leases a commercial motor
vehicle or assigns a person to drive such a motor vehicle.
   ENDORSEMENT. An authorization on a person’s commercial driver’s license that
is required to permit the person to operate a specified type of commercial
motor vehicle.
   FARM TRUCK. A truck controlled and operated by a farmer for use in the
transportation to or from a farm, for a distance of not more than 150 miles, of
products of the farm, including livestock and its products, poultry and its
products, floricultural and horticultural products, and in the transportation
to the farm, from a distance of not more than 150 miles, of supplies for the
farm, including tile, fence and every other thing or commodity used in
agricultural, floricultural, horticultural, livestock, and poultry production,
and livestock, poultry, and other animals and things used for breeding,
feeding, or other purposes connected with the operation of the farm, when the
truck is operated in accordance with this definition and is not used in the
operations of a motor carrier, as defined in R.C. § 4923.01.
   FATALITY. The death of a person as the result of a motor vehicle accident
occurring not more than 365 days prior to the date of death.
   FELONY. Any offense under federal or state law that is punishable by death
or imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and includes any offense
specifically classified as a felony under the law of this state, regardless of
the penalty that may be imposed.
   FOREIGN JURISDICTION. Any jurisdiction other than a state.
   GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING. The value specified by the manufacturer as the
maximum loaded weight of a single or a combination vehicle. The gross vehicle
weight rating of a combination vehicle is the gross vehicle weight rating of
the power unit plus the gross vehicle weight rating of each towed unit.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material that has been designated as hazardous
under 49 U.S.C. § 5103 and is required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R. part
172, subpart F or any quantity of a material listed as a select agent or toxin
in 42 C.F.R. part 73, as amended.
   IMMINENT HAZARD. The existence of a condition that presents a substantial
likelihood that death, serious illness, severe personal injury, or a
substantial endangerment to health, property, or the environment may occur
before the reasonably foreseeable completion date of a formal proceeding begun
to lessen the risk of death, illness, injury, or endangerment.
   MEDICAL VARIANCE. One of the following received by a driver from the Federal
Motor Carrier Safety Administration that allows the driver to be issued a
medical certificate:
      (1)   An exemption letter permitting operation of a commercial motor
vehicle under 49 C.F.R. part 381, subpart C or 49 C.F.R. § 391.64;
      (2)   A skill performance evaluation certificate permitting operation of
a commercial motor vehicle pursuant to 49 C.F.R. § 391.49.
   MOBILE TELEPHONE. A mobile communication device that falls under or uses any
commercial mobile radio service as defined in 47 C.F.R. part 20, except that
mobile telephone does not include two-way or citizens band radio services.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, or semitrailer
propelled or drawn by mechanical power used on highways, except that such term
does not include a vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, or semitrailer operated
exclusively on a rail.
   OUT-OF-SERVICE ORDER. A declaration by an authorized enforcement officer of
a federal, state, local, Canadian, or Mexican jurisdiction declaring that the
driver, commercial motor vehicle, or commercial motor carrier operation is out
of service as defined in 49 C.F.R. § 390.5.
   PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
   PORTABLE TANK. A liquid or gaseous packaging designed primarily to be loaded
onto or temporarily attached to a vehicle and equipped with skids, mountings,
or accessories to facilitate handling of the tank by mechanical means.
   PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01(E)(1) and
(E)(3).
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Includes every vehicle that is defined as a
recreational vehicle in R.C. § 4501.01 and is used exclusively for purposes
other than engaging in business for profit.
   RESIDENCE. Any person’s residence determined in accordance with standards
prescribed in the rules adopted by the Registrar.
   SCHOOL BUS. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   SERIOUS TRAFFIC VIOLATION. Any of the following:
      (1)   A conviction arising from a single charge of operating a commercial
motor vehicle in violation of any provision of R.C. § 4506.03;
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (2)(b) of this definition, a
violation while operating a commercial motor vehicle of a law of this state, or
any municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or any other
substantially equivalent law of another state or political sub-division of
another state, prohibiting either of the following:
            1.   Texting while driving;
            2.   Using a handheld mobile telephone.
         (b)   It is not a serious traffic violation if the person was texting
or using a handheld mobile telephone to contact law enforcement or other
emergency services.
      (3)   A conviction arising from the operation of any motor vehicle that
involves any of the following:
         (a)   A single charge of any speed in excess of the posted speed limit
by 15 miles per hour or more;
         (b)   Violations of R.C. § 4511.20 or R.C. § 4511.201 or any
substantially equivalent ordinance or resolution, or of any substantially
equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of another state;
         (c)   Violation of a law of this state or an ordinance or resolution
relating to traffic control, other than a parking violation, or of any
substantially equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of
another state, that results in a fatal accident;
         (d)   Violation of R.C. § 4506.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or of any substantially
equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of another state, that
involves the operation of a commercial motor vehicle without a valid commercial
driver’s license with the proper class or endorsement for the specific vehicle
group being operated or for the passengers or type of cargo being transported;
         (e)   Violation of R.C. § 4506.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or of any substantially
equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of another state, that
involves the operation of a commercial motor vehicle without a valid commercial
driver’s license being in the person’s possession;
         (f)   Violation of R.C. § 4511.33 or R.C. § 4511.34, or any municipal
ordinance or county or township resolution substantially equivalent to either
of those sections, or any substantially equivalent law of another state or
political subdivision of another state;
         (g)   Violation of any other law of this state, any law of another
state, or any ordinance or resolution of a political subdivision of this state
or another state that meets both of the following requirements:
            1.   It relates to traffic control, other than a parking violation;
            2.   It is determined to be a serious traffic violation by the
United States Secretary of Transportation and is designated by the director as
such by rule.
   STATE. A state of the United States and includes the District of Columbia.
   TANK VEHICLE. Any commercial motor vehicle that is designed to transport any
liquid or gaseous materials within a tank or tanks that are either permanently
or temporarily attached to the vehicle or its chassis and have an individual
rated capacity of more than 119 gallons and an aggregate rated capacity of
1,000 gallons or more. The term does not include a commercial motor vehicle
transporting an empty storage container tank that is not designed for
transportation, has a rated capacity of 1,000 gallons or more, and is
temporarily attached to a flatbed trailer.
   TESTER. Means a person or entity acting pursuant to a valid agreement
entered into pursuant to R.C. § 4506.09(B).
   TEXTING. Manually entering alphanumeric text into, or reading text from, an
electronic device. Texting includes short message service (SMS), e-mail,
instant messaging, a command or request to access a world wide web page,
pressing more than a single button to initiate or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone, or engaging in any other form of
electronic text retrieval or entry, for present or future communication.
Texting does not include the following:
      (1)   Using voice commands to initiate, receive, or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone;
      (2)   Inputting, selecting, or reading information on a global
positioning system or navigation system;
      (3)   Pressing a single button to initiate or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone; or
      (4)   Using, for a purpose that is not otherwise prohibited by law, a
device capable of performing multiple functions, such as a fleet management
system, a dispatching device, a mobile telephone, a citizens band radio, or a
music player.
   TEXTING WHILE DRIVING. Texting while operating a commercial motor vehicle,
with the motor running, including while temporarily stationary because of
traffic, a traffic control device, or other momentary delays. Texting while
driving does not include operating a commercial motor vehicle with or without
the motor running when the driver has moved the vehicle to the side of, or off,
a highway and is stopped in a location where the vehicle can safely remain
stationary.
   UNITED STATES. The 50 states and the District of Columbia.
   UPGRADE. A change in the class of vehicles, endorsements, or self-certified
status as described in R.C. § 4506.10(A)(1) that expands the ability of a
current commercial driver’s license holder to operate commercial motor vehicles
under this chapter or R.C. Chapter 4506.
   USE OF A HANDHELD MOBILE TELEPHONE. Means:
      (1)   Using at least one hand to hold a mobile telephone to conduct a
voice communication;
      (2)   Dialing or answering a mobile telephone by pressing more than a
single button; or
      (3)   Reaching for a mobile telephone in a manner that requires a driver
to maneuver so that the driver is no longer in a seated driving position, or
restrained by a seat belt that is installed in accordance with 49 C.F.R. §
393.93 and adjusted in accordance with the vehicle manufacturer’s instructions.
   VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(R.C. § 4506.01)
§ 71.46 USE OF ACTUAL GROSS WEIGHT IN LIEU OF RATING.
   For purposes of this subchapter, the actual gross weight of a vehicle or
combination of vehicles may be used in lieu of a gross vehicle weight rating to
determine whether a vehicle or combination of vehicles qualifies as a
commercial motor vehicle if the gross vehicle weight rating specified by the
manufacturer for the vehicle of combination of vehicles is not determinable, or
if the manufacturer of the vehicle has not specified a gross vehicle weight
rating.
(R.C. § 4506.011)
§ 71.47 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having in the person’s
possession or otherwise under the person’s control more than one valid driver’s
license issued by this state, any other state, or by a foreign jurisdiction;
      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this municipality
in violation of an out-of-service order while the person’s driving privilege is
suspended, revoked, or cancelled, or while the person is subject to
disqualification;
      (3)   Drive a motor vehicle on a highway in the municipality under the
authority of a commercial driver’s license issued by another state or a foreign
jurisdiction, after having been a resident of this state for 30 days or longer;
      (4)   Knowingly give false information in any application or
certification required by R.C. § 4506.07;
      (5)   Knowingly provide false statements or engage in any fraudulent act
related to testing for a commercial driver’s license as required in R.C. §
4506.09.
   (B)   The municipality shall give every conviction occurring out of this
state and notice of which was received by the state Department of Public Safety
after December 31, 1989, full faith and credit and treat it for sanctioning
purposes under this chapter as though the conviction had occurred in this
state.
(R.C. § 4506.04(A), (B))
   (C)   No person shall drive any commercial motor vehicle for which an
endorsement is required under R.C. § 4506.12 unless the proper endorsement
appears on the person’s commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit. No person shall drive a commercial motor
vehicle in violation of a restriction established under R.C. § 4506.12 that
appears on the person’s commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit.
(R.C. § 4506.12(I))
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1), (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) of this section is guilty of
falsification, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition, the provisions
of R.C. § 4507.19 apply.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(5) of this section is guilty of
falsification, a misdemeanor of the third degree. In addition, the provisions
of R.C. § 4507.19 apply.
(R.C. § 4506.04(C))
      (4)   (a)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   The offenses established under division (C) of this section are
strict liability offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of
these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be construed to imply
that any other offense for which there is no specified degree of culpability,
whether in this section or another section of this code or the Ohio Revised
Code, is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. § 4506.12(J))
§ 71.48 PREREQUISITES TO OPERATION OF COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (A)   Except as provided in divisions (B) or (C) of this section, the
following shall apply:
      (1)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in
this state unless the person holds, and has in the person’s possession, any of
the following:
         (a)   A valid commercial driver’s license with proper endorsements for
the motor vehicle being driven, issued by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or by
another jurisdiction recognized by this state;
         (b)   A valid examiner’s commercial driving permit issued under R.C. §
4506.13;
         (c)   A valid restricted commercial driver’s license and waiver for
farm-related service industries issued under R.C. § 4506.24;
         (d)   A valid commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit
issued by the Registrar, provided that the person is accompanied by an
authorized state driver’s license examiner or tester or a person who has been
issued and has in the person’s immediate possession a current, valid commercial
driver’s license and who meets the requirements of R.C. § 4506.06(B).
      (2)   No person’s commercial driver’s license temporary instruction
permit shall be upgraded, and no commercial driver’s license shall be upgraded,
renewed, or issued to a person until the person surrenders to the registrar of
motor vehicles all valid licenses and permits issued to the person by this
state or by another jurisdiction recognized by this state. If the license or
permit was issued by any other state or another jurisdiction recognized by this
state, the Registrar shall report the surrender of a license or permit to the
issuing authority, together with information that a license or permit is now
issued in this state. The Registrar shall destroy any such license or permit
that is not returned to the issuing authority.
      (3)   No person who has been a resident of this state for 30 days or
longer shall drive a commercial motor vehicle under the authority of a
commercial driver’s license issued in another jurisdiction.
   (B)   Nothing in division (A) of this section applies to any qualified
person when engaged in the operation of any of the following:
      (1)   A farm truck;
      (2)   Fire equipment for a fire department, volunteer or nonvolunteer
fire company, fire district, joint fire district, or the State Fire Marshal;
      (3)   A public safety vehicle used to provide transportation or emergency
medical service for ill or injured persons;
      (4)   A recreational vehicle;
      (5)   A commercial motor vehicle within the boundaries of an eligible
unit of local government, if the person is employed by the eligible unit of
local government and is operating the commercial motor vehicle for the purpose
of removing snow or ice from a roadway by plowing, sanding, or salting, but
only if either the employee who holds a commercial driver’s license issued
under R.C. Chapter 4506 and ordinarily operates a commercial motor vehicle for
these purposes is unable to operate the vehicle, or the employing eligible unit
of local government determines that a snow or ice emergency exists that
requires additional assistance;
      (6)   A vehicle operated for military purposes by any member or uniformed
employee of the armed forces of the United States or their reserve components,
including the Ohio National Guard. This exception does not apply to United
States reserve technicians;
      (7)   A commercial motor vehicle that is operated for nonbusiness
purposes. “Operated for nonbusiness purposes” means that the commercial motor
vehicle is not used in commerce as “commerce” is defined in 49 C.F.R. § 383.5,
as amended, and is not regulated by the Public Utilities Commission pursuant to
R.C. Chapter 4905, 4921, or 4923;
      (8)   A motor vehicle that is designed primarily for the transportation
of goods and not persons, while that motor vehicle is being used for the
occasional transportation of personal property by individuals not for
compensation and not in the furtherance of a commercial enterprise;
      (9)   A police SWAT team vehicle;
      (10)   A police vehicle used to transport prisoners.
   (C)   Nothing contained in division (B)(5) of this section shall be
construed as preempting or superseding any law, rule or regulation of this
state concerning the safe operation of commercial motor vehicles.
(R.C. § 4506.03(A) - (C))
   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a person may drive a
commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this municipality if all of the
following conditions are met:
      (1)   The person has a valid commercial driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit issued by any state or
jurisdiction in accordance with the minimum standards adopted by the Federal
Motor Carrier Safety Administration under the “Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety
Act of 1986”, 100 Stat. 3207-171, 49 U.S.C. App., for issuance of commercial
driver’s licenses;
      (2)   The person’s commercial driver’s license or temporary instruction
permit is not suspended, revoked, or canceled, and the person has the
appropriate endorsements for the vehicle that is being driven;
      (3)   The person is not disqualified from driving a commercial motor
vehicle;
      (4)   The person is not subject to an out-of-service order;
      (5)   The person is medically certified as physically qualified to
operate a commercial motor vehicle in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4506.
         (a)   A person who submitted a medical examiner’s certificate to the
Registrar in accordance with R.C. § 4506.10(A)(1) and whose medical
certification information is maintained in the commercial driver’s license
information system is not required to have the medical examiner’s certificate
in the person’s possession when on duty.
         (b)   A person whose medical certification information is not
maintained in the commercial driver’s license information system shall have in
the person’s possession when on duty the original or a copy of the current
medical examiner’s certificate that was submitted to the Registrar. However,
the person may operate a commercial motor vehicle with such proof of medical
certification for not more than 15 days after the date the current medical
examiner’s certificate was issued to the person.
         (c)   A person who has a medical variance shall have in the person’s
possession the original or copy of the medical variance documentation at all
times while on duty.
   (E)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this
municipality if the person does not meet the conditions specified in division
(D) of this section.
   (F)   Except as set forth in 49 C.F.R. §§ 390.3(f), 391.2, 391.62, 391.67,
and 391.68, no person holding a commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit or a commercial driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter
4506 may drive a commercial motor vehicle in interstate commerce until the
person is at least 21 years of age.
(R.C. § 4506.05(A) - (C))
   (G)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (2)   The offenses established under divisions (D), (E) and (F) of this
section are strict liability offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The
designation of these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be
construed to imply that any other offense, for which there is no specified
degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. §§ 4506.03(D), 4506.05(D))
§ 71.49 PHYSICAL QUALIFICATION TO OPERATE COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person who holds a valid commercial driver’s license shall drive a
commercial motor vehicle unless the person is physically qualified to do so.
      (1)   Any person applying for a commercial driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit, the renewal or upgrade of a
commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit, or the transfer of a commercial driver’s license from out
of state shall self-certify to the Registrar for purposes of 49 C.F.R. § 383.71
one of the following in regard to the applicant’s operation of a commercial
motor vehicle, as applicable:
         (a)   1.   If the applicant operates or expects to operate a
commercial motor vehicle in interstate or foreign commerce and is subject to
and meets the requirements under 49 C.F.R. part 391, the applicant shall self-
certify that the applicant is non-excepted interstate and shall provide the
Registrar with the original or a copy of a medical examiner’s certificate and
each subsequently issued medical examiner’s certificate prepared by a qualified
medical examiner to maintain a medically certified status on the applicant’s
commercial driver licensing system driver record;
            2.   If the applicant operates or expects to operate a commercial
motor vehicle in interstate commerce, but engages in transportation or
operations excepted under 49 C.F.R. §§ 390.3(f), 391.2, 391.68, or 398.3 from
all or parts of the qualification requirements of
49 C.F.R. part 391, the applicant shall self-certify that the applicant is
excepted interstate and is not required to obtain a medical examiner’s
certificate;
         (b)   1.   If the applicant operates only in intrastate commerce and
is subject to state driver qualification requirements, the applicant shall
self-certify that the applicant is non-excepted intrastate;
            2.   If the applicant operates only in intrastate commerce and is
excepted from all or parts of the state driver qualification requirements, the
applicant shall self-certify that the applicant is excepted intrastate.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the expiration date on a person’s commercial
driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit,
every commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit holder shall provide the Registrar with the certification
required by this section on or after January 30, 2012, but prior to January 30,
2014.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4506.10(A), (E))
§ 71.50 CRIMINAL OFFENSES.
   (A)   No person who holds a commercial driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit or who operates a motor vehicle
for which a commercial driver’s license or permit is required shall do any of
the following:
      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having a measurable or
detectable amount of alcohol or of a controlled substance in the person’s
blood, breath, or urine;
      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of 0.04% or more by whole blood or breath;
      (3)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of .048% or more by blood serum or blood plasma;
      (4)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of .056% or more by urine;
      (5)   Drive a motor vehicle while under the influence of a controlled
substance;
      (6)   Drive a motor vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a municipal
OAI ordinance as defined in R.C. § 4511.181;
      (7)   Use a vehicle in the commission of a felony;
      (8)   Refuse to submit to a test under R.C. § 4506.17 or R.C. § 4511.191,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (9)   Operate a commercial motor vehicle while the person’s commercial
driver’s license or permit or other commercial driving privileges are revoked,
suspended, cancelled, or disqualified;
      (10)   Cause a fatality through the negligent operation of a commercial
motor vehicle, including but not limited to the offenses of aggravated
vehicular homicide, vehicular homicide, and vehicular manslaughter;
      (11)   Fail to stop after an accident in violation of R.C. §§ 4549.02 to
4549.03, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (12)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle in violation of any provision of
R.C. §§ 4511.61 through 4511.63 or any federal or local law or ordinance
pertaining to railroad-highway grade crossings;
      (13)   Use a motor vehicle in the commission of a felony involving the
manufacture, distribution, or dispensing of a controlled substance as defined
in R.C. § 3719.01 or the possession with intent to manufacture, distribute, or
dispense a controlled substance;
      (14)   Use a commercial motor vehicle in the commission of a violation of
R.C. § 2905.32 or any other substantially equivalent offense established under
federal law or the laws of another state.
(R.C. § 4506.15(A))
   (B)   No person shall refuse to immediately surrender the person’s
commercial driver’s license or permit to a peace officer when required to do so
by R.C. § 4506.17.
(R.C. § 4506.17(H))
   (C)   (1)   Within the jurisdictional limits of the appointing authority,
any peace officer shall stop and detain any person found violating division (A)
of this section without obtaining a warrant. When there is reasonable ground to
believe that a violation of division (A) of this section has been committed and
a test or tests of the person’s whole blood, blood plasma or blood serum,
breath or urine is necessary, the peace officer shall take the person to an
appropriate place for testing. If a person refuses to submit to a test after
being warned as provided in R.C. § 4506.17(C), or submits to a test that
discloses the presence of a controlled substance or an alcohol concentration of
0.04% or more by whole blood or breath, an alcohol concentration of .048% or
more by blood serum or blood plasma, or an alcohol concentration of .056% or
more by urine, the peace officer shall require that the person immediately
surrender the person’s commercial driver’s license to the peace officer.
      (2)   As used in this division (C), JURISDICTIONAL LIMITS means the
limits within which a peace officer may arrest and detain a person without a
warrant under R.C. § 2935.03, except that the Superintendent and the troopers
of the State Highway Patrol may stop and detain, without warrant, any person
who, in the presence of the Superintendent or any trooper, is engaged in a
violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter or R.C. Chapter 4506.
(R.C. § 4506.23)
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. §§ 4506.15(B), 4506.17(N))
   (E)   The offenses established under division (A) of this section are strict
liability offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of these
offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be construed to imply that any
other offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a
strict liability offense.
(R.C. §§ 4506.15(C))
Statutory reference:
   Alcohol or controlled substance testing, disqualification of drivers, see
R.C. § 4506.17
   Disqualification of drivers for violations, see R.C. § 4506.16
§ 71.51 APPLICATION OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of 49 C.F.R. part 383, subpart C (Notification
Requirements and Employer Responsibilities), as amended, shall apply to all
commercial drivers or persons who apply for employment as commercial drivers.
No person shall fail to make a report to the person’s employer as required by
this section.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4506.19)
§ 71.52 EMPLOYMENT OF DRIVERS OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   Each employer shall require every applicant for employment as a driver
of a commercial vehicle to provide the applicant’s employment history for the
ten years preceding the date the employment application is submitted to the
prospective employer. The following information shall be submitted:
      (1)   A list of the names and addresses of the applicant’s previous
employers for which the applicant was the operator of a commercial motor
vehicle;
      (2)   The dates the applicant was employed by these employers;
      (3)   The reason for leaving each of these employers.
   (B)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize any driver employed by
the employer to drive a commercial motor vehicle during any period in which any
of the following apply:
      (1)   The driver’s commercial driver’s license is suspended, revoked, or
cancelled by any state or a foreign jurisdiction;
      (2)   The driver has lost the privilege to drive, or currently is
disqualified from driving, a commercial motor vehicle in any state or foreign
jurisdiction;
      (3)   The driver, the commercial motor vehicle the driver is driving, or
the motor carrier operation is subject to an out-of-service order in any state
or a foreign jurisdiction;
      (4)   The driver has more than one driver’s license.
   (C)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a
commercial motor vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4506.15.
   (D)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a
commercial motor vehicle if the driver does not hold a valid, current
commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit bearing the proper class or endorsements for the vehicle. No
employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a commercial
motor vehicle in violation of the restrictions on the driver’s commercial
driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit.
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A), (B) or (D) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 4506.20)
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty
otherwise is provided in the section that contains the provision violated is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. §§ 4506.99, 4507.99)
CHAPTER 72: TRAFFIC RULES
Section
General Provisions
   
72.001   Lanes of travel upon roadways
   
72.002   Driving through safety zone
   
72.003   Vehicles traveling in opposite directions
   
72.004   Rules governing overtaking and passing of vehicles
   
72.005   Permission to overtake and pass on the right
   
72.006   Driving to left of center line
   
72.007   Prohibition against driving upon left side of roadway
   
72.008   Hazardous zones
   
72.009   One-way highways and rotary traffic islands
   
72.010   Rules for driving in marked lanes
   
72.011   Space between moving vehicles
   
72.012   Divided roadways
   
72.013   Rules for turns at intersections
   
72.014   U-turns and turning in roadway prohibited
   
72.015   Starting and backing vehicles
   
72.016   Turn and stop signals
   
72.017   Hand and arm signals
   
72.018   Use of motor vehicles on river bank
Right-of-Way
   
72.030   Right-of-way at intersections
   
72.031   Right-of-way when turning left
   
72.032   Right-of-way at through highways; stop signs; yield signs
   
72.033   Stop at sidewalk area; stop signs on private roads and driveways
   
72.034   Right-of-way on public highway
   
72.035   Pedestrian on sidewalk has right-of-way
   
72.036   Right-of-way of public safety vehicles
   
72.037   Funeral procession has right-of-way
   
72.038   Pedestrians yield right-of-way to public safety vehicle
   
72.039   Pedestrian on crosswalk has right-of-way
   
72.040   Right-of-way yielded to blind person
   
72.041   Right-of-way yielded by pedestrian
Pedestrians
   
72.055   Pedestrian movement in crosswalks
   
72.056   Pedestrian walking along highway
   
72.057   Prohibition against soliciting rides; riding on outside of vehicle
   
72.058   Pedestrian on bridge or railroad crossing
   
72.059   Persons operating motorized wheelchairs
   
72.060   Intoxicated or drugged pedestrian hazard on highway
   
72.061   Operation of electric personal assistive mobility devices
   
72.062   Operation of personal delivery device on sidewalks and crosswalks
   
72.063   Low-speed micromobility devices
   
72.064   Occupant restraint devices
Grade Crossings
   
72.075   Stop signs at grade crossings
   
72.076   Driving vehicle across railroad grade crossing
   
72.077   Vehicles required to stop at grade crossings
   
72.078   Slow-moving vehicles or equipment crossing railroad tracks
School Buses
   
72.090   Regulations concerning school buses
   
72.091   Violation of regulations; report; investigation; citation; warning
   
72.092   Restrictions on the operation of school buses
   
72.093   School bus inspection
   
72.094   School bus not used for school purposes
   
72.095   Licensing by Department of Public Safety
   
72.096   Registration and identification of school buses
   
72.097   School bus marking
   
72.098   Flashing light signal lamps
   
72.099   Occupant restraining device for operator
Prohibitions
   
72.115   Obstruction and interference affecting view and control of driver
   
72.116   Occupying travel trailer, fifth wheel vehicle, or manufactured or
mobile home while in motion
   
72.117   Driving upon closed highway prohibited
   
72.118   Driving upon sidewalk area or paths exclusively for bicycles
   
72.119   Obstructing passage of other vehicles
   
72.120   Following an emergency or public vehicle prohibited; approaching
stationary public safety vehicle and certain other vehicles with caution
   
72.121   Driving over unprotected fire hose
   
72.122   Placing injurious material on highway or depositing litter from motor
vehicle
   
72.123   Transporting child not in child-restraint system prohibited
   
72.124   Occupant restraining devices
   
72.125   Use of engine brakes prohibited
   
72.126   Operating motor vehicle while wearing earphones or earplugs
   
72.127   Chauffeured limousines and livery services
   
72.128   Operating traction engine upon improved highway
   
72.129   Cracking exhaust noises; peeling out
   
72.130   Shortcutting across private property
   
72.131   Texting while driving prohibited
   
72.132   Use of electronic wireless communication devices by minors or
probationary drivers while driving prohibited
Statutory reference:
   Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 72.001 LANES OF TRAVEL UPON ROADWAYS.
   (A)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon
the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction, or when making a left turn under the rules governing such movements;
      (2)   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left
of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the
unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an
immediate hazard;
      (3)   When driving upon a roadway divided into three or more marked lanes
for traffic under the rules applicable thereon;
      (4)   When driving upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for
one-way traffic;
      (5)   When otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic-control
device.
   (B)   (1)   Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the
prevailing and lawful speed of traffic at the time and place and under the
conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane then available
for traffic, and far enough to the right to allow passing by faster vehicles if
such passing is safe and reasonable, except under any of the following
circumstances:
         (a)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction;
         (b)   When preparing for a left turn;
         (c)   When the driver must necessarily drive in a lane other than the
right-hand lane to continue on the driver’s intended route.
      (2)   Nothing in division (B)(1) of this section requires a driver of a
slower vehicle to compromise the driver’s safety to allow overtaking by a
faster vehicle.
   (C)   Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic and
providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the
left of the center line of the roadway, except when authorized by official
traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left of the center of
the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use the lanes, or
except as permitted under division (A)(2) of this section. This division shall
not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the center line in making a
left turn into or from an alley, private road, or driveway.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.25)
§ 72.002 DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE.
   (A)   No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety
zone.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.60)
§ 72.003 VEHICLES TRAVELING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.
   (A)   Operators of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass
each other to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one
line of traffic in each direction, each operator shall give to the other one-
half of the main traveled portion of the roadway or as nearly one-half as is
reasonably possible.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.26)
§ 72.004 RULES GOVERNING OVERTAKING AND PASSING OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction:
      (1)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction shall, except as provided in division (A)(3) of this
section, signal to the vehicle to be overtaken, shall pass to the left thereof
at a safe distance, and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway
until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. When a motor vehicle overtakes and
passes a bicycle or electric bicycle, three feet or greater is considered a
safe passing distance.
      (2)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
operator of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle at the latter’s audible signal, and the operator shall not
increase the speed of the operator’s vehicle until completely passed by the
overtaking vehicle.
      (3)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking and passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction on a divided highway as defined in R.C. §
4511.35, a limited access highway as defined in R.C. § 5511.02, or a highway
with four or more traffic lanes is not required to signal audibly to the
vehicle being overtaken and passed.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.27)
§ 72.005 PERMISSION TO OVERTAKE AND PASS ON THE RIGHT.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass on the right of another
vehicle only under the following conditions:
      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
or
      (2)   Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for
two or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction being traveled
by the overtaking vehicle.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle only
under conditions permitting the movement in safety. The movement shall not be
made by driving off the roadway.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.28)
§ 72.006 DRIVING TO LEFT OF CENTER LINE.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left of the center of the roadway in
overtaking and passing traffic proceeding in the same direction, unless the
left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient
distance ahead to permit the overtaking and passing to be completely made
without interfering with the safe operation of any traffic approaching from the
opposite direction or any traffic overtaken. In every event, the overtaking
vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as soon as practicable, and
in the event the passing movement involves the use of a lane authorized for the
traffic approaching from the opposite direction, before coming within 200 feet
of any approaching vehicle.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.29)
§ 72.007 PROHIBITION AGAINST DRIVING UPON LEFT SIDE OF ROADWAY.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven upon the left side of the roadway under the
following conditions:
      (1)   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the
highway, where the operator’s view is obstructed within such a distance as to
create a hazard in the event traffic might approach from the opposite
direction;
      (2)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any
bridge, viaduct, or tunnel; or
      (3)   When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection
or railroad grade crossing.
   (B)   This section does not apply to vehicles upon a one-way roadway, upon a
roadway where traffic is lawfully directed to be driven to the left side, or
under the conditions described in R.C. § 4511.25(A)(2) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.30)
§ 72.008 HAZARDOUS ZONES.
   (A)   The Department of Transportation may determine those portions of any
state highway where overtaking and passing other traffic or driving to the left
of the center or center line of the roadway would be especially hazardous, and
may, by appropriate signs or markings on the highway, indicate the beginning
and end of such zones. When signs or markings are in place and clearly visible,
every operator of a vehicle shall obey the directions of the signs or markings,
notwithstanding the distances set out in R.C. § 4511.30.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply when all of the following
apply:
      (1)   The slower vehicle is proceeding at less than half the speed of the
speed limit applicable to that location.
      (2)   The faster vehicle is capable of overtaking and passing the slower
vehicle without exceeding the speed limit.
      (3)   There is sufficient clear sight distance to the left of the center
or center line of the roadway to meet the overtaking and passing provisions of
R.C. § 4511.29, considering the speed of the slower vehicle.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.31)
§ 72.009 ONE-WAY HIGHWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.
   (A)   (1)   Upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for one-way
traffic, a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.
      (2)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven
only to the right of the rotary traffic island.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.32)
§ 72.010 RULES FOR DRIVING IN MARKED LANES.
   (A)   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for traffic, or wherever within the municipality traffic is lawfully
moving in two or more substantially continuous lines in the same direction, the
following rules apply:
      (1)   A vehicle shall be driven, as nearly as is practicable, entirely
within a single lane or line of traffic and shall not be moved from the lane or
line until the driver has first ascertained that the movement can be made with
safety.
      (2)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and provides for
the two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center
lane, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is
clearly visible and the center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance,
or when preparing for a left turn, or where the center lane is at the time
allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is
proceeding, and is posted with signs to give notice of such allocation.
      (3)   Official signs may be erected directing specified traffic to use a
designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction, regardless of the center of the roadway, or restricting
the use of a particular lane to only buses during certain hours or during all
hours, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of such signs.
      (4)   Official traffic-control devices may be installed prohibiting the
changing of lanes on sections of roadway, and drivers of vehicles shall obey
the directions of every such device.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.33)
§ 72.011 SPACE BETWEEN MOVING VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle
more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of
the vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway.
      (2)   The driver of any truck, or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle,
when traveling upon a roadway outside a business or residence district, shall
maintain a sufficient space, whenever conditions permit, between the vehicle
and another vehicle ahead so an overtaking motor vehicle may enter and occupy
the space without danger. This division does not prevent overtaking and passing
nor does it apply to any lane specially designated for use by trucks.
      (3)   Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business
or residence district in a caravan or motorcade shall maintain a sufficient
space between the vehicles so an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy the
space without danger. This division shall not apply to funeral processions.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.34)
§ 72.012 DIVIDED ROADWAYS.
   (A)   Whenever any highway has been divided into two roadways by an
intervening space, or by a physical barrier, or a clearly indicated dividing
section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be
driven only upon the right-hand roadway, and no vehicle shall be driven over,
across, or within any dividing space, barrier, or section, except through an
opening, crossover, or intersection established by public authority. This
section does not prohibit the occupancy of the dividing space, barrier, or
section for the purpose of an emergency stop, or in compliance with an order of
a police officer.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.35)
§ 72.013 RULES FOR TURNS AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall be
governed by the following rules:
      (1)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
      (2)   At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both
directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left
turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the
center line thereof and by passing to the right of the center line where it
enters the intersection, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn
shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center line
of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made
in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the
intersection.
      (3)   At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on
one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at
any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand
lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of the
vehicle, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so
as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left hand lane
of the roadway being entered lawfully available to traffic moving in that lane.
   (B)   The Department of Transportation and local authorities may cause
markers, buttons, or signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections,
and thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in
this section be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection, and when
markers, buttons, or signs are so placed, no operator of a vehicle shall turn
the vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by the
markers, buttons, or signs.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.36)
§ 72.014 U-TURNS AND TURNING IN ROADWAY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Except as provided in R.C. § 4511.13 and division (B) of this section,
no vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any
curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, if such vehicle
cannot be seen within 500 feet by the driver of any other vehicle approaching
from either direction.
   (B)   The driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, may turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction. This division applies only when the emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and
displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the
vehicle, and when the driver of the vehicle is giving an audible signal by
siren, exhaust whistle, or bell. This division does not relieve the driver of
an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.37)
§ 72.015 STARTING AND BACKING VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or
parked until the movement can be made with reasonable safety.
      (2)   Before backing, operators of vehicles shall give ample warning, and
while backing they shall exercise vigilance not to injure person or property on
the street or highway.
      (3)   No person shall back a motor vehicle on a freeway, except:
         (a)   In a rest area;
         (b)   In the performance of public works or official duties;
         (c)   As a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown
of a motor vehicle.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.38)
§ 72.016 TURN AND STOP SIGNALS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall turn a vehicle or move right or left upon a
highway unless and until the person has exercised due care to ascertain that
the movement can be made with reasonable safety, nor without giving an
appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided.
      (2)   When required, a signal of intention to turn or move right or left
shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by
the vehicle before turning, except that in the case of a person operating a
bicycle or electric bicycle, the signal shall be made not less than one time
but is not required to be continuous. A bicycle or electric bicycle operator is
not required to make a signal if the bicycle is in a designated turn lane, and
a signal shall not be given when the operator’s hands are needed for the safe
operation of the bicycle or electric bicycle.
      (3)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear, when there is opportunity to
give a signal.
      (4)   Any stop or turn signal required by this section shall be given
either by means of the hand and arm, or by signal lights that clearly indicate
to both approaching and following traffic the intention to turn or move right
or left, except that any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped
with, and the required signal shall be given by, signal lights when the
distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside
limit of the body, cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds 24 inches, or when
the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit
of the body or load thereof exceeds 14 feet, whether a single vehicle or a
combination of vehicles.
      (5)   The signal lights required by this section shall not be flashed on
one side only on a disabled vehicle, flashed as a courtesy or “do pass” signal
to operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear, nor be flashed on one
side only of a parked vehicle except as may be necessary for compliance with
this section.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.39)
§ 72.017 HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, all signals
required by the provisions of this traffic code, when given by hand and arm,
shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner, and
the signals shall indicate as follows:
      (1)   Left turn, hand and arm extended horizontally;
      (2)   Right turn, hand and arm extended upward;
      (3)   Stop or decrease speed, hand and arm extended downward.
   (B)   As an alternative to division (A)(2) of this section, a person
operating a bicycle or electric bicycle may give a right turn signal by
extending the right hand and arm horizontally and to the right side of the
bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.40)
§ 72.018 USE OF MOTOR VEHICLES ON RIVER BANK.
   Use of automotive and other motorized vehicles on the river bank is
prohibited.
(Ord. 1984-44, passed 2-26-1985)
RIGHT-OF-WAY
§ 72.030 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different
streets or highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle
on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
   (B)   The right-of-way rule declared in division (A) of this section is
modified at through highways and otherwise as stated in this traffic code or
R.C. Chapter 4511.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.41)
§ 72.031 RIGHT-OF-WAY WHEN TURNING LEFT.
   (A)   The operator of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an
intersection or into an alley, private road, or driveway shall yield the right-
of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within
the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.42)
§ 72.032 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT THROUGH HIGHWAYS; STOP SIGNS; YIELD SIGNS.
   (A)   Except when directed to proceed by a law enforcement officer, every
driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering it. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-
way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so
closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is
moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow down to a
speed reasonable for the existing conditions, and if required for safety to
stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then at the
point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it. After
slowing, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways. Whenever a driver is involved in a
collision with a vehicle in the intersection or junction of roadways, after
driving past a yield sign without stopping, the collision shall be prima facie
evidence of the driver’s failure to yield the right-of-way.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.43)
§ 72.033 STOP AT SIDEWALK AREA; STOP SIGNS ON PRIVATE ROADS AND DRIVEWAYS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building, private
road, or driveway within a business or residence district shall stop the
vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area
extending across the alley, building entrance, road, or driveway, or in the
event there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the point nearest the street to
be entered where the driver has a view of approaching traffic thereon.
(R.C. § 4511.431(A))
   (B)   The owner of a private road or driveway located in a private
residential area containing 20 or more dwelling units may erect stop signs at
places where the road or driveway intersects with another private road or
driveway in the residential area, in compliance with all of the following
requirements:
      (1)   The stop sign is sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily
observant person and meets the specifications of and is placed in accordance
with the manual adopted by the Department of Transportation pursuant to R.C. §
4511.09;
      (2)   The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the private road or
driveway that is in plain view and clearly informs persons entering the road or
driveway that they are entering private property, stop signs have been posted
and must be obeyed, and the signs are enforceable by law enforcement officers
under state law. The sign required by this division, where appropriate, may be
incorporated with the sign required by R.C. § 4511.211(A)(2), or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (C)   The provisions of R.C. § 4511.43(A) and R.C. § 4511.46, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be deemed to apply to the
driver of a vehicle on a private road or driveway where a stop sign is placed
in accordance with division (B) of this section and to a pedestrian crossing
such a road or driveway at an intersection where a stop sign is in place.
   (D)   When a stop sign is placed in accordance with division (B) of this
section, any law enforcement officer may apprehend a person found violating the
stop sign and may stop and charge the person with violating the stop sign.
   (E)   As used in this section, and for the purpose of applying R.C. §
4511.43(A) and R.C. § 4511.46, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, to conduct under this section:
      INTERSECTION. Means:
         (a)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two private roads or driveways which join one another at, or
approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling
upon different private roads or driveways joining at any other angle may come
in conflict.
         (b)   Where a private road or driveway includes two roadways 30 feet
or more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such private roads or
driveways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
      OWNER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.211.
      PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL AREA CONTAINING 20 OR MORE DWELLING UNITS. Has the
same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.211.
      ROADWAY. Means that portion of a private road or driveway improved,
designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, except the berm or shoulder.
If a private road or driveway includes two or more separate roadways, the term
means any such roadway separately but not all such roadways collectively.
(R.C.§ 4511.432(A) - (C), (E))
   (F)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. §§ 4511.431(B), 4511.432(D))
   (G)   If the offender violates division (A) of this section while distracted
and the distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. §§ 4511.431(B))
§ 72.034 RIGHT-OF-WAY ON PUBLIC HIGHWAY.
   (A)   The operator of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from any
place other than another roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all traffic
approaching on the roadway to be entered or crossed.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender violates division (A) of this section while distracted
and the distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.44)
§ 72.035 PEDESTRIAN ON SIDEWALK HAS RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian
on a sidewalk.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.441)
§ 72.036 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLES.
   (A)   Upon the approach of a public safety vehicle or coroner’s vehicle,
equipped with at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating light visible
under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of
the vehicle, and the driver is giving an audible signal by siren, exhaust
whistle, or bell, no driver of any other vehicle shall fail to yield the right-
of-way, immediately drive if practical to a position parallel to, and as close
as possible to, the right edge or curb of the highway clear of any
intersection, and stop and remain in that position until the public safety
vehicle or coroner’s vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a
police officer.
   (B)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle or
coroner’s vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons and property upon the highway.
   (C)   This section applies to a coroner’s vehicle only when the vehicle is
operated in accordance with R.C. § 4513.171, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance. As used in this section, CORONER’S VEHICLE means a vehicle
used by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator that is equipped
with a flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and a siren, exhaust
whistle or bell capable of giving an audible signal.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division or division (E), whoever
violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree on a first offense. On a second offense within one year after the first
offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree, and, on
each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 4511.45)
   (E)   (1)   When the failure of a motor vehicle operator to yield the right-
of-way to a public safety vehicle as required by division (A) of this section
impedes the ability of the public safety vehicle to respond to an emergency,
any emergency personnel in the public safety vehicle may report the license
plate number and a general description of the vehicle and the operator of the
vehicle to the law enforcement agency exercising jurisdiction over the area
where the alleged violation occurred.
      (2)   (a)   Upon receipt of a report under division (E)(1) of this
section, the law enforcement agency may conduct an investigation to attempt to
determine or confirm the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation.
         (b)   If the identity of the operator at the time of an alleged
violation of division (A) of this section is established, the law enforcement
agency has probable cause to issue either a written warning or a citation for
that violation, and the agency shall issue a written warning or a citation to
the operator.
         (c)   If the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation cannot be established, the law enforcement agency may
issue a written warning to the person who owned the vehicle at the time of the
alleged violation. However, in the case of a leased or rented vehicle, the law
enforcement agency shall issue the written warning to the person who leased or
rented the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation.
      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section based on a
report filed under division (E)(1) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined $150.
         (b)   If a person who is issued a citation for a violation of division
(A) of this section based on a report filed under division (E)(1) of this
section does not enter a written plea of guilty and does not waive the person’s
right to contest the citation but instead appears in person in the proper court
to answer the charge, the trier of fact cannot find beyond a reasonable doubt
that the person committed that violation unless the emergency personnel who
filed the report appears in person in the court and testifies.
      (4)   As used in this division (E):
         LICENSE PLATE. Includes any temporary motor vehicle license
registration issued under R.C. § 4503.182 or similar law of another
jurisdiction.
         PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Does not include an unmarked public safety
vehicle or a vehicle used by a public law enforcement officer or other person
sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state or a vehicle used
by the motor carrier enforcement unit for the enforcement of orders and rules
of the public utilities commission.
(R.C. § 4511.454)
§ 72.037 FUNERAL PROCESSION HAS RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   As used in this section, FUNERAL PROCESSION means two or more vehicles
accompanying the cremated remains or the body of a deceased person in the
daytime when each of the vehicles has its headlights lighted and is displaying
a purple and white or an orange and white pennant attached to each vehicle in
such a manner as to be clearly visible to traffic approaching from any
direction.
   (B)   Excepting public safety vehicles proceeding in accordance with R.C. §
4511.45 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or when directed
otherwise by a police officer, pedestrians and the operators of all vehicles
shall yield the right-of-way to each vehicle that is a part of a funeral
procession. Whenever the lead vehicle in a funeral procession lawfully enters
an intersection, the remainder of the vehicles in the procession may continue
to follow the lead vehicle through the intersection, notwithstanding any
traffic-control devices or right-of-way provisions of the Ohio Revised Code,
provided that the operator of each vehicle exercises due care to avoid
colliding with any other vehicle or pedestrian.
   (C)   No person shall operate any vehicle as a part of a funeral procession
without having the headlights of the vehicle lighted and without displaying a
purple and white or an orange and white pennant in such a manner as to be
clearly visible to traffic approaching from any direction.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.451)
§ 72.038 PEDESTRIANS YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY TO PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE.
   (A)   Upon the immediate approach of a public safety vehicle, as stated in
R.C. § 4511.45 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, every
pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to the public safety vehicle.
   (B)   This section shall not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle
from the duty to exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.452)
§ 72.039 PEDESTRIAN ON CROSSWALK HAS RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   When traffic-control signals are not in place, not in operation, or
are not clearly assigning the right-of-way, the driver of a vehicle shall yield
the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, or if
required by R.C. § 4511.132 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is
upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the
pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as
to be in danger.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and
walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close as to constitute an
immediate hazard.
   (C)   Division (A) of this section does not apply under the conditions
stated in R.C. § 4511.48(B), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (D)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (F)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.46)
§ 72.040 RIGHT-OF-WAY YIELDED TO BLIND PERSON.
   (A)   (1)   As used in this section BLIND PERSON or BLIND PEDESTRIAN means a
person having not more than 20/200 visual acuity in the better eye with
correcting lenses, or visual acuity greater than 20/200, but with a limitation
in the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field
subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees.
      (2)   The driver of every vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to every
blind pedestrian guided by a guide dog, or carrying a cane which is
predominantly white or metallic in color, with or without a red tip.
   (B)   No person, other than a blind person, while on any public highway,
street, alley, or other public thoroughfare, shall carry a white or metallic
cane, with or without a red tip.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.47)
§ 72.041 RIGHT-OF-WAY YIELDED BY PEDESTRIAN.
   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (B)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way
to all traffic upon the roadway.
   (C)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked
crosswalk.
   (D)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless
authorized by official traffic-control devices; and when authorized to cross
diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official
traffic-control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.
   (E)   This section does not relieve the operator of a vehicle from
exercising due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway.
   (F)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.48)
PEDESTRIANS
§ 72.055 PEDESTRIAN MOVEMENT IN CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.49)
§ 72.056 PEDESTRIAN WALKING ALONG HIGHWAY.
   (A)   Where a sidewalk is provided and its use is practicable, it shall be
unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (B)   Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder, as far as practicable from the
edge of the roadway.
   (C)   Where neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any pedestrian
walking along and upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable to an
outside edge of the roadway, and, if on a two-way roadway, shall walk only on
the left side of the roadway.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. §§ 4511.13 and 4511.46, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, any pedestrian upon a roadway
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.50)
§ 72.057 PROHIBITION AGAINST SOLICITING RIDES; RIDING ON OUTSIDE OF VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person while on a roadway outside a safety zone shall solicit a
ride from the driver of any vehicle.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, no person
shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting employment, business, or
contributions from the occupant of any vehicle.
      (2)   The Legislative Authority, by ordinance, may authorize the issuance
of a permit to a charitable organization to allow a person acting on behalf of
the organization to solicit charitable contributions from the occupant of a
vehicle by standing on a highway, other than a freeway as provided in R.C. §
4511.051(A)(1), that is under the jurisdiction of the municipality. The permit
shall be valid for only one period of time, which shall be specified in the
permit, in any calendar year. The Legislative Authority also may specify the
locations where contributions may be solicited and may impose any other
restrictions on or requirements regarding the manner in which the solicitations
are to be conducted that the Legislative Authority considers advisable.
      (3)   As used in division (B)(2) of this section, CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION
means an organization that has received from the Internal Revenue Service a
currently valid ruling or determination letter recognizing the tax-exempt
status of the organization pursuant to IRC § 501(c)(3).
   (C)   No person shall hang onto or ride on the outside of any motor vehicle
while it is moving upon a roadway, except mechanics or test engineers making
repairs or adjustments, or workers performing specialized highway or street
maintenance or construction under authority of a public agency.
   (D)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person to hang onto or ride on
the outside of any motor vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway, except
mechanics or test engineers making repairs or adjustments, or workers
performing specialized highway or street maintenance or construction under
authority of a public agency.
   (E)   No driver of a truck, trailer, or semitrailer shall knowingly permit
any person who has not attained the age of 16 years to ride in the unenclosed
or unroofed cargo storage area of the driver’s vehicle if the vehicle is
traveling faster than 25 miles per hour, unless either of the following
applies:
      (1)   The cargo storage area of the vehicle is equipped with a properly
secured seat to which is attached a seat safety belt that is in compliance with
federal standards for an occupant restraining device as defined in R.C. §
4513.263(A)(2), the seat and seat safety belt were installed at the time the
vehicle was originally assembled, and the person riding in the cargo storage
area is in the seat and is wearing the seat safety belt; or
      (2)   An emergency exists that threatens the life of the driver or the
person being transported in the cargo storage area of the truck, trailer, or
semitrailer.
   (F)   No driver of a truck, trailer, or semitrailer shall permit any person,
except for those workers performing specialized highway or street maintenance
or construction under authority of a public agency, to ride in the cargo
storage area or on a tailgate of the driver’s vehicle while the tailgate is
unlatched.
   (G)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
any provision of divisions (A) through (D) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates any provision of divisions (A) through (D) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates any provision of
divisions (A) through (D) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (E) or (F) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.51)
§ 72.058 PEDESTRIAN ON BRIDGE OR RAILROAD CROSSING.
   (A)   No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or approach
thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate, or barrier after a bridge operation
signal indication has been given.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over, or under any crossing
gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while the gate or
barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.511)
§ 72.059 PERSONS OPERATING MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIRS.
   Every person operating a motorized wheelchair shall have all of the rights
and duties applicable to a pedestrian that are contained in this chapter,
except those provisions which by their nature can have no application.
(R.C. § 4511.491)
§ 72.060 INTOXICATED OR DRUGGED PEDESTRIAN HAZARD ON HIGHWAY.
   (A)   A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol, any drug of abuse,
or any combination of them to a degree that renders the pedestrian a hazard
shall not walk or be upon a highway.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.481)
§ 72.061 OPERATION OF ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES.
   (A)   (1)   Electric personal assistive mobility devices may be operated on
the public streets, highways, sidewalks, and paths and portions of roadways set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in accordance with this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, those sections of
this Traffic Code that by their nature are applicable to an electric personal
assistive mobility device apply to the device and the person operating it
whenever it is operated upon any public street, highway, sidewalk, or path or
upon any portion of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
      (3)   The municipality may regulate or prohibit the operation of electric
personal assistive mobility devices on public streets, highways, sidewalks, and
paths, or portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles,
under its jurisdiction.
   (B)   No operator of an electric personal assistive mobility device shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians and human-powered
vehicles at all times;
      (2)   Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a
pedestrian;
      (3)   Operate the device at night unless the device or its operator is
equipped with or wearing both of the following:
         (a)   A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white light visible
from a distance of not less than 500 feet;
         (b)   A red reflector facing the rear that is visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet when directly in front of lawful lower
beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle;
      (4)   Operate the device on any portion of a street or highway that has
an established speed limit of 55 miles per hour or more;
      (5)   Operate the device upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of
pedestrians or other specialized use when an appropriate sign giving notice of
the specialized use is posted on the path;
      (6)   If under 18 years of age, operate the device unless wearing a
protective helmet on the person’s head with the chin strap properly fastened;
      (7)   If under 16 years of age, operate the device unless, during the
operation, the person is under the direct visual and audible supervision of
another person who is 18 years of age or older and is responsible for the
immediate care of the person under 16 years of age.
   (C)   No person who is under 14 years of age shall operate an electric
personal assistive mobility device.
   (D)   No person shall distribute or sell an electric personal assistive
mobility device unless the device is accompanied by a written statement that is
substantially equivalent to the following: “WARNING: TO REDUCE THE RISK OF
SERIOUS INJURY, USE ONLY WHILE WEARING FULL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT – HELMET,
WRIST GUARDS, ELBOW PADS, AND KNEE PADS”.
   (E)   Nothing in this section affects or shall be construed to affect any
rule of the Director of Natural Resources or a board of park district
commissioners governing the operation of vehicles on lands under the control of
the Director or board, as applicable.
   (F)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (B) or (C) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor and shall be punished as follows:
         (a)   The offender shall be fined $10;
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (B) or (C) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to imposing
the fine required under division (F)(1)(a) of this section, shall do one of the
following:
            1.   Order the impoundment for not less than one day but not more
than 30 days of the electric personal assistive mobility device that was
involved in the current violation of that division. The court shall order the
device to be impounded at a safe indoor location designated by the court and
may assess storage fees of not more than $5 per day; provided the total
storage, processing, and release fees assessed against the offender or the
device in connection with the device’s impoundment or subsequent release shall
not exceed $50.
            2.    If the court does not issue an impoundment order pursuant to
division (F)(1)(b)1. of this section, issue an order prohibiting the offender
from operating any electric personal assistive mobility device on the public
streets, highways, sidewalks, and paths and portions of roadways set aside for
the exclusive use of bicycles for not less than one day but not more than 30
days.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.512)
   (G)   As used in this code, ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE
means a self-balancing two non-tandem wheeled device that is designed to
transport only one person, has an electric propulsion system of an average of
750 watts, and when ridden on a paved level surface by an operator who weighs
170 pounds has a maximum speed of less than 20 miles per hour.
(R.C. § 4501.01(TT))
§ 72.062 OPERATION OF PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE ON SIDEWALKS AND CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      ELIGIBLE ENTITY. Means a corporation, partnership, association, firm,
sole proprietorship, or other entity engaged in business.
      PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE. Means an electrically powered device to which
all of the following apply:
         (a)   The device is intended primarily to transport property and cargo
on sidewalks and crosswalks.
         (b)   The device weighs less than 250 pounds excluding any property or
cargo being carried in the device.
         (c)   The device has a maximum speed of ten miles per hour.
         (d)   The device is equipped with technology that enables the
operation of the device with active control or monitoring by a person, without
active control or monitoring by a person, or both with or without active
control or monitoring by a person.
      PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE OPERATOR. Means an agent of an eligible entity
who exercises direct physical control over, or monitoring of, the navigation
and operation of a personal delivery device. The phrase does not include, with
respect to a delivery or other service rendered by a personal delivery device,
the person who requests the delivery or service. The phrase also does not
include a person who only arranges for and dispatches a personal delivery
device for a delivery or other service.
   (B)   An eligible entity may operate a personal delivery device on sidewalks
and crosswalks so long as all of the following requirements are met:
      (1)   The personal delivery device is operated in accordance with all
regulations, if any, established by each local authority within which the
personal delivery device is operated.
      (2)   A personal delivery device operator is actively controlling or
monitoring the navigation and operation of the personal delivery device.
      (3)   The eligible entity maintains an insurance policy that includes
general liability coverage of not less than $100,000 for damages arising from
the operation of the personal delivery device by the eligible entity and any
agent of the eligible entity.
      (4)   The device is equipped with all of the following:
         (a)   A marker that clearly identifies the name and contact
information of the eligible entity operating the personal delivery device and a
unique identification number;
         (b)   A braking system that enables the personal delivery device to
come to a controlled stop;
         (c)   If the personal delivery device is being operated between sunset
and sunrise, a light on both the front and rear of the personal delivery device
that is visible in clear weather from a distance of at least 500 feet to the
front and rear of the personal delivery device when directly in front of low
beams of headlights on a motor vehicle.
   (C)   No personal delivery device operator shall allow a personal delivery
device to do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to comply with traffic or pedestrian control devices and
signals;
      (2)   Unreasonably interfere with pedestrians or traffic;
      (3)   Transport any hazardous material that would require a permit issued
by the Public Utilities Commission;
      (4)   Operate on a street or highway, except when crossing the street or
highway within a crosswalk.
   (D)   A personal delivery device has all of the rights and obligations
applicable to a pedestrian under the same circumstances, except that a personal
delivery device shall yield the right-of-way to human pedestrians on sidewalks
and crosswalks.
   (E)   (1)   No person shall operate a personal delivery device unless the
person is authorized to do so under this section and complies with the
requirements of this section.
      (2)   An eligible entity is responsible for both of the following:
         (a)   Any violation of this section that is committed by a personal
delivery device operator; and
         (b)   Any other circumstance, including a technological malfunction,
in which a personal delivery device operates in a manner prohibited by
divisions (C)(1) to (C)(4) of this section.
(R.C. § 4511.513)
§ 72.063 LOW-SPEED MICROMOBILITY DEVICES.
   (A)   (1)   A low-speed micromobility device may be operated on the public
streets, highways, sidewalks, and shared-use paths, and may be operated on any
portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in accordance
with this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, those sections of
this title that by their nature could apply to a low-speed micromobility device
do apply to the device and the person operating it whenever it is operated upon
any public street, highway, sidewalk, or shared-use path, or upon any portion
of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
   (B)   No operator of a low-speed micromobility device shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians at all times;
      (2)   Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a
pedestrian;
      (3)   Operate the device at night unless the device or its operator is
equipped with or wearing both of the following:
         (a)   A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white light visible
from a distance of not less than 500 feet;
         (b)   A red reflector facing the rear that is visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet when directly in front of lawful lower
beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle.
   (C)   (1)   No person who is under 16 years of age shall rent a low-speed
micromobility device.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly rent a low-speed micromobility device to
a person who is under 16 years of age.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly rent a low-speed micromobility device on
behalf of a person who is under 16 years of age.
   (D)   No person shall operate a low-speed micromobility device at a speed
greater than 20 miles per hour.
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Unless a mens rea is otherwise specified in this section, an
offense established under this section is a strict liability offense and R.C. §
2901.20 does not apply. The designation of that offense as a strict liability
offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for which there
is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense.
   (F)   Notwithstanding division (A)(1) of this section, the municipality,
county, township, metropolitan park district, township park district,
recreation district, or any division of the Ohio Department of Natural
Resources if the division has the approval of the Ohio Director of Natural
Resources may do any of the following:
      (1)   Regulate or prohibit the operation of low-speed micromobility
devices on public streets, highways, sidewalks, and shared-use paths, and
portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, under its
jurisdiction;
      (2)   Include low-speed micromobility devices that are adapted to expand
access for people with various physical limitations into a shared bicycle,
shared electric bicycle, or similar vehicle sharing program, under its
jurisdiction;
      (3)   Require the owner or operator of a low-speed micromobility device
rental service or low-speed micromobility device sharing program to maintain
commercial general liability insurance related to the operation of the devices,
with limits of up to $1,000,000 per occurrence and $2,000,000 per aggregate.
(R.C. § 4511.514)
§ 72.064 OCCUPANT RESTRAINT DEVICES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      AUTOMOBILE. Any commercial tractor, passenger car, commercial car, or
truck that is required to be factory-equipped with an occupant restraining
device for the operator or any passenger by regulations adopted by the United
States Secretary of Transportation pursuant to the National Traffic and Motor
Vehicle Safety Act of 1966.
      COMMERCIAL TRACTOR, PASSENGER CAR and COMMERCIAL CAR. Have the same
meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE. A seat safety belt, shoulder belt, harness
or other safety device for restraining a person who is an operator of or
passenger in an automobile and that satisfies the “Minimum Federal Vehicle
Safety Standards” established by the United States Department of
Transportation.
      PASSENGER. Any person in an automobile, other than its operator, who is
occupying a seating position for which an occupant restraining device is
provided.
      VEHICLE and MOTOR VEHICLE. As used in the definitions of the terms set
forth in this division (A), have the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   (B)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless he or she is
wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device, or operate a school bus that has an occupant restraining
device installed for use in its operator’s seat unless he or she is wearing all
of the available elements of the device, as properly adjusted;
      (2)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless each
passenger in the automobile who is subject to the requirement set forth in
division (B)(3) below is wearing all of the available elements of a properly
adjusted occupant restraining device; or
      (3)   Occupy, as a passenger, a seating position on the front seat of an
automobile being operated on any street or highway unless he or she is wearing
all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining
device.
   (C)   Division (B)(3) above does not apply to a person who is required by §
72.63 or R.C. § 4511.81 to be secured in a child restraint device. Division (B)
(1) does not apply to a person who is an employee of the United States Postal
Service or of a newspaper home delivery service, during any period in which the
person is engaged in the operation of an automobile to deliver mail or
newspapers to addresses. Divisions (B)(2) and (B)(3) above do not apply to a
person who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4731 or a chiropractor licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4734 that states that the person has a physical
impairment that makes use of an occupant restraining device impossible or
impractical. Division (B) above does not apply to an operator of or a passenger
in an automobile who is protected by an automatic air cushion restraint system.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause an operator of an automobile being operated on
any street or highway to stop the automobile for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (B) above has been or is being
committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation or summons for
such a violation or for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a
person for such violation, and no law enforcement officer shall view the
interior or visually inspect any automobile being operated on any street or
highway for the sole purpose of determining whether such a violation has been
or is being committed.
   (E)   All fines collected for violations of division (B) above shall be
forwarded to the Treasurer of State for deposit in the seat belt education
special account.
   (F)   A court in which a charge against a person for violation of division
(B) above is pending shall dismiss the charge, and shall waive any fine if the
person proves to the court, by a preponderance of the evidence, that he or she,
before the scheduled court appearance indicated on the citation issued to him
or her viewed one of the films or videotapes prepared or acquired by the
Department of Highway Safety as part of its seat belt education program. In
coordination with the Department of Highway Safety’s seat belt safety program,
the courts charged with enforcement of division (B) above shall advise persons
charged with a violation of that section of opportunities for viewing the films
or video tapes.
   (G)   A court in which a charge against a person for violation of division
(B) above is pending shall not dismiss the charge and shall impose the fine
levied by R.C. § 4513.99 if either of the following applies:
      (1)   The defendant fails to appear at the scheduled court appearance and
is convicted of the offense; and/or
      (2)   The defendant fails to prove, by a preponderance of the evidence,
that he or she has viewed a seat belt education film or videotape in accordance
with this section and is convicted of the offense.
   (H)   A person’s failure to wear all of the available elements of a properly
adjusted occupant restraining device or to ensure that each passenger of an
automobile being operated by the person is wearing all of the available
elements of such a device, in violation of division (B) above, shall not be
considered or used as evidence of negligence or contributory negligence, shall
not diminish recovery for damages in any civil action involving the person
arising from the ownership, maintenance or operation of an automobile, shall
not be used as a basis for a criminal prosecution of the person other than a
prosecution for a violation of this section, and shall not be admissible as
evidence in any civil or criminal action involving the person other than a
prosecution for a violation of division (B) above.
   (I)   Administrative procedures provisions and penalty are as follows.
      (1)   Fines collected pursuant to this section shall be paid directly to
the Treasurer of the State notwithstanding the provisions of R.C. § 733.40.
      (2)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor, on
a first offense; on a second offense within one year the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree; and on each subsequent offense within one
year, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(Prior Code, § 72.64) (Ord. 1886-23, passed 6-10-1886)
GRADE CROSSINGS
§ 72.075 STOP SIGNS AT GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (A)   As used in this section, ACTIVE GRADE CROSSING WARNING DEVICE means
signs, signals, gates, or other protective devices erected or installed at a
public highway-railway crossing at common grade and activated by an electrical
circuit.
   (B)   The Department of Transportation and local authorities, with the
approval of the Department, may designate dangerous highway crossings over
railroad tracks and erect stop signs thereat.
   (C)   (1)   The Department and local authorities shall erect stop signs at a
railroad highway grade crossing in either of the following circumstances:
         (a)   New warning devices that are not active grade crossing warning
devices are being installed at the grade crossing, and railroad crossbucks were
the only warning devices at the grade crossing prior to the installation of the
new warning devices.
         (b)   The grade crossing is constructed after July 1, 2013, and only
warning devices that are not active grade crossing warning devices are
installed at the grade crossing.
      (2)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to a railroad
highway grade crossing that the Director of Transportation has exempted from
that division because of traffic flow or other considerations or factors.
   (D)   When stop signs are erected pursuant to division (B) or (C) of this
section, the operator of any vehicle shall stop within 50, but not less than
15, feet from the nearest rail of the railroad tracks and shall exercise due
care before proceeding across such grade crossing.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (D) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (F)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.61)
§ 72.076 DRIVING VEHICLE ACROSS RAILROAD GRADE CROSSING.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad
grade crossing, the person shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet
from the nearest rail of the railroad if any of the following circumstances
exist at the crossing:
         (a)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a train.
         (b)   A crossing gate is lowered.
         (c)   A flagperson gives or continues to give a signal of the approach
or passage of a train.
         (d)   There is insufficient space on the other side of the railroad
grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle the person is operating without
obstructing the passage of other vehicles, pedestrians or railroad trains, not-
withstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed.
         (e)   An approaching train is emitting an audible signal or is plainly
visible, and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing.
         (f)   There is insufficient undercarriage clearance to safely
negotiate the crossing.
      (2)   A person who is driving a vehicle and who approaches a railroad
grade crossing shall not proceed as long as any of the circumstances described
in divisions (A)(1)(a) through (A)(1)(f) of this section exist at the crossing.
   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while the gate or barrier is
closed, or is being opened or closed unless the person is signaled by a law
enforcement officer or flagperson that it is permissible to do so.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 4511.62)
§ 72.077 VEHICLES REQUIRED TO STOP AT GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, the operator of
any bus, any school vehicle, or any vehicle transporting material required to
be placarded under 49 C.F.R. parts 100 through 185, before crossing at grade
any track of a railroad, shall stop the vehicle, and while so stopped, shall
listen through an open door or open window, and look in both directions along
the track for any approaching train and for signals indicating the approach of
a train, and shall proceed only upon exercising due care after stopping,
looking, and listening as required by this section. Upon proceeding, the
operator of such a vehicle shall cross only in a gear that will ensure there
will be no necessity for changing gears while traversing the crossing, and
shall not shift gears while crossing the tracks.
   (B)   This section does not apply at grade crossings when any local
authority has filed an application with the Public Utilities Commission
requesting the approval of an exempt crossing, and the Public Utilities
Commission has authorized and approved an exempt crossing as provided in R.C. §
4511.63(B).
   (C)   As used in this section:
      BUS. Means any vehicle originally designed by its manufacturer to
transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver, or carries 16 or more
passengers, including the driver.
      EXEMPT CROSSING. Means a highway rail grade crossing authorized and
approved by the Public Utilities Commission under R.C. § 4511.63(B) at which
vehicles may cross without making the stop otherwise required by this section.
      SCHOOL VEHICLE. Means any vehicle used for the transportation of pupils
to and from a school or school-related function if the vehicle is owned or
operated by, or operated under contract with, a public or nonpublic school.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764, 4511.77, or 4511.79, or
a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of those
sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.63)
§ 72.078 SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES OR EQUIPMENT CROSSING RAILROAD TRACKS.
   (A)   No person shall operate or move any crawler-type tractor, steam
shovel, derrick, roller, or any equipment or structure having a normal
operating speed of six or less miles per hour or a vertical body or load
clearance of less than nine inches above the level surface of a roadway, upon
or across any tracks at a railroad grade crossing without first complying with
divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section.
      (1)   Before making any such crossing, the person operating or moving any
such vehicle or equipment shall first stop the same, and while stopped, the
person shall listen and look in both directions along the track for any
approaching train and for signals indicating the approach of a train, and shall
proceed only upon exercising due care.
      (2)   No such crossing shall be made when warning is given by automatic
signal, crossing gates, or a flagperson, or otherwise of the immediate approach
of a railroad train or car.
   (B)   If the normal sustained speed of the vehicle, equipment, or structure
is not more than three miles per hour, the person owning, operating, or moving
the same shall also give notice of the intended crossing to a station agent or
superintendent of the railroad, and a reasonable time shall be given to the
railroad to provide proper protection for the crossing. Where the vehicles or
equipment are being used in constructing or repairing a section of highway
lying on both sides of a railroad grade crossing, and in this construction or
repair it is necessary to repeatedly move the vehicles or equipment over the
crossing, one daily notice specifying when the work will start and stating the
hours during which it will be prosecuted is sufficient.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.64)
SCHOOL BUSES
§ 72.090 REGULATIONS CONCERNING SCHOOL BUSES.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle, upon meeting or overtaking from either
direction any school bus stopped for the purpose of receiving or discharging
any school child, person attending programs offered by community boards of
mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child
attending a program offered by a head start agency, shall stop at least ten
feet from the front or rear of the school bus and shall not proceed until such
school bus resumes motion, or until signaled by the school bus driver to
proceed. It is no defense to a charge under this division that the school bus
involved failed to display or be equipped with an automatically extended stop
warning sign as required by division (B) of this section.
   (B)   Every school bus shall be equipped with amber and red visual signals
meeting the requirements of R.C. § 4511.771 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and an automatically extended stop warning sign of a type
approved by the Ohio Department of Education and Workforce, which shall be
actuated by the driver of the bus whenever but only whenever the bus is stopped
or stopping on the roadway for the purpose of receiving or discharging school
children, persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental
health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or children attending
programs offered by head start agencies. A school bus driver shall not actuate
the visual signals or the stop warning sign in designated school bus loading
areas where the bus is entirely off the roadway or at school buildings when
children or persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental
health and county boards of developmental disabilities are loading or unloading
at curbside or at buildings when children attending programs offered by head
start agencies are loading or unloading at curbside. The visual signals and
stop warning sign shall be synchronized or otherwise operated as required by
the Ohio Administrative Code.
   (C)   Where a highway has been divided into four or more traffic lanes, a
driver of a vehicle need not stop for a school bus approaching from the
opposite direction which has stopped for the purpose of receiving or
discharging any school child, persons attending programs offered by community
boards of mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or
children attending programs offered by head start agencies. The driver of any
vehicle overtaking the school bus shall comply with division (A) above.
   (D)   School buses operating on divided highways or on highways with four or
more traffic lanes shall receive and discharge all school children, persons
attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and county
boards of developmental disabilities, and children attending programs offered
by head start agencies on their residence side of the highway.
   (E)   No school bus driver shall start the driver’s bus until after any
child, person attending programs offered by community boards of mental health
and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child attending a program
offered by a head start agency who may have alighted therefrom has reached a
place of safety on the child’s or person’s residence side of the road.
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section may be fined an
amount not to exceed $500. A person who is issued a citation for a violation of
division (A) of this section is not permitted to enter a written plea of guilty
and waive the person’s right to contest the citation in a trial but instead
must appear in person in the proper court to answer the charge.
      (2)   In addition to and independent of any other penalty provided by
law, the court or mayor may impose upon an offender who violates this section a
class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7). When a
license is suspended under this section, the court or mayor shall cause the
offender to deliver the license to the court, and the court or clerk of the
court immediately shall forward the license to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles,
together with notice of the court’s action.
   (G)   As used in this section:
      HEAD START AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3301.32.
      SCHOOL BUS. As used in relation to children who attend a program offered
by a head start agency, means a bus that is owned and operated by a head start
agency, is equipped with an automatically extended stop warning sign of a type
approved by the Ohio Department of Education and Workforce, is painted the
color and displays the markings described in R.C. § 4511.77, and is equipped
with amber and red visual signals meeting the requirements of R.C. § 4511.77,
irrespective of whether or not the bus has 15 or more children aboard at any
time. The term does not include a van owned and operated by a head start
agency, irrespective of its color, lights or markings.
(R.C. § 4511.75)
§ 72.091 VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS; REPORT; INVESTIGATION; CITATION; WARNING.
   (A)   As used in this section, LICENSE PLATE includes but is not limited to
any temporary motor vehicle license registration issued under R.C. § 4503.182
or substantially equivalent law of another jurisdiction.
   (B)   When the operator of a school bus believes that a motorist has
violated R.C. § 4511.75(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
the operator shall report the license plate number and general description of
the vehicle and of the operator of the vehicle to the law enforcement agency
exercising jurisdiction over the area where the alleged violation occurred. The
information contained in the report relating to the license plate number and to
the general description of the vehicle and the operator of the vehicle at the
time of the alleged violation may be supplied by any person with first-hand
knowledge of the information. Information of which the operator of the school
bus has first-hand knowledge also may be corroborated by any other person.
   (C)   Upon receipt of the report of the alleged violation of R.C. § 4511.75
(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the law enforcement
agency shall conduct an investigation to attempt to determine the identity of
the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation. If the
identity of the operator at the time of the alleged violation is established,
the reporting of the license plate number of the vehicle shall establish
probable cause for the law enforcement agency to issue a citation for the
violation of R.C. § 4511.75(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance. However, if the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time
of the alleged violation cannot be established, the law enforcement agency
shall issue a warning to the owner of the vehicle at the time of the alleged
violation, except in the case of a leased or rented vehicle when the warning
shall be issued to the lessee at the time of the alleged violation.
(R.C. § 4511.751)
§ 72.092 RESTRICTIONS ON THE OPERATION OF SCHOOL BUSES.
   (A)   No person shall operate a vehicle used for pupil transportation within
this municipality in violation of the rules of the Ohio Department of Education
and Workforce or the Ohio Department of Public Safety. No person, being the
owner thereof, or having the supervisory responsibility therefor, shall permit
the operation of a vehicle used for pupil transportation within this
municipality in violation of the rules of the Ohio Department of Education and
Workforce or the Ohio Department of Public Safety.
   (B)   As used in this section, VEHICLE USED FOR PUPIL TRANSPORTATION means
any vehicle that is identified as such by the Ohio Department of Education and
Workforce by rule and that is subject to O.A.C. Chapter 3301-83.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
R.C. § 4511.76, or R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764, 4511.77, or
4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of
those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.76(C), (H), (I))
§ 72.093 SCHOOL BUS INSPECTION.
   (A)   No person shall operate, nor shall any person being the owner thereof,
or having supervisory responsibility therefor, permit the operation of, a
school bus within this municipality, unless there is displayed thereon the
decals issued by the state highway patrol bearing the proper date of inspection
for the calendar year for which the inspection decals were issued.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
R.C. § 4511.761, or R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.762, 4511.764, 4511.77, or
4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of
those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
   (C)   Whenever a person is found guilty in a court of record of a violation
of this section, the trial judge, in addition to or independent of all other
penalties provided by law, may suspend for any period of time not exceeding
three years, or cancel the license of any person, partnership, association, or
corporation, issued under R.C. § 4511.763.
(R.C. § 4511.761)
§ 72.094 SCHOOL BUS NOT USED FOR SCHOOL PURPOSES.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, no person who is
the owner of a bus that previously was registered as a school bus that is used
or is to be used exclusively for purposes other than the transportation of
children shall operate the bus or permit it to be operated within this
municipality unless the bus has been painted a color different from that
prescribed for school buses by R.C. § 4511.77 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance and painted in such a way that the words “stop” and “school
bus” are obliterated.
   (B)   Any church bus that previously was registered as a school bus and is
registered under R.C. § 4503.07 may retain the paint color prescribed for
school buses by R.C. § 4511.77 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance if the bus complies with all of the following:
      (1)   The words “school bus” required by R.C. § 4511.77 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance are covered or obliterated and the
bus is marked on the front and rear with the words “church bus” painted in
black lettering not less than ten inches in height.
      (2)   The automatically extending stop warning sign required by R.C. §
4511.75 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance is removed and the
word “stop” required by R.C. § 4511.77 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance is covered or obliterated.
      (3)   The flashing red and amber lights required by R.C. § 4511.771 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance are covered or removed.
      (4)   The inspection decal required by R.C. § 4511.761 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance is covered or removed.
      (5)   The identification number assigned under R.C. § 4511.764 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance and marked in black lettering on
the front and rear of the bus is covered or obliterated.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
R.C. § 4511.762, or R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.764, 4511.77, or
4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of
those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
   (D)   Whenever a person is found guilty in a court of record of a violation
of this section, the trial judge, in addition to or independent of all other
penalties provided by law, may suspend for any period of time not exceeding
three years, or cancel the license of any person, partnership, association, or
corporation, issued under R.C. § 4511.763.
(R.C. § 4511.762)
§ 72.095 LICENSING BY DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY.
   (A)   No person, partnership, association, or corporation shall transport
pupils to or from school on a school bus or enter into a contract with a board
of education of any school district for the transportation of pupils on a
school bus without being licensed by the Department of Public Safety.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.763)
§ 72.096 REGISTRATION AND IDENTIFICATION OF SCHOOL BUSES.
   (A)   No person shall operate, nor shall any person being the owner thereof
or having supervisory responsibility therefor, permit the operation of a school
bus within this municipality unless there is displayed thereon an identifying
number in accordance with R.C. § 4511.764.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of R.C. § 4511.63,
4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.77, or 4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that
is substantially equivalent to any of those sections, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.764)
§ 72.097 SCHOOL BUS MARKING.
   (A)   No person shall operate, nor shall any person being the owner thereof
or having supervisory responsibility therefor permit the operation of, a school
bus within this municipality unless it is painted national school bus yellow
and is marked on both front and rear with the words “school bus” in black
lettering not less than eight inches in height and on the rear of the bus with
the word “stop” in black lettering not less than ten inches in height.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
R.C. § 4511.77, or R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764, or
4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of
those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
   (C)   Whenever a person is found guilty in a court of record of a violation
of this section, the trial judge, in addition to or independent of all other
penalties provided by law, may suspend, for any period of time not exceeding
three years, or cancel the license of any person, partnership, association, or
corporation issued under R.C. § 4511.763.
(R.C. § 4511.77)
§ 72.098 FLASHING LIGHT SIGNAL LAMPS.
   (A)   Every school bus shall, in addition to any other equipment and
distinctive markings required pursuant to R.C. §§ 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.764
and 4511.77, and any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, be equipped
with signal lamps mounted as high as practicable, which shall display to the
front two alternately flashing red lights and two alternately flashing amber
lights located at the same level and to the rear two alternately flashing red
lights and alternately flashing amber lights located at the same level, and
these lights shall be visible at 500 feet in normal sunlight. The alternately
flashing red lights shall be spaced as widely as practicable, and the
alternately flashing amber lights shall be located next to them.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.771)
§ 72.099 OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE FOR OPERATOR.
   (A)   On and after May 6, 1986, no person, school board, or governmental
entity shall purchase, lease, or rent a new school bus unless the school bus
has an occupant restraining device, as defined in R.C. § 4513.263, installed
for use in its operator’s seat.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.772)
PROHIBITIONS
§ 72.115 OBSTRUCTION AND INTERFERENCE AFFECTING VIEW AND CONTROL OF DRIVER.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there
are in the front seat such number of persons, as to obstruct the view of the
driver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or to interfere with the driver’s
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (B)   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in a position as to interfere
with the driver’s view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with the driver’s
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (C)   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.70)
§ 72.116 OCCUPYING TRAVEL TRAILER, FIFTH WHEEL VEHICLE, OR MANUFACTURED OR
MOBILE HOME WHILE IN MOTION.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, no person shall
occupy any travel trailer, fifth wheel trailer, or manufactured or mobile home
while it is being used as a conveyance upon a street or highway.
   (B)   (1)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to a fifth wheel
trailer when both of the following apply:
         (a)   Any child riding in the fifth wheel trailer is properly secured
in the manner provided in R.C. § 4511.81.
         (b)   The operator of the vehicle towing the fifth wheel trailer has
some means of viable communication with the passengers riding in the trailer.
      (2)   As used in this division, “viable communication” includes a
cellular or satellite telephone, a radio, or any other similar electronic
wireless communications device.
   (C)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   The offense established under this section is a strict liability
offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this offense as a
strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.
(R.C. § 4511.701)
§ 72.117 DRIVING UPON CLOSED HIGHWAY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall drive upon, along, or across a street or highway, or
any part of a street or highway that has been closed in the process of its
construction, reconstruction, or repair, and posted with appropriate signs by
the authority having jurisdiction to close the highway.
(R.C. § 4511.71(A))
   (B)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle on or onto a public street or
highway that is temporarily covered by a rise in water level, including
groundwater or an overflow of water, and that is clearly marked by a sign that
specifies that the road is closed due to the rise in water level and that any
person who uses the closed portion of the road may be fined up to $2,000.
      (2)   A person who is issued a citation for a violation of division (B)
(1) of this section is not permitted to enter a written plea of guilty and
waive the person’s right to contest the citation in court, but instead must
appear in person in the proper court to answer the charge.
(R.C. § 4511.714(A), (B))
   (C)   (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever
violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
         (b)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.71(B))
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required
under R.C. § 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or required under
any provision of law, the court imposing the sentence upon an offender who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (B) of this section
shall order the offender to reimburse one or more rescuers for the cost any
such rescuer incurred in rescuing the person, excluding any cost of
transporting the rescued person to a hospital or other facility for treatment
of injuries, up to a cumulative maximum of $2,000. If more than one rescuer was
involved in the emergency response, the court shall allocate the reimbursement
proportionately, according to the cost each rescuer incurred. A financial
sanction imposed under this section is a judgment in favor of the rescuer and,
subject to a determination of indigency under R.C. § 2929.28(B), a rescuer may
collect the financial sanction in the same manner as provided in R.C. §
2929.28.
(R.C. § 4511.714(C))
   (D)   As used in this section:
      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE ORGANIZATION. Has the same meanings as in R.C.
§ 9.60.
      FIREFIGHTING AGENCY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 9.60.
      PRIVATE FIRE COMPANY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 9.60.
      RESCUER. Means a state agency, political subdivision, firefighting
agency, private fire company, or emergency medical service organization.
(R.C. § 4511.714(D))
§ 72.118 DRIVING UPON SIDEWALK AREA OR PATHS EXCLUSIVELY FOR BICYCLES.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall drive any vehicle, other than a bicycle or an
electric bicycle if the motor is not engaged, upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area,
except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway.
      (2)   This prohibition does not apply to a law enforcement officer, or
other person sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state, using
an electric bicycle with the motor engaged while in the performance of the
officer’s duties.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting local
authorities from regulating the operation of bicycles or electric bicycles,
except that no local authority may require that bicycles or electric bicycles
be operated on sidewalks.
(R.C. § 4511.711(A))
   (B)   (1)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, snowmobile, or all-
purpose vehicle upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, when
an appropriate sign giving notice of such use is posted on the path.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect any rule of
the Director of Natural Resources governing the operation of motor vehicles,
snowmobiles, all-purpose vehicles, and bicycles on lands under the Director’s
jurisdiction.
(R.C. § 4511.713(A))
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. §§ 4511.711(B), 4511.713(B))
§ 72.119 OBSTRUCTING PASSAGE OF OTHER VEHICLES.
   (A)   No driver shall enter an intersection or marked crosswalk, or drive
onto any railroad grade crossing, unless there is sufficient space on the other
side of the intersection, crosswalk, or grade crossing to accommodate the
vehicle the driver is operating without obstructing the passage of other
vehicles, pedestrians, or railroad trains, notwithstanding any traffic-control
signal indication to proceed.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.712)
§ 72.120 FOLLOWING AN EMERGENCY OR PUBLIC VEHICLE PROHIBITED; APPROACHING
STATIONARY PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE AND CERTAIN OTHER VEHICLES WITH CAUTION.
   (A)   Following an emergency or public vehicle prohibited. The driver of any
vehicle, other than an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle on official
business, shall not follow any emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle
traveling in response to an alarm closer than 500 feet, or drive into or park
the vehicle within the block where the fire apparatus has stopped in answer to
a fire alarm, unless directed to do so by a police officer or a firefighter.
(R.C. § 4511.72(A))
   (B)   Approaching stationary public safety vehicle with caution.
      (1)   The driver of a motor vehicle, upon approaching a stationary public
safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, waste collection
vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor
vehicle inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a
highway maintenance vehicle that is displaying the appropriate visual signals
by means of flashing, oscillating, or rotating lights, as prescribed in R.C. §
4513.17, shall do either of the following:
         (a)   If the driver of the motor vehicle is traveling on a highway
that consists of at least two lanes that carry traffic in the same direction of
travel as that of the driver’s motor vehicle, the driver shall proceed with due
caution and, if possible and with due regard to the road, weather, and traffic
conditions, shall change lanes into a lane that is not adjacent to that of the
stationary public safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle,
waste collection vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to
conduct motor vehicle inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and
4923.06, or a highway maintenance vehicle.
         (b)   If the driver is not traveling on a highway of a type described
in division (B)(1)(a) of this section, or if the driver is traveling on a
highway of that type but it is not possible to change lanes or if to do so
would be unsafe, the driver shall proceed with due caution, reduce the speed of
the motor vehicle, and maintain a safe speed for the road, weather, and traffic
conditions.
      (2)   This division (B) does not relieve the driver of a public safety
vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, waste collection vehicle,
vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor vehicle
inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a highway
maintenance vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of
all persons and property upon the highway.
      (3)   No person shall fail to drive a motor vehicle in compliance with
divisions (B)(1)(a) or (B)(1)(b) of this section when so required by division
(B) of this section.
(R.C. § 4511.213(A) - (C))
   (C)   Penalty.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Notwithstanding §
130.99 or R.C. § 2929.28, upon a finding that a person operated a motor vehicle
in violation of division (B)(3) of this section, the court, in addition to all
other penalties provided by law, shall impose a fine of two times the usual
amount imposed for the violation.
      (3)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. §§ 4511.213(D), 4511.72(B))
   (D)   The offense established under division (B) of this section is a strict
liability offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this
offense as a strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any
other offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a
strict liability offense.
(R.C. §§ 4511.213(E))
§ 72.121 DRIVING OVER UNPROTECTED FIRE HOSE.
   (A)   No vehicle shall, without the consent of the fire department official
in command, be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department that is
laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of
fire.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.73)
§ 72.122 PLACING INJURIOUS MATERIAL ON HIGHWAY OR DEPOSITING LITTER FROM MOTOR
VEHICLE.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a
highway, lane, road, street, or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails,
or other articles which may damage or injure any person, vehicle, or animal
traveling along or upon the highway, except such substances that may be placed
upon the roadway by proper authority for the repair or construction thereof.
      (2)   Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any
highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the
same.
      (3)   Any person authorized to remove a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a
highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the
highway from such vehicle.
      (4)   No person shall place any obstruction in or upon a highway without
proper authority.
   (B)   No person, with intent to cause physical harm to a person or a
vehicle, shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a highway, lane, road,
street, or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails, or other articles
which may damage or injure any person, vehicle, or animal traveling along or
upon such highway, except such substances that may be placed upon the roadway
by proper authority for the repair or construction thereof.
(R.C. § 4511.74(A), (B))
   (C)   No operator or occupant of a motor vehicle shall, regardless of
intent, throw, drop, discard, or deposit litter from any motor vehicle in
operation upon any street, road, or highway, except into a litter receptacle in
a manner that prevents its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (D)   No operator of a motor vehicle in operation upon any street, road, or
highway shall allow litter to be thrown, dropped, discarded, or deposited from
the motor vehicle, except into a litter receptacle in a manner that prevents
its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (E)   As used in this section, LITTER means garbage, trash, waste, rubbish,
ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts, furniture,
glass, or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.
(R.C. § 4511.82(A), (B), (D))
   (F)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4511.74(C))
      (3)   Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.82(C))
§ 72.123 TRANSPORTING CHILD NOT IN CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM PROHIBITED.
   (A)   When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that is required by the United States
Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of
manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions in a child
restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;
      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.
   (B)   When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, that is owned,
leased, or otherwise under the control of a nursery school or child care
center, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured
in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions in a child restraint system
that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;
      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.
   (C)   When any child who is less than eight years of age and less than four
feet nine inches in height, who is not required by division (A) or (B) of this
section to be secured in a child restraint system, is being transported in a
motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 4511.01 or a vehicle that is regulated under R.C. § 5104.015, that is
required by the United States Department of Transportation to be equipped with
seat belts at the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor
vehicle shall have the child properly secured in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions on a booster seat that meets federal motor vehicle
safety standards.
   (D)   When any child who is at least eight years of age but not older than
15 years of age, and who is not otherwise required by division (A), (B), or (C)
of this section to be secured in a child restraint system or booster seat, is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that is required by the United States
Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of
manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly restrained either in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions
in a child restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards
or in an occupant restraining device as defined in R.C. § 4513.263.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause an operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section has been
or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section or causing the
arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of division
(C) or (D) of this section, and absent another violation of law, a law
enforcement officer’s view of the interior or visual inspection of a motor
vehicle being operated on any street or highway may not be used for the purpose
of determining whether a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section has
been or is being committed.
   (F)   The Director of Public Safety shall adopt such rules as are necessary
to carry out this section.
   (G)   The failure of an operator of a motor vehicle to secure a child in a
child restraint system, a booster seat, or an occupant restraining device as
required in this section is not negligence imputable to the child, is not
admissible as evidence in any civil action involving the rights of the child
against any other person allegedly liable for injuries to the child, is not to
be used as a basis for a criminal prosecution of the operator of the motor
vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section, and is not
admissible as evidence in any criminal action involving the operator of the
motor vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section.
   (H)   This section does not apply when an emergency exists that threatens
the life of any person operating or occupying a motor vehicle that is being
used to transport a child who otherwise would be required to be restrained
under this section. This section does not apply to a person operating a motor
vehicle who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4731 or a chiropractor licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4734 that states that the child who otherwise would be
required to be restrained under this section has a physical impairment that
makes use of a child restraint system, booster seat, or an occupant restraining
device impossible or impractical, provided that the person operating the
vehicle has safely and appropriately restrained the child in accordance with
any recommendations of the physician or chiropractor as noted on the affidavit.
   (I)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any person to
carry with the person the birth certificate of a child to prove the age of the
child, but the production of a valid birth certificate for a child showing that
the child was not of an age to which this section applies is a defense against
any ticket, citation, or summons issued for violating this section.
   (J)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A), (B), (C), or (D) of this section
shall be punished as follows, provided that the failure of an operator of a
motor vehicle to secure more than one child in a child restraint system,
booster seat, or occupant restraining device as required by this section that
occurred at the same time, on the same day, and at the same location is deemed
to be a single violation of this section:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (J)(1)(b) of this
section, the offender is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not
less than $25 nor more than $75.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (A), (B), (C), or (D) of this section or of a
state law or municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent any of those
divisions, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   All fines imposed pursuant to division (J)(1) of this section shall
be forwarded to the State Treasurer for deposit in the Child Highway Safety
Fund created by R.C. § 4511.81(I).
(R.C. § 4511.81(A) - (H), (K), (L))
§ 72.124 OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICES.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      AUTOMOBILE. Means any commercial tractor, passenger car, commercial car,
or truck that is required to be factory-equipped with an occupant restraining
device for the operator or any passenger by regulations adopted by the United
States Secretary of Transportation pursuant to the “National Traffic and Motor
Vehicle Safety Act of 1966”, 80 Stat. 719, 15 U.S.C. § 1392.
      COMMERCIAL CAR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      COMMERCIAL TRACTOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE. A seat safety belt, shoulder belt, harness,
or other safety device for restraining a person who is an operator of or
passenger in an automobile and that satisfies the minimum federal vehicle
safety standards established by the United States Department of Transportation.
      PASSENGER. Any person in an automobile, other than its operator, who is
occupying a seating position for which an occupant restraining device is
provided.
      PASSENGER CAR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      TORT ACTION. A civil action for damages for injury, death, or loss to
person or property. The term includes a product liability claim, as defined in
R.C. § 2307.71, and as asbestos claim, as defined in R.C. § 2307.91, but does
not include a civil action for damages for breach of contract or another
agreement between persons.
      VEHICLE and MOTOR VEHICLE. As used in the definitions of the terms set
forth above, VEHICLE and MOTOR VEHICLE have the same meanings as in R.C. §
4511.01.
   (B)   Prohibited acts. No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless he or she is
wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device, or operate a school bus that has an occupant restraining
device installed for use in its operator’s seat unless he or she is wearing all
of the available elements of the device, as properly adjusted.
      (2)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless each
passenger in the automobile who is subject to the requirement set forth in
division (B)(3) of this section is wearing all of the available elements of a
properly adjusted occupant restraining device.
      (3)   Occupy, as a passenger, a seating position on the front seat of an
automobile being operated on any street or highway unless he or she is wearing
all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining
device.
      (4)   Operate a taxicab on any street or highway unless all factory-
equipped occupant restraining devices in the taxicab are maintained in usable
form.
   (C)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Division (B)(3) of this section does not apply to a person who is
required by R.C. § 4511.81 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to
be secured in a child restraint device or booster seat.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
an employee of the United States Postal Service or of a newspaper home delivery
service, during any period in which the person is engaged in the operation of
an automobile to deliver mail or newspapers to addressees.
      (3)   Divisions (B)(1) and (B)(3) of this section do not apply to a
person who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4731 or a chiropractor licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4734 that states the following:
         (a)   That the person has a physical impairment that makes use of an
occupant restraining device impossible or impractical;
         (b)   Whether the physical impairment is temporary, permanent, or
reasonably expected to be permanent;
         (c)   If the physical impairment is temporary, how long the physical
impairment is expected to make the use of an occupant restraining device
impossible or impractical.
      (4)   Divisions (B)(1) and (B)(3) of this section do not apply to a
person who has registered with the Registrar of Motor Vehicles in accordance
with division (C)(5) of this section.
      (5)   A person who has received an affidavit under division (C)(3) of
this section stating that the person has a permanent or reasonably expected to
be permanent physical impairment that makes use of an occupant restraining
device impossible or impracticable may register with the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles attesting to that fact. Upon such registration, the Registrar shall
make that information available in the law enforcement automated data system. A
person included in the database under division (C)(5) of this section is not
required to have the affidavit obtained in accordance with division (C)(3) of
this section in their possession while operating or occupying an automobile.
      (6)   A physician or chiropractor who issues an affidavit for the
purposes of division (C)(3) or (C)(4) of this section is immune from civil
liability arising from any injury or death sustained by the person who was
issued the affidavit due to the failure of the person to wear an occupant
restraining device unless the physician or chiropractor, in issuing the
affidavit, acted in a manner that constituted willful, wanton, or reckless
misconduct.
      (7)   The Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall adopt rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 establishing a process for a person to be included in the
database under division (C)(5) of this section. The information provided and
included in the database under division (C)(5) of this section is not a public
record subject to inspection or copying under R.C. § 149.43.
   (D)   Officers not permitted to stop cars to determine violation.
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement
officer shall cause an operator of an automobile being operated on any street
or highway to stop the automobile for the sole purpose of determining whether a
violation of division (B) of this section has been or is being committed or for
the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or summons for the violation or
for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for the
violation. No law enforcement officer shall view the interior or visually
inspect any automobile being operated on any street or highway for the sole
purpose of determining whether the violation has been or is being committed.
   (E)   Use of fines for educational program. All fines collected for
violations of division (B) of this section shall be forwarded to the State
Treasurer for deposit in the funds as set forth in R.C. § 4513.263(E).
   (F)   Limitations on evidence used for prosecution.
      (1)   Subject to division (F)(2) of this section, the failure of a person
to wear all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device in violation of division (B)(1) or (B)(3) of this section or
the failure of a person to ensure that each minor who is a passenger of an
automobile being operated by that person is wearing all of the available
elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device in violation of
division (B)(2) of this section shall not be considered or used by the trier of
fact in a tort action as evidence of negligence or contributory negligence.
But, the trier of fact may determine based on evidence admitted consistent with
the Ohio Rules of Evidence that the failure contributed to the harm alleged in
the tort action and may diminish a recovery of compensatory damages that
represents non-economic loss, as defined in R.C. § 2307.011, in a tort action
that could have been recovered but for the plaintiff’s failure to wear all of
the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device.
Evidence of that failure shall not be used as a basis for a criminal
prosecution of the person other than a prosecution for a violation of this
section; and shall not be admissible as evidence in a criminal action involving
the person other than a prosecution for a violation of this section.
      (2)   If, at the time of an accident involving a passenger car equipped
with occupant restraining devices, any occupant of the passenger car who
sustained injury or death was not wearing an available occupant restraining
device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a device, or was
not wearing such a device as properly adjusted, then, consistent with the Rules
of Evidence, the fact that the occupant was not wearing the available occupant
restraining device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a
device, or was not wearing such a device as properly adjusted is admissible in
evidence in relation to any claim for relief in a tort action to the extent
that the claim for relief satisfies all of the following:
         (a)   It seeks to recover damages for injury or death to the occupant;
         (b)   The defendant in question is the manufacturer, designer,
distributor, or seller of the passenger car;
         (c)   The claim for relief against the defendant in question is that
the injury or death sustained by the occupant was enhanced or aggravated by
some design defect in the passenger car or that the passenger car was not
crashworthy.
   (G)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section shall be fined
$30.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B)(2) shall be subject to the penalty
set forth in §
70.99(B).
      (3)   Whoever violates division (B)(3) of this section shall be fined
$20.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (B)(4) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
division (B)(4) of this section, whoever violates division (B)(4) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4513.263)
§ 72.125 USE OF ENGINE BRAKES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The non-emergency use of engine brakes within the municipality is
prohibited.
   (B)   As used in this section, ENGINE BRAKES shall be defined to include but
is not limited to Jake Brakes, Jacobs Brakes, C Brakes, PacBrakes, TekBrakes,
and any other type of engine retarders commonly utilized within the trucking
industry.
   (C)   This section does not apply to emergency vehicles operated by fire,
police, or military units.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 72.126 OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE WHILE WEARING EARPHONES OR EARPLUGS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      EARPHONES. Any device that covers all or a portion of both ears and that
does either of the following:
         (a)   Through either a physical connection to another device or a
wireless connection, provides the listener with radio programs, music, or other
information;
         (b)   Provides hearing protection.
      EARPHONES does not include speakers or other listening devices that are
built into protective headgear.
      EARPLUGS. Any device that can be inserted into one or both ears and that
does either of the following:
         (a)   Through either a physical connection to another device or a
wireless connection, provides the listener with radio programs, music, or other
information;
         (b)   Provides hearing protection.
   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle while wearing earphones over,
or earplugs in, both ears.
   (C)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   Any person wearing a hearing aid;
      (2)   Law enforcement personnel while on duty;
      (3)   Fire Department personnel and emergency medical service personnel
while on duty;
      (4)   Any person engaged in the operation of equipment for use in the
maintenance or repair of any highway;
      (5)   Any person engaged in the operation of refuse collection equipment;
      (6)   Any person wearing earphones or earplugs for hearing protection
while operating a motorcycle.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.84)
§ 72.127 CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINES AND LIVERY SERVICES.
   (A)   The operator of a chauffeured limousine shall accept passengers only
on the basis of prearranged contracts, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, and shall
not cruise in search of patronage unless the limousine is in compliance with
any statute or ordinance governing the operation of taxicabs or other similar
vehicles for hire.
   (B)   The operator of a chauffeured limousine may provide transportation to
passengers who arrange for the transportation through an intermediary,
including a digital dispatching service. Notwithstanding any law to the
contrary, when providing transportation arranged through an intermediary, the
operator of a chauffeured limousine may establish the fare and method of fare
calculation, so long as the method of fare calculation is provided to the
passenger upon request.
   (C)   No person shall advertise or hold himself or herself out as doing
business as a limousine service or livery service or other similar designation
unless each vehicle used by the person to provide the service is registered in
accordance with R.C. § 4503.24 and is in compliance with R.C. § 4509.80.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4511.85)
Statutory reference:
   Chauffeured limousine, motor vehicle licensing, see R.C. § 4503.24
   Proof of financial responsibility, see R.C. § 4509.80
§ 72.128 OPERATING TRACTION ENGINE UPON IMPROVED HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   No person shall drive over the improved highways of this municipality
a traction engine or tractor with tires or wheels equipped with ice picks,
spuds, spikes, chains or other projections of any kind extending beyond the
cleats, and no person shall tow or in any way pull another vehicle over the
improved highways of this municipality which towed or pulled vehicle has tires
or wheels equipped with ice picks, spuds, spikes, chains or other projections
of any kind. As used in this section, “traction engine” or “tractor” applies to
all self-propelling engines equipped with metal-tired wheels operated or
propelled by any form of engine, motor or mechanical power.
   (B)   This municipality shall not adopt, enforce, or maintain any ordinance,
rule or regulation contrary to or inconsistent with division (A), nor shall
this municipality require any license tax upon or registration fee for any
traction engine, tractor, or trailer, or any permit or license to operate.
Operators of traction engines or tractors shall have the same rights upon the
public streets and highways as the drivers of any other vehicles, unless some
other safe and convenient way is provided, and no public road open to traffic
shall be closed to traction engines or tractors.
(R.C. § 5589.08)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 5589.99(B))
§ 72.129 CRACKING EXHAUST NOISES; PEELING OUT.
   No person shall operate any motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe
operation, or in compliance with law, in such a manner that the vehicle is so
rapidly accelerated or started from a stopped position, or in the shifting of
gears while in motion, that the exhaust system emits a loud, cracking or
chattering noise unusual to its normal operation, or that the rubber tires of
such vehicle squeal or leave tire marks on the roadway, commonly known as
“peeling out”.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.130 SHORTCUTTING ACROSS PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No operator of a motor vehicle shall enter upon private property for the
sole purpose of driving across such property, between abutting streets or other
public ways thereof. The failure to stop on such property in connection with or
in furtherance of the enterprise or activities being conducted on the property
shall constitute prima facie evidence of the violation.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.131 TEXTING WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any street, highway, or
property open to the public for vehicular traffic while using, holding, or
physically supporting with any part of the person’s body an electronic wireless
communications device.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device to make
contact, for emergency purposes, with a law enforcement agency, hospital or
health care provider, fire department, or other similar emergency agency or
entity;
      (2)   A person driving a public safety vehicle while using an electronic
wireless communications device in the course of the person’s duties;
      (3)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device when
the person’s motor vehicle is in a stationary position and is outside a lane of
travel, at a traffic control signal that is currently directing traffic to
stop, or parked on a road or highway due to an emergency or road closure;
      (4)   A person using and holding an electronic wireless communications
device directly near the person’s ear for the purpose of making, receiving, or
conducting a telephone call, provided that the person does not manually enter
letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
      (5)   A person receiving wireless messages on an electronic wireless
communications device regarding the operation or navigation of a motor vehicle;
safety-related information, including emergency, traffic, or weather alerts; or
data used primarily by the motor vehicle, provided that the person does not
hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (6)   A person using the speaker phone function of the electronic
wireless communications device, provided that the person does not hold or
support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (7)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device for
navigation purposes, provided that the person does not do either of the
following during the use:
         (a)   Manually enter letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
         (b)   Hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (8)   A person using a feature or function of the electronic wireless
communications device with a single touch or single swipe, provided that the
person does not do either of the following during the use:
         (a)   Manually enter letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
         (b)   Hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (9)   A person operating a commercial truck while using a mobile data
terminal that transmits and receives data;
      (10)   A person operating a utility service vehicle or a vehicle for or
on behalf of a utility, if the person is acting in response to an emergency,
power outage, or circumstance that affects the health or safety of individuals;
      (11)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device in
conjunction with a voice-operated or hands-free feature or function of the
vehicle or of the device without the use of either hand except to activate,
deactivate, or initiate the feature or function with a single touch or swipe,
provided the person does not hold or support the device with any part of the
person’s body;
      (12)   A person using technology that physically or electronically
integrates the device into the motor vehicle, provided that the person does not
do either of the following during the use:
         (a)   Manually enter letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
         (b)   Hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body.
      (13)   A person storing an electronic wireless communications device in a
holster, harness, or article of clothing on the person’s body.
   (C)   If a law enforcement officer issues an offender a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of division (A) of this section, the officer shall do
both of the following:
      (1)   Report the issuance of the ticket, citation, or summons to the
officer’s law enforcement agency;
      (2)   Ensure that such report indicates the offender’s race.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of operating a
motor vehicle while using an electronic wireless communication device, an
unclassified misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided in divisions (D)(1)
to (D)(5) of this section.
      (1)   The offender shall be fined, and is subject to a suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege, as follows:
         (a)   Except as provided in divisions (D)(1)(b), (D)(1)(c), (D)(1)(d),
and (D)(2) of this section, the court shall impose upon the offender a fine of
not more than $150.
         (b)   If, within two years of the violation, the offender has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one prior violation of this section, R.C. §
4511.204, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court shall
impose upon the offender a fine of not more than $250.
         (c)   If, within two years of the violation, the offender has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more prior violations of this section,
R.C. § 4511.204, or a substantially equivalent or municipal ordinance, the
court shall impose upon the offender a fine of not more than $500. The court
also may impose a suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or
nonresident operating privilege for 90 days.
         (d)   Notwithstanding divisions (D)(1)(a) to (D)(1)(c) of this
section, if the offender was operating the motor vehicle at the time of the
violation in a construction zone where a sign was posted in accordance with
R.C. § 4511.98, the court, in addition to all other penalties provided by law,
shall impose upon the offender a fine of two times the amount imposed for the
violation under division (D)(1)(a), (D)(1)(b), or (D)(1)(c) of this section, as
applicable.
      (2)   If the offender is in the category of offenders to whom division
(D)(1)(a) of this section applies, in lieu of payment of the fine of $150 under
division (D)(1)(a) of this section and the assessment of points under division
(D)(4) of this section, the offender instead may elect to attend the distracted
driving safety course, as described in R.C. § 4511.991. If the offender attends
and successfully completes the course, the offender shall be issued written
evidence that the offender successfully completed the course. The offender
shall not be required to pay the fine and shall not have the points assessed
against that offender’s driver’s license if the offender submits the written
evidence to the court within 90 days of the violation of division (A) of this
section. However, successful completion of the course does not result in a
dismissal of the charges for the violation, and the violation is a prior
offense under divisions (D)(1)(b) and (D)(1)(c) of this section if the offender
commits a subsequent violation or violations of division (A) of this section
within two years of the offense for which the course was completed. This
division does not apply with respect to any offender in the category of
offenders to whom division (D)(1)(b), (D)(1)(c), or (D)(1)(d) of this section
applies.
      (3)   The court may impose any other penalty authorized under R.C. §§
2929.21 to 2929.28. However, the court shall not impose a fine or a suspension
not otherwise specified in division (D)(1) of this section. The court also
shall not impose a jail term or community residential sanction.
      (4)   Except as provided in division (D)(2) of this section, points shall
be assessed for a violation of division (A) of this section in accordance with
R.C. § 4510.036.
      (5)   The offense established under this section is a strict liability
offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this offense as a
strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.
   (E)   A prosecution for an offense in violation of this section does not
preclude a prosecution for an offense in violation of R.C. § 4511.204 based on
the same conduct. However, the two offenses are allied offenses of similar
import under R.C. § 2941.25.
   (F)   (1)   A law enforcement officer does not have probable cause and shall
not stop the operator of a motor vehicle for purposes of enforcing this section
unless the officer visually observes the operator using, holding, or physically
supporting with any part of the person’s body the electronic wireless
communications device.
      (2)   A law enforcement officer who stops the operator of a motor vehicle
for a violation of division (A) of this section shall inform the operator that
the operator may decline a search of the operator’s electronic wireless
communications device. The officer shall not do any of the following:
         (a)   Access the device without a warrant, unless the operator
voluntarily and unequivocally gives consent for the officer to access the
device;
         (b)   Confiscate the device while awaiting the issuance of a warrant
to access the device;
         (c)   Obtain consent from the operator to access the device through
coercion or any other improper means. Any consent by the operator to access the
device shall be voluntary and unequivocal before the officer may access the
device without a warrant.
   (G)   As used in this section:
      ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Includes any of the following:
         (a)   A wireless telephone;
         (b)   A text-messaging device;
         (c)   A personal digital assistant;
         (d)   A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet;
         (e)   Any device capable of displaying a video, movie, broadcast
television image, or visual image;
         (f)   Any other substantially similar wireless device that is designed
or used to communicate text, initiate or receive communication, or exchange
information or data.
      An “electronic wireless communications device” does not include a two-way
radio transmitter or receiver used by a person who is licensed by the federal
communications commission to participate in the amateur radio service.
      UTILITY. An entity specified in R.C. § 4905.03(A), (C), (D), (E), or (G).
      UTILITY SERVICE VEHICLE. A vehicle owned or operated by a utility.
      VOICE-OPERATED OR HANDS-FREE FEATURE OR FUNCTION. A feature or function
that allows a person to use an electronic wireless communications device
without the use of either hand, except to activate, deactivate, or initiate the
feature or function with a single touch or single swipe.
(R.C. § 4511.204)
Statutory reference:
   No preemption for local regulations imposing greater penalties, see R.C. §
4511.204(E)
§ 72.132 USE OF ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATION DEVICES BY MINORS OR
PROBATIONARY DRIVERS WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit who has not attained the
age of 18 years and no holder of a probationary driver’s license shall drive a
motor vehicle on any street, highway, or property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic or parking while using in any manner an
electronic wireless communications device.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to either of the
following:
      (1)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device for
emergency purposes, including an emergency contact with a law enforcement
agency, hospital or health care provider, fire department, or other similar
emergency agency or entity;
      (2)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device whose
motor vehicle is in a stationary position and the motor vehicle is outside a
lane of travel;
      (3)   A person using a navigation device in a voice-operated or hands-
free manner who does not manipulate the device while driving.
   (C)   (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section, whoever
violates division (A) of this section shall be fined $150. In addition, the
court shall impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license
or permit for a definite period of 60 days.
      (2)   If the person previously has been adjudicated a delinquent child or
a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of this section, whoever violates
this section shall be fined $300. In addition, the court shall impose a class
seven suspension of the person’s driver’s license or permit for a definite
period of one year.
   (D)   The filing of a sworn complaint against a person for a violation of
this section does not preclude the filing of a sworn complaint for a violation
of R.C. § 4511.205 for the same conduct. However, if a person is adjudicated a
delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of this section
and is also adjudicated a delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a
violation of R.C. § 4511.205 for the same conduct, the two offenses are allied
offenses of similar import under R.C. § 2941.25.
   (E)   As used in this section, ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE
includes any of the following:
      (1)   A wireless telephone;
      (2)   A personal digital assistant;
      (3)   A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet;
      (4)   A text-messaging device;
      (5)   Any other substantially similar electronic wireless device that is
designed or used to communicate via voice, image, or written word.
(R.C. § 4511.205)
CHAPTER 73: MOTOR VEHICLE CRIMES
Section
General Provisions
   
73.01   Driving while intoxicated or drugged
   
73.02   Implied consent
   
73.03   Physical control of vehicle while under the influence
   
73.04   Driving commercial vehicle with impaired alertness or ability; use of
drugs
   
73.05   Reckless operation of vehicles
   
73.06   Reckless operation off streets and highways; competitive operation
   
73.07   Operator to be in reasonable control
   
73.08   Immobilizing or disabling device violation
   
73.09   Street racing, stunt driving and street takeovers prohibited
   
73.10   Speed limits
   
73.11   Slow speed or stopping
   
73.12   Emergency vehicles excepted from speed limitation
   
73.13   Speed regulations on bridges
   
73.14   Presenting false name or information to officer
   
73.15   Prohibition against resisting officer
   
73.16   Operation restricted for mini-trucks and low-speed, under-speed, or
utility vehicles
   
73.17   Rapid acceleration of motor vehicles
Stopping After Accident
   
73.30   Failure to stop after accident
   
73.31   Stopping after accident on other than public roads or highways
   
73.32   Accident involving damage to realty
   
73.33   Failure to report accident
Statutory reference:
   Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 73.01 DRIVING WHILE INTOXICATED OR DRUGGED.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate any vehicle within this municipality,
if, at the time of the operation, any of the following apply:
         (a)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse,
or a combination of them.
         (b)   The person has a concentration of 0.08% or more but less than
0.17% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.
         (c)   The person has a concentration of 0.096% or more but less than
0.204% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or
plasma.
         (d)   The person has a concentration of 0.08 grams or more but less
than 0.17 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath.
         (e)   The person has a concentration of 0.11 grams or more but less
than 0.238 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s
urine.
         (f)   The person has a concentration of 0.17% or more by weight per
unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.
         (g)   The person has a concentration of 0.204% or more by weight per
unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or plasma.
         (h)   The person has a concentration of 0.17 grams or more by weight
of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath.
         (i)   The person has a concentration of 0.238 grams or more by weight
of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine.
         (j)   Except as provided in division (K) of this section, the person
has a concentration of any of the following controlled substances or
metabolites of a controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum
or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds any of the following:
            1.   The person has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s
urine of at least 500 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter
of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            2.   The person has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s
urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s urine
or has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma of at least 50 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.
            3.   The person has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine metabolite per milliliter
of the person’s urine or has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of
cocaine metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.
            4.   The person has a concentration of heroin in the person’s urine
of at least 2,000 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s urine or
has a concentration of heroin in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma of at least 50 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.
            5.   The person has a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-
monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s urine of at least ten nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s urine or has
a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s whole blood
or blood serum or plasma.
            6.   The person has a concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s urine
of at least 25 nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s urine or a
concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of
at least ten nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma.
            7.   The person has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s
urine of at least ten nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma of at least two nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            8.   Either of the following applies:
               a.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or a combination of them, and the person has a concentration of
marihuana metabolite in the person’s urine of at least 15 nanograms of
marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a
concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma of at least five nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
               b.   The person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in
the person’s urine of at least 35 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite
in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms
of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma.
            9.   The person has a concentration of methamphetamine in the
person’s urine of at least 500 nanograms of methamphetamine per milliliter of
the person’s urine or has a concentration of methamphetamine in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of
methamphetamine per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.
            10.   The person has a concentration of phencyclidine in the
person’s urine of at least 25 nanograms of phencyclidine per milliliter of the
person’s urine or has a concentration of phencyclidine in the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of phencyclidine per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            11.   The State Board of Pharmacy has adopted a rule pursuant to
R.C. § 4729.041 that specifies the amount of salvia divinorum and the amount of
salvinorin A that constitute concentrations of salvia divinorum and salvinorin
A in a person’s urine, in a person’s whole blood, or in a person’s blood serum
or plasma at or above which the person is impaired for purposes of operating
any vehicle within this state, the rule is in effect, and the person has a
concentration of salvia divinorum or salvinorin A of at least that amount so
specified by rule in the person’s urine, in the person’s whole blood, or in the
person’s blood serum or plasma.
      (2)   No person who, within 20 years of the conduct described in division
(A)(2)(a) of this section, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of this division or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(1) of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or any other
equivalent offense shall do both of the following:
         (a)   Operate any vehicle within this municipality while under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them;
         (b)   Subsequent to being arrested for operating the vehicle as
described in division (A)(2)(a) of this section, being asked by a law
enforcement officer to submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and being advised by the
officer in accordance with R.C. § 4511.192 or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance of the consequences of the person’s refusal or submission
to the test or tests, refuse to submit to the test or tests.
   (B)   No person under 18 years of age shall operate any vehicle streetcar or
trackless trolley within this state, if any of the following apply:
      (1)   The person has a concentration of at least two-hundredths of 1% but
less than ten-hundredths of 1% by weight of alcohol in his or her blood;
      (2)   The person has a concentration of at least two-hundredths of one
gram but less than ten-hundredths of one gram by weight of alcohol per 210
liters of his or her breath; and/or
      (3)   The person has a concentration of at least twenty-eight one-
thousandths of one gram but less than fourteen-hundredths of one gram by eight
of alcohol in his or her urine.
   (C)   In any proceeding arising out of one incident, a person may be charged
with a violation of division (A)(1) above and a violation of divisions (B)(1)
through (B)(3) above, but he or she may not be convicted of more than one
violation of these divisions.
   (D)   (1)   (a)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding
for a violation of division (A)(1)(a) of this section or for an equivalent
offense that is vehicle-related, the result of any test of any blood or urine
withdrawn and analyzed at any health care provider, as defined in R.C. §
2317.02, may be admitted with expert testimony to be considered with any other
relevant and competent evidence in determining the guilt or innocence of the
defendant.
         (b)   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of division (A) or
(B) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, the
court may admit evidence on the concentration of alcohol, drugs of abuse,
controlled substances, metabolites of a controlled substance, or a combination
of them in the defendant’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine,
or other bodily substance at the time of the alleged violation as shown by
chemical analysis of the substance withdrawn within three hours of the time of
the alleged violation. The three-hour time limit specified in this division
regarding the admission of evidence does not extend or affect the two-hour time
limit specified in R.C. § 4511.192(A) as the maximum period of time during
which a person may consent to a chemical test or tests as described in that
section. The court may admit evidence on the concentration of alcohol, drugs of
abuse, or a combination of them as described in this division when a person
submits to a blood test at the request of a law enforcement officer under R.C.
§ 4511.191 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a blood or
urine sample is obtained pursuant to a search warrant. Only a physician, a
registered nurse, an emergency medical technician-intermediate, an emergency
medical technician-paramedic, or a qualified technician, chemist, or
phlebotomist shall withdraw a blood sample for the purpose of determining the
alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination content of the whole blood, blood serum, or blood plasma. This
limitation does not apply to the taking of breath or urine specimens. A person
authorized to withdraw blood under this division (D)(1)(b) may refuse to
withdraw blood under this division, if in that person’s opinion, the physical
welfare of the person would be endangered by the withdrawing of blood. The
bodily substance withdrawn under this division (D)(1)(b) shall be analyzed in
accordance with methods approved by the Director of Health by an individual
possessing a valid permit issued by the Director pursuant to R.C. § 3701.143.
         (c)   As used in division (D)(1)(b) of this section, EMERGENCY MEDICAL
TECHNICIAN-INTERMEDIATE and EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-PARAMEDIC have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 4765.01.
      (2)   In a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (A) of this
section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, if there was at
the time the bodily substance was withdrawn a concentration of less than the
applicable concentration of alcohol specified in divisions (A)(1)(b), (A)(1)
(c), (A)(1)(d) and (A)(1)(e) of this section or less than the applicable
concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a
controlled substance specified for a violation of division (A)(1)(j) of this
section, that fact may be considered with other competent evidence in
determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant. This division does not
limit or affect a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (B) of this
section.
      (3)   Upon the request of the person who was tested, the results of the
chemical test shall be made available to the person or the person’s attorney,
immediately upon the completion of the chemical test analysis. If the chemical
test was obtained pursuant to division (D)(1)(b) of this section, the person
tested may have a physician, a registered nurse, or a qualified technician,
chemist, or phlebotomist of the person’s own choosing administer a chemical
test or tests, at the person’s expense, in addition to any administered at the
request of a law enforcement officer. If the person was under arrest as
described in R.C. § 4511.191(A)(5), the arresting officer shall advise the
person at the time of the arrest that the person may have an independent
chemical test taken at the person’s own expense. If the person was under arrest
other than described in R.C. § 4511.191(A)(5), the form to be read to the
person to be tested, as required under §
73.02, shall state that the person may have an independent test performed at
the person’s expense. The failure or inability to obtain an additional chemical
test by a person shall not preclude the admission of evidence relating to the
chemical test or tests taken at the request of a law enforcement officer.
      (4)   (a)   As used in division (D)(4)(b) and (D)(4)(c) of this section,
NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY ADMINISTRATION means the National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration established as an administration of the United
States Department of Transportation under 96 Stat. 2415 (1983), 49 U.S.C. §
105.
         (b)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (A) or (B) of this section, of a municipal ordinance
relating to operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or alcohol and a drug of abuse, or of a municipal ordinance relating to
operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, or urine, if a law enforcement officer has
administered a field sobriety test to the operator of the vehicle involved in
the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the
officer administered the test in substantial compliance with the testing
standards for any reliable, credible, and generally accepted field sobriety
tests that were in effect at the time the tests were administered, including
but not limited to any testing standards then in effect that were set by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, all of the following apply:
            1.   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered.
            2.   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field
sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding.
            3.   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
division (D)(4)(b)1. or (D)(4)(b)2. of this section and if the testimony or
evidence is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the
testimony or evidence and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the
trier of fact considers to be appropriate.
         (c)   Division (D)(4)(b) of this section does not limit or preclude a
court, in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by
probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division,
from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by
division (D)(4)(b) of this section.
   (E)   (1)   Subject to division (E)(3) of this section, in any criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of division (A)(1)(b),
(A)(1)(c), (A)(1)(d), (A)(1)(e), (A)(1)(f), (A)(1)(g), (A)(1)(h), (A)(1)(i), or
(A)(1)(j) or (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), or (B)(4) of this section or for an
equivalent offense that is substantially equivalent to any of those divisions,
a laboratory report from any laboratory personnel issued a permit by the
Department of Health authorizing an analysis as described in this division that
contains an analysis of the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine,
or other bodily substance tested and that contains all of the information
specified in this division shall be admitted as prima facie evidence of the
information and statements that the report contains. The laboratory report
shall contain all of the following:
         (a)   The signature, under oath, of any person who performed the
analysis;
         (b)   Any findings as to the identity and quantity of alcohol, a drug
of abuse, a controlled substance, a metabolite of a controlled substance, or a
combination of them that was found;
         (c)   A copy of a notarized statement by the laboratory director of a
designee of the director that contains the name of each certified analyst or
test performer involved with the report, the analyst’s or test performer’s
employment relationship with the laboratory that issued the report, and a
notation that performing an analysis of the type involved is part of the
analyst’s or test performer’s regular duties;
         (d)   An outline of the analyst’s or test performer’s education,
training, and experience in performing the type of analysis involved and a
certification that the laboratory satisfies appropriate quality control
standards in general and, in this particular analysis, under rules of the
Department of Health.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding the admission
of evidence, a report of the type described in division (E)(1) of this section
is not admissible against the defendant to whom it pertains in any proceeding,
other than a preliminary hearing or a grand jury proceeding, unless the
prosecutor has served a copy of the report on the defendant’s attorney or, if
the defendant has no attorney, on the defendant.
      (3)   A report of the type described in division (E)(1) of this section
shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents, identity, or amount of any
substance if, within seven days after the defendant to whom the report pertains
or the defendant’s attorney receives a copy of the report, the defendant or the
defendant’s attorney demands the testimony of the person who signed the report.
The judge in the case may extend the seven-day time limit in the interest of
justice.
   (F)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, any physician,
registered nurse, emergency medical technician-intermediate, emergency medical
technician-paramedic, or qualified technician, chemist, or phlebotomist who
withdraws blood from a person pursuant to this section or R.C. § 4511.19,
4511.191 or 4511.192, and any hospital, first-aid station, or clinic at which
blood is withdrawn from a person pursuant to this section or R.C. § 4511.19,
4511.191 or 4511.192, is immune from criminal liability and civil liability
based upon a claim of assault and battery or any other claim that is not a
claim of malpractice, for any act performed in withdrawing blood from the
person. The immunity provided in this division also extends to an emergency
medical service organization that employs an emergency medical technician-
intermediate or emergency medical technician-paramedic who withdraws blood
under this section. The immunity provided in this division is not available to
a person who withdraws blood if the person engages in willful or wanton
misconduct.
      (2)   As used in division (F)(1), EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-
INTERMEDIATE and EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-PARAMEDIC have the same meanings
as in R.C. § 4765.01.
   (G)   (1)   Whoever violates any provisions of divisions (A)(1)(a) through
(A)(1)(i) or (A)(2) of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them. Whoever
violates division (A)(1)(j) of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle
while under the influence of a listed controlled substance or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance. The court shall sentence the offender for
either offense under R.C. Chapter 2929, except as otherwise authorized or
required by divisions (G)(1)(a) through (G)(1)(e) of this section:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (G)(1)(b), (G)(1)(c),
(G)(1)(d), or (G)(1)(e) of this section, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree, and the court shall sentence the offender to
all of the penalties and sanctions provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(a)(i)
through (G)(1)(a)(iv).
         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in division (G)(1)(e) of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of division (A) of this section
or one other equivalent offense is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
The court shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties and sanctions
provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) through (G)(1)(b)(v).
         (c)   Except as otherwise provided in division (G)(1)(e) of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of division (A) of this
section or other equivalent offenses is guilty of a misdemeanor. The court
shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties and sanctions provided in
R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(c)(i) through (G)(1)(c)(vi).
         (d)   Except as otherwise provided in division (G)(1)(e) of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of division (A) of
this section or other equivalent offenses or an offender who, within 20 years
of the offense, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to five or
more violations of that nature, or an offender who previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a specification of the type described in R.C.
§ 2941.1413, is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
         (e)   An offender who previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) that was a felony, regardless of
when the violation and the conviction or guilty plea occurred, is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   An offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (A) of this section and who subsequently seeks reinstatement of the
driver’s or occupational driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege suspended under this section or R.C. § 4511.19 as a result of the
conviction or guilty plea shall pay a reinstatement fee as provided in R.C. §
4511.191(F)(2).
      (3)   (a)   If an offender is sentenced to a jail term under R.C. §
4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) or (G)(1)(b)(ii) or (G)(1)(c)(i) or (G)(1)(c)(ii) and if,
within 60 days of sentencing of the offender, the court issues a written
finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail
where the offender is required to serve the term, the offender will not be able
to begin serving that term within the 60-day period following the date of
sentencing, the court may impose an alternative sentence as specified in R.C. §
4511.19(G)(3) that includes a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring,
with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and
continuous alcohol monitoring.
         (b)   As an alternative to the mandatory jail terms as required by
R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1), the court may sentence the offender as provided in R.C. §
4511.19(G)(3).
      (4)   If an offender’s driver’s or occupational driver’s license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended under division (G) of
this section or R.C. § 4511.19(G) and if R.C. § 4510.13 permits the court to
grant limited driving privileges, the court may grant the limited driving
privileges in accordance with that section. If division (A)(7) of that section
requires the court impose as a condition of the privileges that the offender
must display on the vehicle that is driven subject to the privileges restricted
license plates that are issued under R.C. § 4503.231, except as provided in
division (B) of that section, the court shall impose that condition as one of
the conditions of the limited driving privileges granted to the offender,
except as provided in R.C. § 4503.231(B).
      (5)   Fines imposed under this section for a violation of division (A) of
this section shall be distributed as provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(5).
      (6)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order of criminal
forfeiture under division (G)(1)(c), (G)(1)(d), or (G)(1)(e) of this section is
assigned or transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in
addition to or independent of any other penalty established by law, the court
may fine the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of
the National Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds of any fine so
imposed shall be distributed in accordance with division (C)(2) of that
section.
      (7)   In all cases in which an offender is sentenced under division (G)
of this section, the offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, the court, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, may order restitution pursuant to §
130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for
any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and
proximate result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or
after committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under division
(G) of this section.
      (8)   A court may order an offender to reimburse a law enforcement agency
for any costs incurred by the agency with respect to a chemical test or tests
administered to the offender if all of the following apply:
         (a)   The offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (A) of this section.
         (b)   The test or tests were of the offender’s whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, or urine.
         (c)   The test or tests indicated that the offender had a prohibited
concentration of a controlled substance or a metabolite of a controlled
substance in the offender’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine at the
time of the offense.
      (9)   As used in division (G) of this section, ELECTRONIC MONITORING has
the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   (H)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of operating a
motor vehicle after underage alcohol consumption and shall be punished as
follows:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (H)(2) of this section,
the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. In addition to
any other sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class six
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6). The court may grant
limited driving privileges relative to the suspension under R.C. §§ 4510.021
and 4510.13. The court may grant unlimited driving privileges with an ignition
interlock device relative to the suspension and may reduce the period of
suspension as authorized under R.C. § 4510.022. If the court grants unlimited
driving privileges under R.C. § 4510.022, the court shall suspend any jail term
imposed under division (H)(1) of this section as required under that section.
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of division (A)
of this section or other equivalent offenses, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. In addition to any other sanction imposed for
the offense, the court shall impose a class four suspension of the offender’s
driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4). The court may grant limited driving
privileges relative to the suspension under R.C. §§ 4510.021 and 4510.13.
      (3)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after
committing the violation of division (B) of this section.
   (I)   (1)   No court shall sentence an offender to an alcohol treatment
program under this section unless the treatment program complies with the
minimum standards for alcohol treatment programs adopted under R.C. Chapter
5119 by the Director of Mental Health and Addiction Services.
      (2)   An offender who stays in a drivers’ intervention program or in an
alcohol treatment program under an order issued under this section shall pay
the cost of the stay in the program. However, if the court determines that an
offender who stays in an alcohol treatment program under an order issued under
this section is unable to pay the cost of the stay in the program, the court
may order that the cost be paid from the court’s Indigent Drivers’ Alcohol
Treatment Fund.
   (J)   If a person whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege is suspended under this section or R.C. §
4511.19 files an appeal regarding any aspect of the person’s trial or sentence,
the appeal itself does not stay the operation of the suspension.
   (K)   Division (A)(1)(j) of this section does not apply to a person who
operates a vehicle while the person has a concentration of a listed controlled
substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s
whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds the amount
specified in that division, if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
      (2)   The person injected, ingested, or inhaled the controlled substance
in accordance with the health professional’s directions.
   (L)   The prohibited concentrations of a controlled substance or a
metabolite of a controlled substance listed in division (A)(1)(j) of this
section also apply in a prosecution of a violation of R.C. § 2923.16(D) in the
same manner as if the offender is being prosecuted for a prohibited
concentration of alcohol.
   (M)   All terms defined in R.C. § 4510.01 apply to this section. If the
meaning of a term defined in R.C. § 4510.01 conflicts with the meaning of the
same term as defined in R.C. § 4501.01 or 4511.01, the term as defined in R.C.
§ 4510.01 applies to this section.
   (N)   As used in this section, §
73.02 and §
73.03:
      COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL SANCTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2929.01.
      CONTINUOUS ALCOHOL MONITORING. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      DRUG OF ABUSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4506.01.
      EQUIVALENT OFFENSE. Means any of the following:
         (a)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A);
         (b)   A violation of a municipal OAI ordinance;
         (c)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.04 in a case in which the offender
was subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that section;
         (d)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.06(A)(1) or R.C. § 2903.08 or a
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to either of those
divisions;
         (e)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.06(A)(2), (A)(3), or (A)(4), R.C. §
2903.08(A)(2), or former R.C. § 2903.07, or a municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to any of those divisions or that former section, in a
case in which a judge or jury as the trier of fact found that the offender was
under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them;
         (f)   A violation of R.C. § 1547.11(A);
         (g)   A violation of a municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from
operating or being in physical control of any vessel underway or from
manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or similar device on the waters of this
state while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination
of them or prohibiting a person from operating or being in physical control of
any vessel underway or from manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or similar
device on the waters of this state with a prohibited concentration of alcohol,
a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine;
         (h)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
R.C. § 4511.19(A) or R.C. § 1547.11(A);
         (i)   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A) or R.C. § 1547.11(A).
      EQUIVALENT OFFENSE THAT IS VEHICLE-RELATED. Means an equivalent offense
that is any of the following:
         (a)   A violation described in division (a), (b), (c), (d), or (e) of
the definition for “equivalent offense” provided in this division (N);
         (b)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
R.C. § 4511.19(A);
         (c)   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A).
      JAIL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Means the mandatory term in jail of 3, 6, 10, 20,
30, or 60 days that must be imposed under R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(a), (G)(1)(b),
or (G)(1)(c) upon an offender convicted of a violation of division (A) of that
section and in relation to which all of the following apply:
         (a)   Except as specifically authorized under R.C. § 4511.19, the term
must be served in a jail.
         (b)   Except as specifically authorized under R.C. § 4511.19, the term
cannot be suspended, reduced, or otherwise modified pursuant to R.C. §§ 2929.21
through 2929.28 or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
      MANDATORY PRISON TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      MANDATORY TERM OF LOCAL INCARCERATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2929.01.
      MUNICIPAL OAI ORDINANCE and MUNICIPAL OAI OFFENSE. Mean any municipal
ordinance prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle while under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them or prohibiting
a person from operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a
controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine.
      PRISON TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      SANCTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
(Prior Code, § 73.01) (Ord. 1990-30, passed 8-14-1990)
Editor’s note:
   Ordinance 1990-30 amends only divisions (B) and (C) of §
73.01. The rest of this section remains as it is set forth in §
73.01 of the Ohio Basic Code as of December 31, 2024.
Statutory reference:
   Mandatory suspension periods; immobilizing or disabling device; restricted
license, see R.C. § 4510.13
   Similar provisions, see R.C. §§ 4511.181 and 4511(A) - (M)
   Trial judge to suspend driver’s license, see R.C. § 4510.05
§ 73.02 IMPLIED CONSENT.
   (A)   (1)   As used in this section:
         ALCOHOL MONITORING DEVICE. Means any device that provides for
continuous alcohol monitoring, any ignition interlock device, any immobilizing
or disabling device other than an ignition interlock device that is constantly
available to monitor the concentration of alcohol in a person’s system, or any
other device that provides for the automatic testing and periodic reporting of
alcohol consumption by a person and that a court orders a person to use as a
sanction imposed as a result of the person’s conviction of or plea of guilty to
an offense.
         COMMUNITY ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 5119.01.
         PHYSICAL CONTROL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.194.
      (2)   Any person who operates a vehicle upon a highway or any public or
private property used by the public for vehicular travel or parking within this
municipality or who is in physical control of a vehicle shall be deemed to have
given consent to a chemical test or tests of the person’s whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, or urine to determine the alcohol, drug of abuse,
controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or combination
content of the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine if
arrested for a violation of §
73.01(A) or (B), §
73.03, R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, or any other municipal OAI ordinance.
      (3)   The chemical test or tests under division (A)(2) of this section
shall be administered at the request of a law enforcement officer having
reasonable grounds to believe the person was operating or in physical control
of a vehicle in violation of a division, section, or ordinance identified in
division (A)(2) of this section. The law enforcement agency by which the
officer is employed shall designate which of the tests shall be administered.
      (4)   Any person who is dead or unconscious, or who otherwise is in a
condition rendering the person incapable of refusal, shall be deemed to have
consented as provided in division (A)(2) of this section, and the test or tests
may be administered, subject to R.C. §§ 313.12 through 313.16.
      (5)   (a)   If a law enforcement officer arrests a person for a violation
of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, or a municipal OAI ordinance and if the person if
convicted would be required to be sentenced under R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(c), (d),
or (e), the law enforcement officer shall request the person to submit, and the
person shall submit, to a chemical test or tests of the person’s whole blood,
blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine for the purpose of determining the
alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled
substance, or combination content of the person’s whole blood, blood serum or
plasma, breath, or urine. A law enforcement officer who makes a request
pursuant to this division that a person submit to a chemical test or tests is
not required to advise the person of the consequences of submitting to, or
refusing to submit to, the test or tests and is not required to give the person
the form described in division (C) of this section, but the officer shall
advise the person at the time of the arrest that if the person refuses to take
a chemical test the officer may employ whatever reasonable means are necessary
to ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma. The officer shall also advise the person at the
time of the arrest that the person may have an independent chemical test taken
at the person’s own expense. Divisions (A)(3) and (A)(4) of this section apply
to the administration of a chemical test or tests pursuant to this division.
         (b)   If a person refuses to submit to a chemical test upon a request
made pursuant to division (A)(5)(a) of this section, the law enforcement
officer who made the request may employ whatever reasonable means are necessary
to ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma. A law enforcement officer who acts pursuant to
this division to ensure that a person submits to a chemical test of the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma is immune from criminal and civil
liability based upon a claim for assault and battery or any other claim for the
acts, unless the officer so acted with malicious purpose, in bad faith, or in a
wanton or reckless manner.
(R.C. § 4511.191(A))
   (B)   Except as provided in division (A)(5) of this section, the arresting
law enforcement officer shall give advice in accordance with this section to
any person under arrest for a violation of §
73.01(A) or (B), §
73.03, R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, or any other municipal OAI ordinance. The officer shall
give that advice in a written form that contains the information described in
division (C) of this section and shall read the advice to the person. The form
shall contain a statement that the form was shown to the person under arrest
and read to the person by the arresting officer. One or more persons shall
witness the arresting officer’s reading of the form, and the witnesses shall
certify to this fact by signing the form. The person must submit to the
chemical test or tests, subsequent to the request of the arresting officer,
within two hours of the time of the alleged violation and, if the person does
not submit to the test or tests within that two-hour time limit, the failure to
submit automatically constitutes a refusal to submit to the test or tests.
   (C)   Except as provided in division (A)(5) of this section, if a person is
under arrest as described in division (B) of this section, before the person
may be requested to submit to a chemical test or tests to determine the
alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled
substance, or combination content of the person’s whole blood, blood serum or
plasma, breath, or urine, the arresting officer shall read the following form
to the person:
   You now are under arrest for (specifically state the offense under state law
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for which the person was
arrested – operating a vehicle under the influence of alcohol, a drug, or a
combination of them; operating a vehicle while under the influence of a listed
controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance;
operating a vehicle after underage alcohol consumption; or having physical
control of a vehicle while under the influence).
   If you refuse to take any chemical test required by law, your Ohio driving
privileges will be suspended immediately, and you will have to pay a fee to
have the privileges reinstated. If you have a prior conviction of OAI or
operating a vehicle while under the influence of a listed controlled substance
or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance under state or municipal law
within the preceding 20 years, you are now under arrest for state OAI, and, if
you refuse to take a chemical test, you will face increased penalties if you
subsequently are convicted of the state OAI.
   (Read this part unless the person is under arrest for solely having physical
control of a vehicle while under the influence.) If you take any chemical test
required by law and are found to be at or over the prohibited amount of
alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
your whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as set by law, your
Ohio driving privileges will be suspended immediately, and you will have to pay
a fee to have the privileges reinstated.
   If you take a chemical test, you may have an independent chemical test taken
at your own expense.
   (D)   If the arresting law enforcement officer does not ask a person under
arrest as described in division (B) of this section or division (A)(5) of this
section to submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191 or this
section, the arresting officer shall seize the Ohio or out-of-state driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit of the person and immediately forward it
to the court in which the arrested person is to appear on the charge. If the
arrested person is not in possession of the person’s license or permit or it is
not in the person’s vehicle, the officer shall order the person to surrender it
to the law enforcement agency that employs the officer within 24 hours after
the arrest, and, upon the surrender, the agency immediately shall forward the
license or permit to the court in which the person is to appear on the charge.
Upon receipt of the license or permit, the court shall retain it pending the
arrested person’s initial appearance and any action taken under R.C. §
4511.196.
   (E)   (1)   If a law enforcement officer asks a person under arrest as
described in division (A)(5) of this section to submit to a chemical test or
tests under that division and the test results indicate a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, or urine at the time of the alleged offense, or if a law enforcement
officer asks a person under arrest as described in division (B) of this section
to submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191 or this section, if
the officer advises the person in accordance with this section of the
consequences of the person’s refusal or submission, and if either the person
refuses to submit to the test or tests or, unless the arrest was for a
violation of §
73.03, R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the
person submits to the test or tests and the test results indicate a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, or urine at the time of the alleged offense, the arresting officer
shall do all of the following:
         (a)   On behalf of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, notify the person
that, independent of any penalties or sanctions imposed upon the person, the
person’s Ohio driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege is suspended immediately, that the suspension will last at
least until the person’s initial appearance on the charge, which will be held
within five days after the date of the person’s arrest or the issuance of a
citation to the person, and that the person may appeal the suspension at the
initial appearance or during the period of time ending 30 days after that
initial appearance;
         (b)   Seize the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit of
the person and immediately forward it to the Registrar. If the arrested person
is not in possession of the person’s license or permit or it is not in the
person’s vehicle, the officer shall order the person to surrender it to the law
enforcement agency that employs the officer within 24 hours after the person is
given notice of the suspension, and, upon the surrender, the officer’s
employing agency immediately shall forward the license or permit to the
Registrar;
         (c)   Verify the person’s current residence and, if it differs from
that on the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit, notify
the Registrar of the change;
         (d)   Send to the Registrar, within 48 hours after the arrest of the
person, a sworn report that includes all of the following statements:
            1.   That the officer had reasonable grounds to believe that, at
the time of the arrest, the arrested person was operating a vehicle in
violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B) or a municipal OAI ordinance or for being
in physical control of a stationary vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4511.194 or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
            2.   That the person was arrested and charged with a violation of
R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, or a municipal OAI ordinance;
            3.   Unless division (E)(1)(d)5. of this section applies, that the
officer asked the person to take the designated chemical test or tests, advised
the person in accordance with this section of the consequences of submitting
to, or refusing to take, the test or tests, and gave the person the form
described in division (C) of this section;
            4.   Unless division (E)(1)(d)5. of this section applies, that
either the person refused to submit to the chemical test or tests or, unless
the arrest was for a violation of R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the person submitted to the chemical test or tests and the
test results indicate a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine at the time of the alleged
offense.
            5.   If the person was under arrest as described in division (A)(5)
of this section and the chemical test or tests were performed in accordance
with that division, that the person was under arrest as described in that
division, that the chemical test or tests were performed in accordance with
that division, and that test results indicated a prohibited concentration of
alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine at the time
of the alleged offense.
      (2)   Division (E)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
arrested for a violation of §
73.03, R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, who
is asked by a law enforcement officer to submit to a chemical test or tests
under this section, and who submits to the test or tests, regardless of the
amount of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled
substance that the test results indicate is present in the person’s whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine.
   (F)   The arresting officer shall give the officer’s sworn report that is
completed under this section to the arrested person at the time of the arrest,
or the Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall send the report to the person by
regular first class mail as soon as possible after receipt of the report, but
not later than 14 days after receipt of it. An arresting officer may give an
unsworn report to the arrested person at the time of the arrest provided the
report is complete when given to the arrested person and subsequently is sworn
to by the arresting officer. As soon as possible, but not later than 48 hours
after the arrest of the person, the arresting officer shall send a copy of the
sworn report to the court in which the arrested person is to appear on the
charge for which the person was arrested.
   (G)   The sworn report of an arresting officer completed under this section
is prima facie proof of the information and statements that it contains. It
shall be admitted and considered as prima facie proof of the information and
statements that it contains in any appeal under R.C. § 4511.197 relative to any
suspension of a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege that results from the arrest covered by the
report.
(R.C. § 4511.192)
   (H)   (1)   A suspension of a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit or nonresident operating privilege under this section for the
time described in R.C. § 4511.191(B) or (C) is effective immediately from the
time at which the arresting officer serves the notice of suspension upon the
arrested person. Any subsequent finding that the person is not guilty of the
charge that resulted in the person’s being requested to take the chemical test
or tests under division (A) of this section does not affect the suspension.
      (2)   If a person arrested for operating a vehicle in violation of §
73.01(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), or any other municipal OAI
ordinance, or for being in physical control of a vehicle in violation of §
73.03 or R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
regardless of whether the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege is or is not suspended under R.C. §
4511.191(B) or (C) or R.C. Chapter 4510, the person’s initial appearance on the
charge resulting from the arrest shall be held within five days of the persons’
arrest or the issuance of the citation to him or her, subject to any
continuance granted by the court pursuant to R.C. § 4511.197 regarding the
issues specified in that section.
(R.C. § 4511.191(D))
Statutory reference:
   Continuous alcohol monitoring, see R.C. § 4511.198
   Disposition of fines, immobilization of vehicle and impoundment of license
plates, criminal forfeiture for municipal ordinance conviction, see R.C. §
4511.193
   Effect of refusal to submit to test, seizure of license, suspension periods,
appeal procedures, occupational driving privileges, and Indigent Drivers
Alcohol Treatment Funds, see R.C. § 4511.191
   Judicial pretrial suspension, initial appearance, see R.C. § 4511.196
   Mandatory suspension periods; immobilizing / disabling device; restricted
license, see R.C. § 4510.13
   Seizure of vehicles upon arrest, see R.C. § 4511.195
§ 73.03 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF VEHICLE WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE.
   (A)   As used in this section, PHYSICAL CONTROL means being in the driver’s
position of the front seat of a vehicle and having possession of the vehicle’s
ignition key or other ignition device.
   (B)   No person shall be in physical control of a vehicle if, at the time of
the physical control, any of the following apply:
      (1)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them.
      (2)   The person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine
contains at least the concentration of alcohol specified in §
73.01(A)(1)(b), (A)(1)(c), (A)(1)(d), or (A)(1)(e).
      (3)   Except as provided in division (E) of this section, the person has
a concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or
urine that equals or exceeds the concentration specified in §
73.01(A)(1)(j).
   (C)   (1)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of this section, if a law enforcement officer has administered a
field sobriety test to the person in physical control of the vehicle involved
in the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the
officer administered the test in substantial compliance with the testing
standards for any reliable, credible, and generally acceptable field sobriety
tests that were in effect at the time the tests were administered, including
but not limited to any testing standards then in effect what were set by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, all of the following apply:
         (a)   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered.
         (b)   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field sobriety
test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal prosecution
or juvenile court proceeding.
         (c)   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
division (C)(1)(a) or (C)(1)(b) of this section and if the testimony or
evidence is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the
testimony or evidence, and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the
trier of fact considers to be appropriate.
      (2)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not limit or preclude a court,
in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by
probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division,
from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by
division (C)(1) of this section.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of having physical control of
a vehicle while under the influence, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In
addition to other sanctions imposed, the court may impose on the offender a
class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
   (E)   Division (B)(3) of this section does not apply to a person who is in
physical control of a vehicle while the person has a concentration of a listed
controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance in the
person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds
the amount specified in §
73.01(A)(1)(j) if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
      (2)   The person injected, ingested, or inhaled the controlled substance
in accordance with the health professional’s directions.
(R.C. § 4511.194)
§ 73.04 DRIVING COMMERCIAL VEHICLE WITH IMPAIRED ALERTNESS OR ABILITY; USE OF
DRUGS.
   (A)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle, as defined in R.C. §
4506.01, or a commercial car or commercial tractor, as defined in R.C. §
4501.01, while the person’s ability or alertness is so impaired by fatigue,
illness, or other causes that it is unsafe for the person to drive such
vehicle. No driver shall use any drug which would adversely affect the driver’s
ability or alertness.
   (B)   No owner, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, of a commercial motor vehicle,
commercial car or commercial tractor, or a person employing or otherwise
directing the driver of such vehicle, shall require or knowingly permit a
driver in any such condition described in division (A) of this section to drive
such vehicle upon any street or highway.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
R.C. § 4511.79, or R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764, or
4511.77 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of
those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.79)
§ 73.05 RECKLESS OPERATION OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any street or highway in willful
or wanton disregard of the safety of persons or property.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.20)
§ 73.06 RECKLESS OPERATION OFF STREETS AND HIGHWAYS; COMPETITIVE OPERATION.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any public or private
property other than streets or highways in willful or wanton disregard of the
safety of persons or property.
      (2)   This section does not apply to the competitive operation of
vehicles on public or private property when the owner of such property
knowingly permits such operation thereon.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.201)
§ 73.07 OPERATOR TO BE IN REASONABLE CONTROL.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, agricultural tractor, or
agricultural tractor that is towing, pulling, or otherwise drawing a unit of
farm machinery on any street, highway, or property open to the public for
vehicular traffic without being in reasonable control of the vehicle,
agricultural tractor, or unit of farm machinery.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle
or agricultural tractor without being in control of it, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.202)
§ 73.08 IMMOBILIZING OR DISABLING DEVICE VIOLATION.
   (A)   (1)   No offender who has been granted limited or unlimited driving
privileges, during any period that the offender is required to operate only a
motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device, shall request
or permit any other person to breathe into the device if it is an ignition
interlock device or another type of device that monitors the concentration of
alcohol in a person’s breath or to otherwise start the motor vehicle equipped
with the device, for the purpose of providing the offender with an operable
motor vehicle.
      (2)   No person shall breathe into an immobilizing or disabling device
that is an ignition interlock device or another type of device that monitors
the concentration of alcohol in a person’s breath or otherwise start a motor
vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device, for the purpose of
providing an operable motor vehicle to another person who has been granted
limited or unlimited driving privileges under the condition that the person
operate only a motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device.
      (3)   No unauthorized person shall tamper with or circumvent the
operation of an immobilizing or disabling device.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an immobilizing or
disabling device violation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4510.44)
§ 73.09 STREET RACING, STUNT DRIVING AND STREET TAKEOVERS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      BURNOUT. A maneuver performed while operating a vehicle whereby the
vehicle is kept in a stationary position, but the wheels of the vehicle are
spun, which may cause the tires of the vehicle to become heated and emit smoke
from the friction.
      DOUGHNUT. A maneuver performed while operating a vehicle whereby the
front or rear of the vehicle is rotated around the opposite set of wheels in a
continuous motion, which may cause a circular skid-mark pattern of rubber on
the driving surface, or the tires of the vehicle to become heated and emit
smoke from the friction, or both.
      DRIFTING. A maneuver performed while operating a vehicle whereby the
vehicle is driven in a manner that causes a controlled, sideways skid during a
turn, with the front wheels pointing in a direction that is the opposite of the
direction of the turn.
      STREET RACING. The operation of two or more vehicles from a point side by
side at accelerating speeds in a competitive attempt to out-distance each other
or the operation of one or more vehicles over a common selected course, from
the same point to the same point, wherein timing is made of the participating
vehicles involving competitive accelerations or speeds. The operation of two or
more vehicles side by side either at speeds in excess of prima-facie lawful
speeds established by R.C. § 4511.21(B)(1)(a) to (B)(9) or rapidly accelerating
from a common starting point to a speed in excess of such prima-facie lawful
speeds shall be prima-facie evidence of street racing.
      STREET TAKEOVER. Blocking or impeding the regular flow of vehicle or
pedestrian traffic on a public road, street, or highway or on private property
that is open to the general public for the purpose of street racing or stunt
driving.
      STUNT DRIVING. Performing or engaging in burnouts, doughnuts, drifting,
or wheelies, or allowing a passenger to ride either partially or fully outside
of the vehicle while operating that vehicle.
      WHEELIE. A maneuver performed while operating a vehicle whereby the front
wheel or wheels of the vehicle are raised off of the ground or whereby two
wheels that are on the same side of the vehicle are raised off of the ground.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly participate in street racing, stunt driving,
or street takeover upon any public road, street, or highway, or on private
property that is open to the general public.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of street racing, stunt
driving, or street takeover, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to
any other sanctions, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege for not less than 30 days or more
than three years. No judge shall suspend the first 30 days of any suspension of
an offender’s license, permit, or privilege imposed under this division.
   (D)   Persons rendering assistance in any manner to street racing, stunt
driving, or street takeover shall be equally charged as the participants.
   (E)   This section does not apply to the competitive operation of vehicles
on public or private property when the political subdivision with jurisdiction
of the location or owner of the property knowingly permits such operation
thereon.
(R.C. § 4511.251)
§ 73.10 SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater or less
than is reasonable or proper, having due regard for the traffic, surface, and
width of the street or highway and any other conditions, and no person shall
drive any motor vehicle in and upon any street or highway at a greater speed
than will permit him or her to bring it to a stop within the assured clear
distance ahead.
   (B)   It is prima facie lawful, in the absence of a lower limit declared or
established pursuant to this section by the Director of Transportation or local
authorities, for the operator of a motor vehicle to operate the same at a speed
not exceeding the following:
      (1)   (a)   Twenty miles per hour in school zones during school recess
and while children are going to or leaving school during the opening or closing
hours, and when 20 miles per hour school speed limit signs are erected, except
that on controlled-access highways and expressways, if the right-of-way line
fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be governed
by division (B)(4) of this section, and on freeways, if the right-of-way line
fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be governed
by divisions (B)(10) and (B)(11) of this section. The end of every school zone
may be marked by a sign indicating the end of the zone. Nothing in this section
or in the Manual and Specifications for a Uniform System of Traffic-Control
Devices shall be construed to require school zones to be indicated by signs
equipped with flashing or other lights, or giving other special notice of the
hours in which the school zone speed limit is in effect.
         (b)   As used in this section, SCHOOL means all of the following:
            1.   Any school chartered under R.C. § 3301.16;
            2.   Any nonchartered school that during the preceding year filed
with the Ohio Department of Education and Workforce in compliance with O.A.C. §
3301-35-08, a copy of the school’s report for the parents of the school’s
pupils certifying that the school meets state minimum standards for
nonchartered, nontax-supported schools and presents evidence of this filing to
the jurisdiction from which it is requesting the establishment of a school
zone;
            3.   Any special elementary school that in writing requests the
County Engineer to create a school zone at the location of the school. Upon
receipt of such written request, the County Engineer shall create a school zone
at that location by erecting appropriate signs;
            4.   Any preschool education program operated by an educational
service center that is located on a street or highway with a speed limit of 45
miles per hour or more, when the educational service center in writing requests
that the County Engineer create a school zone at the location of that program.
Upon receipt of such a written request, the County Engineer shall create a
school zone at that location by erecting the appropriate signs.
         (c)   As used in this section, SCHOOL ZONE means that portion of a
street or highway passing a school fronting upon the street or highway that is
encompassed by projecting the school property lines to the fronting street or
highway, and also includes that portion of a state highway. Upon request from
local authorities for streets and highways under their jurisdiction and that
portion of a state highway under the jurisdiction of the Director of
Transportation or a request from a County Engineer in the case of a school zone
for a special elementary school, the Director may extend the traditional school
zone boundaries. The distances in divisions (B)(1)(c)1. through (B)(1)(c)3.
below shall not exceed 300 feet per approach per direction, and are bounded by
whichever of the following distances or combination thereof the Director
approves as most appropriate:
            1.   The distance encompassed by projecting the school building
lines normal to the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction;
            2.   The distance encompassed by projecting the school property
lines intersecting the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction;
            3.   The distance encompassed by the special marking of the
pavement for a principal school pupil crosswalk plus a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction of the highway.
         (d)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the
Director’s initial action on August 9, 1976, establishing all school zones at
the traditional school zone boundaries defined by projecting school property
lines, except when those boundaries are extended as provided in divisions (B)
(1)(a) and (B)(1)(c) of this section.
         (e)   As used in this division, CROSSWALK has the meaning given that
term in R.C. § 4511.01(LL)(2).
         (f)   The Director may, upon request by resolution of the Legislative
Authority and upon submission by the municipality of such engineering, traffic,
and other information as the Director considers necessary, designate a school
zone on any portion of a state route lying within the municipality that
includes a crosswalk customarily used by children going to or leaving a school
during recess and opening and closing hours, whenever the distance, as measured
in a straight line, from the school property line nearest the crosswalk to the
nearest point of a crosswalk is no more than 1,320 feet. Such a school zone
shall include the distance encompassed by the crosswalk and extending 300 feet
in each appropriate direction of the state route.
         (g)   As used in this section, SPECIAL ELEMENTARY SCHOOL means a
school that meets all of the following:
            1.   It is not chartered and does not receive tax revenue from any
source.
            2.   It does not educate children beyond the eighth grade.
            3.   It is located outside the limits of a municipal corporation.
            4.   A majority of the total number of students enrolled at the
school are not related by blood.
            5.   The principal or other person in charge of the special
elementary school annually sends a report to the superintendent of the school
district in which the special elementary school is located indicating the total
number of students enrolled at the school, but otherwise the principal or other
person in charge does not report any other information or data to the
superintendent.
      (2)   Twenty-five miles per hour in all other portions of the
municipality, except on state routes outside business districts, through
highways outside business districts, and alleys;
      (3)   Thirty-five miles per hour on all state routes or through highways
within the municipality outside business districts, except as provided in
divisions (B)(4) and (B)(6) of this section;
      (4)   Fifty miles per hour on controlled-access highways and expressways
within the municipality, except as provided in divisions (B)(12), (B)(13), (B)
(14), (B)(15), and (B)(16) of this section;
      (5)   Fifty-five miles per hour on highways outside the municipality,
other than highways within island jurisdictions as provided in division (B)(8)
of this section, highways as provided in divisions (B)(9) and (B)(10) of this
section, and highways, expressways and freeways as provided in divisions (B)
(12), (B)(13), (B)(14), and (B)(16) of this section;
      (6)   Fifty miles per hour on state routes within the municipality
outside urban districts unless a lower prima facie speed is established as
further provided in this section;
      (7)   Fifteen miles per hour on all alleys within the municipality;
      (8)   Thirty-five miles per hour on highways outside the municipality
that are within an island jurisdiction;
      (9)   Thirty-five miles per hour on through highways, except state
routes, that are outside municipal corporations and that are within a national
park with boundaries extending through two or more counties;
      (10)   Sixty miles per hour on two-lane state routes outside municipal
corporations as established by the Director under R.C. § 4511.21(H)(2);
      (11)   Fifty-five miles per hour on freeways with paved shoulders inside
the municipality, other than freeways as provided in divisions (B)(14) and (B)
(16) of this section;
      (12)   Sixty miles per hour on rural expressways with traffic control
signals and on all portions of rural divided highways, except as provided in
divisions (B)(13) and (B)(14) of this section;
      (13)   Sixty-five miles per hour on all rural expressways without traffic
control signals;
      (14)   Seventy miles per hour on all rural freeways;
      (15)   Fifty-five miles per hour on all portions of freeways or
expressways in congested areas as determined by the Director and that are
located within a municipal corporation or within an interstate freeway
outerbelt, except as provided in division (B)(16) of this section;
      (16)   Sixty-five miles per hour on all portions of freeways or
expressways without traffic control signals in urbanized areas.
   (C)   It is prima facie unlawful for any person to exceed any of the speed
limitations in divisions (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7), (B)
(8) and (B)(9) of this section or any declared or established pursuant to this
section by the Director or local authorities and it is unlawful for any person
to exceed any of the speed limitations in division (D) of this section. No
person shall be convicted of more than one violation of this section for the
same conduct, although violations of more than one provision of this section
may be charged in the alternative in a single affidavit.
   (D)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon a street or highway as
follows:
      (1)   At a speed exceeding 55 miles per hour, except upon a two-lane
state route as provided in division (B)(10) of this section and upon a highway,
expressway or freeway as provided in divisions (B)(12), (B)(13), (B)(14), and
(B)(16) of this section;
      (2)   At a speed exceeding 60 miles per hour upon a two-lane state route
as provided in division (B)(10) of this section and upon a highway as provided
in division (B)(12) of this section;
      (3)   At a speed exceeding 65 miles per hour upon an expressway as
provided in division (B)(13) of this section or upon a freeway as provided in
division (B)(16) of this section, except upon a freeway as provided in division
(B)(14) of this section;
      (4)   At a speed exceeding 70 miles per hour upon a freeway as provided
in division (B)(14) of this section;
      (5)   At a speed exceeding the posted speed limit upon a highway,
expressway or freeway for which the Director has determined and declared a
speed limit pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(I)(2) or (L)(2).
   (E)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(E), in every charge of violating this
section, the affidavit and warrant shall specify the time, place and speed at
which the defendant is alleged to have driven, and in charges made in reliance
upon division (C) of this section also the speed which division (B)(1)(a), (B)
(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7), (B)(8) or (B)(9) of, or a limit declared
or established pursuant to, this section or R.C. § 4511.21 declares is prima
facie lawful at the time and place of such alleged violation, except that in
affidavits where a person is alleged to have driven at a greater speed than
will permit the person to bring the vehicle to stop within the assured clear
distance ahead, the affidavit and warrant need not specify the speed at which
the defendant is alleged to have driven.
   (F)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(F), when a speed in excess of both a prima
facie limitation and a limitation in division (D) of this section is alleged,
the defendant shall be charged in a single affidavit, alleging a single act,
with a violation indicated of both division (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4),
(B)(6), (B)(7), (B)(8) or (B)(9) of this section, or of a limit declared or
established pursuant to this section or R.C. § 4511.21 by the Director or local
authorities, and of the limitation in division (D) of this section. If the
court finds a violation of division (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6),
(B)(7), (B)(8) or (B)(9) of, or a limit declared or established pursuant to,
this section or R.C. § 4511.21 has occurred, it shall enter a judgment of
conviction under such division and dismiss the charge under division (D) of
this section. If it finds no violation of division (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3),
(B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7), (B)(8) or (B)(9) of, or a limit declared or established
pursuant to, this section or R.C. § 4511.21, it shall then consider whether the
evidence supports a conviction under division (D) of this section.
   (G)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(G), points shall be assessed for a
violation of a limitation under division (D) of this section in accordance with
R.C. § 4510.036.
(R.C. § 4511.21(A) - (G))
   (H)   Whenever, in accordance with R.C. § 4511.21(H) through (N), the
maximum prima facie speed limitations as established herein have been altered,
either higher or lower, and the appropriate signs giving notice have been
erected as required, operators of motor vehicles shall be governed by the speed
limitations set forth on such signs. It is prima facie unlawful for any person
to exceed the speed limits posted upon such signs.
   (I)   As used in this section:
      COMMERCIAL BUS. Means a motor vehicle designed for carrying more than
nine passengers and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.
      DIVIDED. Means a roadway having two or more travel lanes for vehicles
moving in opposite directions and that is separated by a median of more than
four feet, excluding turn lanes.
      INTERSTATE SYSTEM. Has the same meaning as in 23 U.S.C. § 101.
      NONCOMMERCIAL BUS. Includes but is not limited to a school bus, or a
motor vehicle operated solely for the transportation of persons associated with
a charitable or nonprofit organization.
      OUTERBELT. A portion of a freeway that is part of the interstate system
and is located in the outer vicinity of a major municipal corporation or group
of municipal corporations, as designated by the Director.
      RURAL. Means an area outside urbanized areas and outside of a business or
urban district, and areas that extend within urbanized areas where the roadway
characteristics remain mostly unchanged from those outside the urbanized areas.
      URBANIZED AREA. Has the same meaning as in 23 U.S.C. § 101.
(R.C. § 4511.21(O))
   (J)   Speed limits for private roads and driveways.
      (1)   The owner of a private road or driveway located in a private
residential area containing 20 or more dwelling units may establish a speed
limit on the road or driveway by complying with all of the following
requirements:
         (a)   The speed limit is not less than 25 miles per hour and is
indicated by a sign that is in a proper position, is sufficiently legible to be
seen by an ordinarily observant person, and meets the specifications for the
basic speed limit sign included in the manual adopted by the Department of
Transportation pursuant to R.C. § 4511.09;
         (b)   The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the private road
or driveway that is in plain view and clearly informs persons entering the road
or driveway that they are entering private property, a speed limit has been
established for the road or driveway, and the speed limit is enforceable by law
enforcement officers under state law.
      (2)   No person shall operate a vehicle upon a private road or driveway
as provided in division (J)(1) of this section at a speed exceeding any speed
limit established and posted pursuant to division (J)(1).
      (3)   When a speed limit is established and posted in accordance with
division (J)(1) of this section, a law enforcement officer may apprehend a
person violating the speed limit of the residential area by utilizing any of
the means described in R.C. § 4511.091 or by any other accepted method of
determining the speed of a motor vehicle and may stop and charge the person
with exceeding the speed limit.
      (4)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.211(D), points shall be assessed for
violation of a speed limit established and posted in accordance with division
(J)(1) of this section in accordance with R.C. § 4510.036.
      (5)   As used in this division (J):
         OWNER. Includes but is not limited to a person who holds title to the
real property in fee simple, a condominium owners’ association, a property
owners’ association, a board of directors or trustees of a private community,
and a nonprofit corporation governing a private community.
         PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL AREA CONTAINING 20 OR MORE DWELLING UNITS. Does
not include a Chautauqua assembly as defined in R.C. § 4511.90.
(R.C. § 4511.211(A) - (E))
   (K)   Penalties.
      (1)   Divisions (A) through (I).
         (a)   A violation of any provision of divisions (A) through (I) of
this section is one of the following:
            1.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (K)(1)(a)2., (K)(1)
(a)3., (K)(1)(b), and (K)(1)(c) of this section, a minor misdemeanor;
            2.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of any provision of
divisions (A) through (I) of this section, R.C. § 4511.21, or any provision of
any other municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any provision
of that section, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
            3.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of any
provision of divisions (A) through (I) of this section, R.C. § 4511.21, or any
provision of any other municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to
any provision of that section, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
         (b)   If the offender operated a motor vehicle faster than 35 miles an
hour in a business district of the municipality, faster than 50 miles an hour
in other portions of the municipality, or faster than 35 miles an hour in a
school zone during recess or while children are going to or leaving school
during the school’s opening or closing hours, a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. This division does not apply if penalties may be imposed under division
(K)(1)(a)2. or (K)(1)(a)3. of this section.
         (c)   Notwithstanding division (K)(1)(a) of this section, if the
offender operated a motor vehicle in a construction zone where a sign was then
posted in accordance with R.C. § 4511.98, the court, in addition to all other
penalties provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a fine of two times
the usual amount imposed for the violation. No court shall impose a fine of two
times the usual amount imposed for the violation upon an offender if the
offender alleges, in an affidavit filed with the court prior to the offender’s
sentencing, that the offender is indigent and is unable to pay the fine imposed
pursuant to this division and if the court determines that the offender is an
indigent person and unable to pay the fine.
         (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.21(P))
      (2)   Division (J).
         (a)   A violation of division (J)(2) of this section is one of the
following:
            1.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (K)(2)(a)2. and (K)
(2)(a)3. of this section, a minor misdemeanor;
            2.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of division (J)(2) of
this section, R.C. § 4511.211(B), or any other municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to that division, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
            3.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of division
(J)(2) of this section, R.C. § 4511.211(B), or any other municipal ordinance
that is substantially equivalent to that division, a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
         (b)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.211(F))
Statutory reference:
   Alteration of speed limits with approval of Director, see R.C. § 4511.21(H)
through (N)
   Arrest pending warrant when radar, electrical or mechanical timing device
used to determine violation, see R.C. § 4511.091
§ 73.11 SLOW SPEED OR STOPPING.
   (A)   No person shall stop or operate a vehicle at such an unreasonably slow
speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic,
except when stopping or reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or to
comply with law.
   (B)   Whenever the Director of Transportation or local authorities determine
on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that slow speeds on
any part of a controlled-access highway, expressway, or freeway consistently
impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, the Director or such
local authority may declare a minimum speed limit below which no person shall
operate a motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe operation or in
compliance with the law. No minimum speed limit established hereunder shall be
less than 30 miles per hour, greater than 50 miles per hour, nor effective
until the provisions of R.C. § 4511.21 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, relating to appropriate signs, have been fulfilled and local
authorities have obtained the approval of the Director.
   (C)   In a case involving a violation of this section, the trier of fact, in
determining whether the vehicle was being operated at an unreasonably slow
speed, shall consider the capabilities of the vehicle and its operator.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.22)
§ 73.12 EMERGENCY VEHICLES EXCEPTED FROM SPEED LIMITATION.
   The prima facie speed limitations set forth in R.C. § 4511.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance do not apply to emergency vehicles
or public safety vehicles when they are responding to emergency calls and are
equipped with and displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating
light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet
to the front of the vehicle, and when the drivers thereof sound audible signals
by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle. This section does not relieve the driver of
an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons using the street or highway.
(R.C. § 4511.24)
§ 73.13 SPEED REGULATIONS ON BRIDGES.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle over any bridge or other
elevated structure constituting a part of a highway at a speed which is greater
than the maximum speed that can be maintained with safety to such bridge or
structure, when such structure is posted with signs as provided in this
section.
      (2)   The Department of Transportation upon request from any local
authority shall, or upon its own initiative may, conduct an investigation of
any bridge or other elevated structure constituting a part of a highway, and if
it finds that such structure cannot with safety withstand traffic traveling at
the speed otherwise permissible under this Traffic Code, the Department shall
determine and declare the maximum speed of traffic which such structure can
withstand, and shall cause or permit suitable signs stating such maximum speed
to be erected and maintained at a distance of a least 100 feet before each end
of the structure.
      (3)   Upon the trial of any person charged with a violation of this
section, proof of such determination of the maximum speed by the Department and
the existence of such signs shall constitute prima facie evidence of the
maximum speed which can be maintained with safety to such bridge or structure.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.23)
§ 73.14 PRESENTING FALSE NAME OR INFORMATION TO OFFICER.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly present, display, or orally communicate a
false name, social security number, or date of birth to a law enforcement
officer who is in the process of issuing to the person a traffic ticket or
complaint.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4513.361)
§ 73.15 PROHIBITION AGAINST RESISTING OFFICER.
   (A)   No person shall resist, hinder, obstruct, or abuse any sheriff,
constable, or other official while that official is attempting to arrest
offenders under any provision of this Title VII. No person shall interfere with
any person charged under any provision of this Title VII with the enforcement
of the law relative to public highways.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.36)
   (C)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the hindrance,
obstruction, resistance, or interference alleged consisted of constitutionally
protected speech only.
§ 73.16 OPERATION RESTRICTED FOR MINI-TRUCKS AND LOW-SPEED, UNDER-SPEED, OR
UTILITY VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate a low-speed vehicle upon any street or
highway having an established speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour.
      (2)   No person shall operate an under-speed or utility vehicle or a
mini-truck upon any street or highway except as follows:
         (a)   Upon a street or highway having an established speed limit not
greater than 35 miles per hour and only upon such streets or highways where the
municipality has granted permission for such operation in accordance with
division (E) of this section;
         (b)   A state park or political subdivision employee or volunteer
operating a utility vehicle exclusively within the boundaries of state parks or
political subdivision parks for the operation or maintenance of state or
political subdivision park facilities.
      (3)   No person shall operate a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter upon
any street or highway having an established speed limit greater than 45 miles
per hour.
   (B)   This section does not prohibit either of the following:
      (1)   A person operating a low-speed, under-speed, or utility vehicle or
a mini-truck from proceeding across an intersection of a street or highway
having a speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour;
      (2)   A person operating a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter from
proceeding across an intersection of a street or highway having a speed limit
greater than 45 miles per hour.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the municipality from adopting
more stringent local ordinances, resolutions, or regulations governing the
operation of a low-speed vehicle or a mini-truck, or a motor-driven cycle or
motor scooter.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If within one year of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.214)
   (E)   By ordinance or resolution, the municipality may authorize the
operation of under-speed or utility vehicles or mini-trucks on a public street
or highway under its jurisdiction. The municipality shall do all of the
following:
      (1)   Limit the operation of those vehicles to streets and highways
having an established speed limit not greater than 35 miles per hour;
      (2)   Require the vehicle owner who wishes to operate an under-speed or
utility vehicle or a mini-truck on the public streets or highways to submit the
vehicle to an inspection conducted by a local law enforcement agency that
complies with inspection requirements established by the Department of Public
Safety under R.C. § 4513.02;
      (3)   Permit the operation on public streets or highways of only those
vehicles that successfully pass the required vehicle inspection, are registered
in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4503, and are titled in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 4505;
      (4)   Notify the Director of Public Safety, in a manner the Director
determines, of the authorization for the operation of under-speed or utility
vehicles or mini-trucks.
   (F)   The municipality may establish additional requirements for the
operation of under-speed or utility vehicles or mini-trucks on its streets and
highways.
(R.C. § 4511.215)
   (G)   Notwithstanding divisions (A) through (F) of this section, a person
may operate a utility vehicle on any public roads or right-of-way, other than a
freeway, when traveling from one farm field to another for agricultural
purposes if the vehicle is displaying a triangular slow-moving vehicle emblem
as described in R.C. § 4513.112.
(R.C. § 4511.216)
   (H)   (1)   Except as provided in this division (H) and divisions (E) and
(F) of this section, no person shall operate a mini-truck within this
municipality.
      (2)   A person may operate a mini-truck on a farm for agricultural
purposes only when the owner of the farm qualifies for the current agricultural
use valuation tax credit. A mini-truck may be operated by or on behalf of such
a farm owner on public roads and rights-of-way only when traveling from one
farm field to another.
      (3)   A person may operate a mini-truck on property owned or leased by a
dealer who sells mini-trucks at retail.
      (4)   Whoever violates this division (H) shall be penalized as provided
in division (D) of this section.
(R.C. § 4519.401)
§ 73.17 RAPID ACCELERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES.
   No person shall operate any motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe
operation or in compliance with law, in such manner that the vehicle is so
rapidly accelerated or started from a stopped position that the exhaust system
emits a loud cracking or chattering noise unusual to its normal operation or
the rubber tires of such vehicle squeal or leave tire marks on the roadway,
commonly called PEELING.
(Prior Code, § 73.09) (Ord. 1973-4, passed 1-22-1973)
STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT
§ 73.30 FAILURE TO STOP AFTER ACCIDENT.
   (A)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision with
persons or property on a public road or highway, the operator of the motor
vehicle, having knowledge of the accident or collision, immediately shall stop
the operator’s motor vehicle at the scene of the accident or collision. The
operator shall remain at the scene of the accident or collision until the
operator has given the operator’s name and address and, if the operator is not
the owner, the name and address of the owner of that motor vehicle, together
with the registered number of that motor vehicle, to all of the following:
         (a)   Any person injured in the accident or collision;
         (b)   The operator, occupant, owner, or attendant of any motor vehicle
damaged in the accident or collision;
         (c)   The police officer at the scene of the accident or collision.
      (2)   In the event an injured person is unable to comprehend and record
the information required to be given under division (A)(1) of this section, the
other operator involved in the accident or collision shall notify the nearest
police authority concerning the location of the accident or collision, and the
operator’s name, address, and the registered number of the motor vehicle the
operator was operating. The operator shall remain at the scene of the accident
or collision until a police officer arrives, unless removed from the scene by
an emergency vehicle operated by a political subdivision or an ambulance.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely
attach the information required to be given in this section, in writing, to a
conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor vehicle.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after an accident. Except as otherwise provided in division (B)
(2) or (B)(3) of this section, failure to stop after an accident is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm to a
person, failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a person,
failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend the first six months
of suspension of an offender’s license, permit, or privilege required by this
division.
      (5)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. §
2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.02)
§ 73.31 STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT ON OTHER THAN PUBLIC ROADS OR HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision resulting
in injury or damage to persons or property on any public or private property
other than a public road or highway, the operator of the motor vehicle, having
knowledge of the accident or collision, shall stop at the scene of the accident
or collision. Upon request of any person who is injured or damaged, or any
other person, the operator shall give that person the operator’s name and
address, and, if the operator is not the owner, the name and address of the
owner of that motor vehicle, together with the registered number of that motor
vehicle, and, if available, exhibit the operator’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license.
      (2)   If the operator of the motor vehicle involved in the accident or
collision does not provide the information specified in division (A)(1) of this
section, the operator shall give that information, within 24 hours after the
accident or collision, to the police department of the city or village in which
the accident or collision occurred, or if it occurred outside the corporate
limits of a city or village, to the sheriff of the county in which the accident
or collision occurred.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely
attach the information required under division (A)(1) of this section, in
writing, to a conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor
vehicle.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident. Except as otherwise provided
in division (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section, failure to stop after a nonpublic
road accident is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm to a
person, failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a person,
failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend the first six months
of suspension of an offender’s license, permit, or privilege required by this
division.
      (5)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. §
2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.021)
§ 73.32 ACCIDENT INVOLVING DAMAGE TO REALTY.
   (A)   (1)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in
damage to real property, or personal property attached to real property,
legally upon or adjacent to a public road or highway immediately shall stop and
take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of the
property of that fact, of the driver’s name and address, and of the
registration number of vehicle the driver is driving and, upon request and if
available, shall exhibit the driver’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license.
      (2)   If the owner or person in charge of the property cannot be located
after reasonable search, the driver of the vehicle involved in the accident
resulting in damage to the property, within 24 hours after accident, shall
forward to the police department of the municipality the same information
required to be given to the owner or person in control of the property and give
the location of the accident and a description of the damage insofar as it is
known.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after an accident involving the property of others, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or
after committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.03)
§ 73.33 FAILURE TO REPORT ACCIDENT.
   (A)   No person shall fail to report a motor vehicle accident as required
under state or local law.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4509.74)
CHAPTER 74: EQUIPMENT AND LOADS
Section
Equipment
   
74.01   Unsafe vehicles, prohibition against operation
   
74.02   Bumpers on motor vehicles
   
74.03   Lighted lights required
   
74.04   Headlights
   
74.05   Tail lights and illumination of rear license plate
   
74.06   Red reflectors required
   
74.07   Safety lighting of commercial vehicles
   
74.08   Stoplight regulations
   
74.09   Obscured lights on vehicles
   
74.10   Red light or flag required
   
74.11   Lights on parked vehicles
   
74.12   Lights, emblems, and reflectors on slow-moving vehicles, farm
machinery, agricultural tractors, and animal-drawn vehicles
   
74.13   Spotlight and auxiliary driving lights
   
74.14   Cowl, fender, and back-up lights
   
74.15   Two lights displayed
   
74.16   Headlights required
   
74.17   Lights of less intensity
   
74.18   Number of lights permitted; red and flashing lights
   
74.19   Standards for lights on snow removal equipment and oversize vehicles
   
74.20   Flashing lights permitted for certain types of vehicles
   
74.21   Lights and sign on transportation for preschool children
   
74.22   Focus and aim of headlights
   
74.23   Brake equipment; specifications
   
74.24   Brake fluid
   
74.25   Minimum standards for brakes and components
   
74.26   Horns, sirens, and warning devices
   
74.27   Mufflers; excessive smoke or gas
   
74.28   Rearview mirrors
   
74.29   Windshields and wipers
   
74.30   Solid tire requirements
   
74.31   Use of tinted glass and other vision-obscuring materials
   
74.32   Directional signals
   
74.33   Installation and sale of seat safety belts required; definition
   
74.34   Requirements for extra signal equipment
   
74.35   Display of warning devices on disabled vehicles
   
74.36   Requirements for vehicles transporting explosives
   
74.37   Studded tires; seasonal use permitted
   
74.38   Safety inspection decals for buses
   
74.39   Air bags
Loads
   
74.50   Permit required to exceed load limits
   
74.51   Limitation of load extension on left side of vehicle
   
74.52   All loads shall be properly secured
   
74.53   Towing requirements; exception to size and weight restrictions
   
74.54   Weighing of vehicle; removal of excess load
   
74.55   Operation of vehicle exceeding weight limits prohibited
   
74.56   Load limits
   
74.57   Maximum width, height, and length
   
74.58   Statement of gross vehicle weight
   
74.59   Wheel protectors required on heavy commercial vehicles
   
74.60   Liability for damages; prosecution; application of monies
   
74.61   Weight exceptions for certain vehicles
   
74.62   Weight limits on bridges
Statutory reference:
   Exemption of certain vehicles from emission, noise control and fuel
standards, see R.C. § 4513.41
   Exemption of collector’s or historical vehicles from equipment standards,
see R.C. § 4513.38
   Motorcycles, protective eye devices required for operators and passengers;
helmets required for persons under 18 years of age, see O.A.C. § 4501-17-01
   Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14
   Snowmobiles and all-purpose vehicles, equipment, see O.A.C. § 4501-29-01
   Vehicle lighting, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-15
EQUIPMENT
§ 74.01 UNSAFE VEHICLES, PROHIBITION AGAINST OPERATION.
   (A)   No person shall drive or move, or cause or knowingly permit to be
driven or moved, on any highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is
in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.02(A), (H))
§ 74.02 BUMPERS ON MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING. The manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight
rating established for that vehicle.
      MANUFACTURER. The same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      MULTIPURPOSE PASSENGER VEHICLE. A motor vehicle with motive power, except
a motorcycle, designed to carry ten persons or less, that is constructed either
on a truck chassis or with special features for occasional off-road operation.
      PASSENGER CAR. Any motor vehicle with motive power, designed for carrying
ten persons or less, except a multipurpose passenger vehicle or motorcycle.
      TRUCK. Every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers, designed
and used to carry property and having a gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000
pounds or less.
   (B)   No person shall operate upon a street or highway any passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this state that does not
conform to the requirements established by the Director of Highway Safety
establishing maximum bumper heights. In the absence of bumpers or in cases
where bumper heights have been lowered or modified, no person shall operate
upon a street or highway any passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle or
truck registered in this state that does not conform to the requirements
established by the Director of Highway Safety establishing the maximum height
to the bottom of the frame rail of any passenger car, multipurpose passenger
vehicle or truck.
   (C)   No person shall modify any motor vehicle registered in this state in
such a manner as to cause the vehicle body or chassis to come in contact with
the ground, expose the fuel tank to damage from collision, or cause the wheels
to come in contact with the body under normal operation, and no person shall
disconnect any part of the original suspension system of the vehicle to defeat
the safe operation of that system.
   (D)   Nothing contained in this section or in the rules adopted pursuant to
this section shall be construed to prohibit either of the following:
      (1)   The installation upon a passenger car, multi-purpose passenger
vehicle or truck registered in this state of heavy duty equipment, including
shock absorbers and overload springs; and/or
      (2)   The operation on a street or highway of a passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this state with normal
wear to the suspension system if the normal wear does not adversely affect the
control of the vehicle.
   (E)   This section and the rules adopted pursuant to it do not apply to any
specially designed or modified passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle or
truck when operated off a street or highway in races and similar events.
   (F)   Any person found in violation of this section shall be fined not more
than $100.
(Prior Code, § 74.02) (Ord. 1990-26, passed 8-14-1990)
Statutory reference:
   Maximum height on bumpers, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-43
§ 74.03 LIGHTED LIGHTS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every vehicle, other than a motorized bicycle, operated upon a street
or highway within this state shall display lighted lights and illuminating
devices as required by R.C. §§ 4513.04 to 4513.37 during all of the following
times:
      (1)   The time from sunset to sunrise;
      (2)   At any other time when, due to insufficient natural light or
unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons, vehicles, and substantial objects
on the highway are not discernible at a distance of 1,000 feet ahead;
      (3)   At any time when the windshield wipers of the vehicle are in use
because of precipitation on the windshield.
   (B)   Every motorized bicycle shall display at such times lighted lights
meeting the rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under R.C. §
4511.521. No motor vehicle, during any time specified in this section, shall be
operated upon a street or highway within this state using only parking lights
as illumination.
   (C)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the distance
from which certain lamps and devices shall render objects visible, or within
which such lamps or devices shall be visible, such distance shall be measured
upon a straight level unlighted highway under normal atmospheric conditions
unless a different condition is expressly stated.
   (D)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the mounted
height of lights or devices, it shall mean from the center of such light or
device to the level ground upon which the vehicle stands.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a vehicle being operated upon a
street or highway within this state to stop the vehicle solely because the
officer observes that a violation of division (A)(3) of this section has been
or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of that division, or causing the arrest of or
commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of that division.
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.03)
§ 74.04 HEADLIGHTS.
   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, shall be equipped
with at least two headlights with at least one near each side of the front of
the motor vehicle.
      (2)   Every motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one and not more
than two headlights.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.04)
§ 74.05 TAIL LIGHTS AND ILLUMINATION OF REAR LICENSE PLATE.
   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer or
vehicle which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles shall be
equipped with at least one tail light mounted on the rear which, when lighted,
shall emit a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear,
provided that in the case of a train of vehicles only the tail light on the
rearmost vehicle need be visible from the distance specified.
      (2)   Either a tail light or a separate light shall be so constructed and
placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration plate, when
such registration plate is required, and render it legible from a distance of
50 feet to the rear. Any tail light, together with any separate light for
illuminating the rear registration plate, shall be so wired as to be lighted
whenever the headlights or auxiliary driving lights are lighted, except where
separate lighting systems are provided for trailers for the purpose of
illuminating such registration plate.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.05)
§ 74.06 RED REFLECTORS REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   Every new motor vehicle sold after September 6, 1941, and
operated on a highway, other than a commercial tractor to which a trailer or
semitrailer is attached, shall carry at the rear, either as a part of the tail
lamps or separately, two red reflectors meeting the requirements of this
section, except that vehicles of the type mentioned in R.C. § 4513.07 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall be equipped with reflectors
as required by the regulations provided for in that section.
      (2)   Every such reflector shall be of such size and characteristics and
so maintained as to be visible at night from all distances within 300 feet to
50 feet from such vehicle.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.06)
§ 74.07 SAFETY LIGHTING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   When the Director of Public Safety prescribes and promulgates
regulations relating to clearance lights, marker lights, reflectors and stop
lights on buses, trucks, commercial tractors, trailers, semitrailers and pole
trailers, when operated upon any highway, these vehicles shall be equipped as
required by such regulations, and such equipment shall be lighted at all times
mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
except that clearance lights and side marker lights need not be lighted on any
such vehicle when it is operated within the municipality where there is
sufficient light to reveal any person or substantial object on the highway at a
distance of 500 feet.
      (2)   Such equipment shall be in addition to all other lights
specifically required by R.C. §§ 4513.03 through 4513.16, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinances.
      (3)   Vehicles operated under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities
Commission are not subject to this section.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.07)
§ 74.08 STOPLIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, and pole trailer when
operated upon a highway shall be equipped with two or more stop lights, except
that passenger cars manufactured or assembled prior to January 1, 1967,
motorcycles, and motor-driven cycles shall be equipped with at least one stop
light. Stop lights shall be mounted on the rear of the vehicle, actuated upon
application of the service brake, and may be incorporated with other rear
lights. Such stop lights when actuated shall emit a red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear; provided that in the case of a train of
vehicles only the stop lights on the rearmost vehicle need be visible from the
distance specified.
      (2)   Such stop lights when actuated shall give a steady warning light to
the rear of a vehicle or train of vehicles to indicate the intention of the
operator to diminish the speed of or stop a vehicle or train of vehicles.
      (3)   When stop lights are used as required by this section, they shall
be constructed or installed so as to provide adequate and reliable illumination
and shall conform to the appropriate rules and regulations established under
R.C. § 4513.19.
      (4)   Historical motor vehicles as defined in R.C. § 4503.181, not
originally manufactured with stop lights, are not subject to this section.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.071)
§ 74.09 OBSCURED LIGHTS ON VEHICLES.
   Whenever motor and other vehicles are operated in combination during the
time that lights are required, any light, except tail lights, which by reason
of its location on a vehicle of the combination would be obscured by another
vehicle of the combination, need not be lighted, but this section does not
affect the requirement that lighted clearance lights be displayed on the front
of the foremost vehicle required to have clearance lights or that all lights
required on the rear of the rearmost vehicle of any combination shall be
lighted.
(R.C. § 4513.08)
§ 74.10 RED LIGHT OR FLAG REQUIRED.
   (A)   Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four feet or
more beyond the bed or body of this vehicle, there shall be displayed at the
extreme rear end of the load, at the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, a red light or lantern plainly
visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the sides and rear. The red
light or lantern required by this section is in addition to the red rear light
required upon every vehicle. At any other time there shall be displayed at the
extreme rear end of such load a red flag or cloth not less than 16 inches
square.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.09)
§ 74.11 LIGHTS ON PARKED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Except in case of an emergency, whenever a vehicle is parked or
stopped upon a roadway open to traffic or a shoulder adjacent thereto, whether
attended or unattended, during the times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, such vehicle shall be equipped
with one or more lights which shall exhibit a white or amber light on the
roadway side visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle,
and a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear. No lights need
be displayed upon any such vehicle when it is stopped or parked within the
municipality where there is sufficient light to reveal any person or
substantial object within a distance of 500 feet upon such highway. Any lighted
headlights upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed.
(R.C. § 4513.10)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 74.12 LIGHTS, EMBLEMS, AND REFLECTORS ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES, FARM
MACHINERY, AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS, AND ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      BOAT TRAILER. Means any vehicle designed and used exclusively to
transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a
marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a distance of no more
than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less.
      SLOW-MOVING VEHICLE and SMV. Mean a boat trailer, unit of farm machinery,
road construction machinery, or other machinery designed by the manufacturer to
operate at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less. The term does not include a
bicycle, motorized bicycle, electric bicycle, or animal-drawn vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.11)
   (B)   Generally.
      (1)   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall operate
either of the following vehicles unless it is equipped with and displays the
lamps described in division (B)(2) of this section:
         (a)   A vehicle not specifically required to be equipped with lamps or
other lighting devices by R.C. §§ 4513.03 to 4513.10;
         (b)   A vehicle referred to in R.C. § 4513.02(G).
      (2)   Vehicles described in division (B)(1) of this section shall be
equipped with both of the following:
         (a)   At least one lamp displaying a white light visible from a
distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the front of the vehicle;
         (b)   Two lamps displaying red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear of the vehicle, or as an alternative, one lamp
displaying a red light visible from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to
the rear and two red reflectors visible from all distances of 600 feet to 100
feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams of headlamps.
      (3)   (a)   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall
operate a multi-wheel agricultural tractor model year 2001 or earlier on a
street or highway unless it is equipped with and displays reflectors and
illuminated amber lamps so that the extreme left and right projections of the
tractor are indicated by all of the following:
            1.   Flashing lamps displaying amber light, visible to the front
and the rear. The lamps need not flash simultaneously and need not flash in
conjunction with any directional signals of the tractor.
            2.   Amber reflectors, all visible to the front;
            3.   Red reflectors, all visible to the rear.
         (b)   Rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under R.C. §
4513.111 governing the lamps and reflectors described in division (B)(3)(a) of
this section and their placement correlate with and, as far as possible,
conform with paragraphs 4.1.4.1, 4.1.7.1, and 4.1.7.2 respectively of the
American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S279.10 OCT 98,
Lighting and Marking of Agricultural Equipment on Highways.
      (4)   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall operate a
unit of farm machinery model year 2002 or later on a street or highway unless
it is equipped with and displays markings and illuminated lamps that meet or
exceed the lighting, illumination, and marking standards and specifications
that are applicable to that type of farm machinery for the unit’s model year
specified in the American society of agricultural engineers standard ANSI/ASAE
S279.10 OCT 98, lighting and marking of agricultural equipment on highways.
      (5)   Any unit of farm machinery designed by its manufacturer to operate
at a speed of 25 miles per hour or greater or any SMV may be equipped with and
display a red flashing light that is visible from a distance of not less than
1,000 feet to the rear at all times specified in R.C. § 4513.03. When a double-
faced light is used, it shall display amber light to the front and red light to
the rear.
      (6)   Lights and reflectors required under divisions (B)(3) and (B)(4) of
this section and authorized under division (B)(5) of this section are in
addition to other lights required or permitted by this division (B) or R.C. §
4513.17.
      (7)   The Ohio Director of Public Safety shall adopt rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 that establish standards and specifications for lamps and
reflectors required or authorized by this section. Lamps and reflectors
required or authorized by this section shall meet those standards and
specifications.
      (8)   This division (B) does not apply to a bicycle, motorized bicycle,
electric bicycle, or animal-drawn vehicle.
      (9)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.111)
   (C)   Slow-moving vehicles.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall
operate an SMV on a street or highway as follows:
         (a)   At a speed exceeding 25 miles per hour;
         (b)   Without displaying the triangular SMV emblem mounted in
accordance with division (C)(2) of this section.
      (2)   The SMV emblem shall be mounted so as to be visible from a distance
of not less than 500 feet to the rear. In accordance with R.C. Chapter 119, the
Ohio Director of Public Safety shall adopt standards and specifications for the
design and position of mounting the SMV emblem. The standards and
specifications for the SMV emblem correlate with and, so far as possible,
conform with those approved by the American Society of Agricultural Engineers.
      (3)   A person may operate an SMV on a street or highway without
displaying the triangular SMV emblem when any of the following apply:
         (a)   The SMV is being used in actual construction and maintenance
work in an area guarded by a flagperson, or where flares are used.
         (b)   The SMV is operating or traveling within the limits of a
construction area designated by the Ohio Director of Transportation, a city
engineer, or the county engineer of the several counties, when such
construction area is marked in accordance with requirements of the Ohio
Director of Transportation and the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices,
as set forth in R.C. § 4511.09.
      (4)   No person shall display an SMV emblem on any of the following:
         (a)   Any vehicle not required to use the SMV emblem by this division
(C) or R.C. § 4513.113 or 4513.114;
         (b)   An SMV being transported upon any other vehicle;
         (c)   Any stationary object on the highway.
      (5)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate an SMV, except a unit
designed to be completely mounted on a primary power unit that is manufactured
or assembled on or after April 1, 1966, unless it is equipped with an SMV
emblem mounting device.
      (6)   Whoever violates this division (C) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.112)
   (D)   Farm machinery and agricultural tractors.
      (1)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate on a street or
highway any unit of farm machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to
operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the unit displays both
of the following:
         (a)   The SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. § 4513.112(B);
         (b)   A speed identification symbol that does both of the following:
            1.   Meets the specifications contained in the American Society of
Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005, Agricultural Equipment:
Speed Identification Symbol (SIS);
            2.   Indicates the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the
unit of farm machinery is designed by its manufacturer to operate.
      (2)   No person operating a tractor on a street or highway that is
designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per
hour and that is towing, pulling, or otherwise drawing a unit of farm machinery
while operating at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour shall fail to display
both of the following on the unit of farm machinery:
         (a)   The SMV emblem;
         (b)   The speed identification symbol that matches the speed
identification symbol required to be displayed on the agricultural tractor.
      (3)   No person shall operate an agricultural tractor that is designed by
its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless
the person possesses documentation published or provided by the manufacturer
indicating the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the manufacturer
designed the agricultural tractor to operate.
      (4)   Whoever violates this division (D) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.113)
   (E)   Animal-drawn vehicles.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (E)(4) of this section, no
person shall operate an animal-drawn vehicle on a street or highway unless it
is equipped with and displays, at the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, both
of the following:
         (a)   At least one lamp displaying a white light visible from a
distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the front of the animal-drawn vehicle;
         (b)   Two lamps displaying red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear of the animal-drawn vehicle, or as an
alternative, one lamp displaying a red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear and two red reflectors visible from all
distances of 600 feet to one hundred feet to the rear when illuminated by the
lawful lower beams of headlamps.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (E)(4) of this section, no
person shall operate an animal-drawn vehicle on a street or highway unless it
is equipped with and displays, at all times, all of the following:
         (a)   One yellow flashing lamp displaying yellow light that is visible
from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet and that is mounted in either of
the following positions:
            1.   On the top most portion of the rear of the animal-drawn
vehicle;
            2.   On the top of the animal-drawn vehicle.
         (b)   At least one of the following:
            1.   An SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. § 4513.112(B);
            2.   Micro-prism reflective tape that is visible from a distance of
not less than 500 feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams
of headlamps;
            3.   Both an SMV emblem and micro-prism reflective tape, as
specified in this division.
         (c)   Lamps and micro-prism reflective tape required by this section
shall meet standards and specifications adopted by the Ohio Director of Public
Safety under R.C. § 4513.114.
      (3)   The Ohio Director of Public Safety, in accordance with R.C. Chapter
119, shall adopt rules establishing standards and specifications for the
position and mounting of the lamps and micro-prism reflective tape required by
R.C. § 4513.114. The rules permit the micro-prism reflective tape to be red,
amber, white, or silver in color.
      (4)   (a)   Divisions (E)(1) and (E)(2) of this section do not apply to
the operator of animal-drawn agricultural equipment who is not transporting any
livestock or a person other than the operator.
         (b)   No operator described in division (E)(4)(a) of this section
shall operate animal-drawn agricultural equipment unless it is equipped with
and displays, at all times, the SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. §
4513.112(B).
         (c)   As used in division (E)(4) of this section, “animal-drawn
agricultural equipment” means equipment drawn by the muscular power of an
animal that is used solely for agricultural purposes. “Animal-drawn
agricultural equipment” includes any of the following:
            1.   A plow;
            2.   A manure spreader;
            3.   A thresher.
      (5)   Whoever violates this division (E) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.114)
   (F)   Strict liability offenses. The offenses established under this section
are strict liability offenses, and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The
designation of these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be
construed to imply that any other offense, for which there is no specified
degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. § 4513.115)
§ 74.13 SPOTLIGHT AND AUXILIARY DRIVING LIGHTS.
   (A)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one
spotlight and every lighted spotlight shall be so aimed and used upon
approaching another vehicle that no part of the high-intensity portion of the
beam will be directed to the left of the prolongation of the extreme left side
of the vehicle, nor more than 100 feet ahead of the vehicle.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than three
auxiliary driving lights mounted on the front of the vehicle. Any such lights
which do not conform to the specifications for auxiliary driving lights and the
regulations for their use prescribed by the Director of Public Safety shall not
be used.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.12)
§ 74.14 COWL, FENDER, AND BACK-UP LIGHTS.
   (A)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with side cowl or fender
lights which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with lights on each side thereof
which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.
      (3)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with back-up lights, either
separately or in combination with another light. No back-up lights shall be
continuously lighted when the motor vehicle is in forward motion.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.13)
§ 74.15 TWO LIGHTS DISPLAYED.
   (A)   At all times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, at least two lighted lights shall be displayed, one near
each side of the front of every motor vehicle, except when such vehicle is
parked subject to the regulations governing lights on parked vehicles.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.14)
§ 74.16 HEADLIGHTS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Whenever a motor vehicle is being operated on a roadway or shoulder
adjacent thereto during the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the driver shall use a
distribution of light, or composite beam, directed high enough and of
sufficient intensity to reveal persons, vehicles and substantial objects at a
safe distance in advance of the vehicle, subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming vehicle,
such driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam, so aimed that
the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the oncoming driver.
      (2)   Every new motor vehicle registered in this state which has
multiple-beam road lighting equipment shall be equipped with a beam indicator,
which shall be lighted whenever the uppermost distribution of light from the
headlights is in use, and shall not otherwise be lighted. This indicator shall
be so designed and located that, when lighted, it will be readily visible
without glare to the driver of the vehicle.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.15)
§ 74.17 LIGHTS OF LESS INTENSITY.
   (A)   Any motor vehicle may be operated under the conditions specified in
R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance when it is
equipped with two lighted lights upon the front thereof capable of revealing
persons and substantial objects 75 feet ahead, in lieu of lights required in
R.C. § 4513.14 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, provided that
such vehicle shall not be operated at a speed in excess of 20 miles per hour.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.16)
§ 74.18 NUMBER OF LIGHTS PERMITTED; RED AND FLASHING LIGHTS.
   (A)   Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlights is also equipped
with any auxiliary lights or spotlight or any other light on the front thereof
projecting a beam of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower, not more than a
total of five of any such lights on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted at
any one time when the vehicle is upon a highway.
   (B)   Any lighted light or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle, other
than headlights, spotlights, signal lights, or auxiliary driving lights, that
projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower shall be
so directed that no part of the beam will strike the level of the roadway on
which the vehicle stands at a distance of more than 75 feet from the vehicle.
   (C)   (1)   Flashing lights are prohibited on motor vehicles, except as a
means for indicating a right or a left turn, or in the presence of a vehicular
traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching, or overtaking or passing.
      (2)   The prohibition in division (C)(1) of this section does not apply
to any of the following:
         (a)   Emergency vehicles, road service vehicles servicing or towing a
disabled vehicle, stationary waste collection vehicles actively collecting
garbage, refuse, trash, or recyclable materials on the roadside, rural mail
delivery vehicles, vehicles as provided in R.C. § 4513.182, highway maintenance
vehicles, and similar equipment operated by state or local authorities,
provided such vehicles are equipped with and display, when used on a street or
highway for the special purpose necessitating such lights, a flashing,
oscillating, or rotating amber light;
         (b)   Vehicles or machinery permitted by R.C. § 4513.111 to have a
flashing red light;
         (c)   Farm machinery and vehicles escorting farm machinery, provided
such machinery and vehicles are equipped with and display, when used on a
street or highway, a flashing, oscillating, or rotating amber light. Farm
machinery also may display the lights described in R.C. § 4513.111.
         (d)   A funeral hearse or funeral escort vehicle, provided that the
funeral hearse or funeral escort vehicle is equipped with and displays, when
used on a street or highway for the special purpose necessitating such lights,
a flashing, oscillating, or rotating purple or amber light;
         (e)   A vehicle being used for emergency preparedness, response, and
recovery activities, as those terms are defined in R.C. § 5502.21, that is
equipped with and displays, when used on a street or highway for the special
purpose necessitating such lights, a flashing, oscillating, or rotating amber
or red and white light, provided that the vehicle is being operated by a person
from one of the following and the vehicle is clearly marked with the applicable
agency’s or authority’s insignia:
            1.   The Ohio Emergency Management Agency;
            2.   A countywide emergency management agency established under
R.C. § 5502.26;
            3.   A regional authority for emergency management established
under R.C. § 5502.27;
            4.   A program for emergency management established under R.C. §
5502.271.
      (3)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to animal-drawn
vehicles subject to R.C. § 4513.114.
   (D)   (1)   Except a person operating a public safety vehicle, as defined in
R.C. § 4511.01(E), an emergency management agency vehicle, as described in
division (C)(2)(e) of this section, or a school bus, no person shall operate,
move, or park upon, or permit to stand within the right-of-way of any public
street or highway any vehicle or equipment that is equipped with and displaying
a flashing red or a flashing combination red and white light, or an oscillating
or rotating red light, or a combination red and white oscillating or rotating
light.
      (2)   Except a public law enforcement officer, or other person sworn to
enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state, operating a public safety
vehicle when on duty, no person shall operate, move, or park upon, or permit to
stand within the right-of-way of any street or highway any vehicle or equipment
that is equipped with, or upon which is mounted, and displaying a flashing blue
or a flashing combination blue and white light, or an oscillating or rotating
blue light, or a combination blue and white oscillating or rotating light.
   (E)   This section does not prohibit the use of warning lights required by
law or the simultaneous flashing of turn signals on disabled vehicles or on
vehicles being operated in unfavorable atmospheric conditions in order to
enhance their visibility. This section also does not prohibit the simultaneous
flashing of turn signals or warning lights whether on farm machinery or
vehicles escorting farm machinery when used on a street or highway.
(R.C. § 4513.17)
   (F)   (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a motor vehicle
operated by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator may be equipped
with a flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and siren, whistle
or bell capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a
distance of not less than 500 feet. Such a vehicle may display the flashing,
oscillating or rotating red or blue light and may give the audible signal of
the siren, whistle or bell only when responding to a fatality or a fatal motor
vehicle accident on a street or highway and only at those locations where the
stoppage of traffic impedes the ability of the coroner, deputy coroner or
coroner’s investigator to arrive at the site of the fatality.
      (2)   This division (F) does not relieve the coroner, deputy coroner or
coroner’s investigator operating a motor vehicle from the duty to drive with
due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
(R.C. § 4513.171)
   (G)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. §§ 4513.17(F), 4513.171(B))
§ 74.19 STANDARDS FOR LIGHTS ON SNOW REMOVAL EQUIPMENT AND OVERSIZE VEHICLES.
   (A)   It is unlawful to operate snow removal equipment on a highway unless
the lights thereon comply with and are lighted when and as required by the
standards and specifications adopted by the Director of Transportation pursuant
to R.C. § 4513.18.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.18)
§ 74.20 FLASHING LIGHTS PERMITTED FOR CERTAIN TYPES OF VEHICLES.
   Rural mail delivery vehicles, state highway survey vehicles, and funeral
escort vehicles are permitted to use flashing lights.
(R.C. § 4513.181)
§ 74.21 LIGHTS AND SIGN ON TRANSPORTATION FOR PRESCHOOL CHILDREN.
   (A)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle owned, leased, or hired by a
nursery school, kindergarten, or child care center, while transporting
preschool children to or from such an institution unless the motor vehicle is
equipped with and displaying two amber flashing lights mounted on a bar
attached to the top of the vehicle, and a sign bearing the designation “caution
– children”, which shall be attached to the bar carrying the amber flashing
lights in such a manner as to be legible to persons both in front of and behind
the vehicle. The lights and sign shall meet standards and specifications
adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety.
   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle displaying the lights and sign
required by this section for any purpose other than the transportation of
preschool children as provided in this section.
(R.C. § 4513.182)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 74.22 FOCUS AND AIM OF HEADLIGHTS.
   (A)   No person shall use any lights mentioned in R.C. §§ 4513.03 through
4513.18, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, upon any motor
vehicle, trailer or semitrailer unless these lights are equipped, mounted and
adjusted as to focus and aim in accordance with regulations which are
prescribed by the Director of Public Safety.
   (B)   The headlights on any motor vehicle shall comply with the headlamp
color requirements contained in Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number
108, 49 C.F.R. § 571.108. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in violation
of this division.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.19)
§ 74.23 BRAKE EQUIPMENT; SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The following requirements govern as to brake equipment on vehicles:
      (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, when operated upon a
highway shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and
to stop and hold the motor vehicle, including two separate means of applying
the brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at
least two wheels. If these two separate means of applying the brakes are
connected in any way, then on such motor vehicles, manufactured or assembled
after January 1, 1942, they shall be so constructed that failure of any one
part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the motor vehicle without
brakes on at least two wheels.
      (2)   Every motorcycle, when operated upon a highway shall be equipped
with at least one adequate brake, which may be operated by hand or by foot.
      (3)   Every motorized bicycle shall be equipped with brakes meeting the
rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety under R.C. § 4511.521.
      (4)   When operated upon the highways, the following vehicles shall be
equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and to
hold the vehicle, designed to be applied by the driver of the towing motor
vehicle from its cab, and also designed and connected so that, in case of a
breakaway of the towed vehicle, the brakes shall be automatically applied:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every trailer or
semitrailer, except a pole trailer, with an empty weight of 2,000 pounds or
more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1942;
         (b)   Every manufactured home or travel trailer with an empty weight
of 2,000 pounds or more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 2001.
      (5)   Every watercraft trailer with a gross weight or manufacturer’s
gross vehicle weight rating of 3,000 pounds or more that is manufactured or
assembled on or after January 1, 2008, shall have separate brakes equipped with
hydraulic surge or electrically operated brakes on two wheels.
      (6)   In any combination of motor-drawn trailers or semitrailers equipped
with brakes, means shall be provided for applying the rearmost brakes in
approximate synchronism with the brakes on the towing vehicle, and developing
the required braking effort on the rearmost wheels at the fastest rate; or
means shall be provided for applying braking effort first on the rearmost
brakes; or both of the above means, capable of being used alternatively, may be
employed.
      (7)   Every vehicle and combination of vehicles, except motorcycles and
motorized bicycles, and except trailers and semitrailers of a gross weight of
less than 2,000 pounds, and pole trailers, shall be equipped with parking
brakes adequate to hold the vehicle on any grade on which it is operated, under
all conditions of loading, on a surface free from snow, ice, or loose material.
The parking brakes shall be capable of being applied in conformance with the
foregoing requirements by the driver’s muscular effort or by spring action or
by equivalent means. Their operation may be assisted by the service brakes or
other source of power provided that failure of the service brake actuation
system or other power assisting mechanism will not prevent the parking brakes
from being applied in conformance with the foregoing requirements. The parking
brakes shall be so designed that when once applied they shall remain applied
with the required effectiveness despite exhaustion of any source of energy or
leakage of any kind.
      (8)   The same brake drums, brake shoes and lining assemblies, brake shoe
anchors, and mechanical brake shoe actuation mechanism normally associated with
the wheel brake assemblies may be used for both the service brakes and the
parking brakes. If the means of applying the parking brakes and the service
brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed that failure of
any one part shall not leave the vehicle without operative brakes.
      (9)   Every motor vehicle or combination of motor-drawn vehicles shall,
at all times and under all conditions of loading, be capable of being stopped
on a dry, smooth, level road free from loose material, upon application of the
service or foot brake, within the following specified distances, or shall be
capable of being decelerated at a sustained rate corresponding to these
distances:
         (a)   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles having brakes on all wheels
shall come to a stop in 30 feet or less from a speed of 20 miles per hour.
         (b)   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles not having brakes on all
wheels shall come to a stop in 40 feet or less from a speed of 20 miles per
hour.
      (10)   All brakes shall be maintained in good working order and shall be
so adjusted as to operate as equally as practicable with respect to the wheels
on opposite sides of the vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.20)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 74.24 BRAKE FLUID.
   (A)   No hydraulic brake fluid for use in motor vehicles shall be sold in
this municipality if the brake fluid is below the minimum standard of
specifications for heavy duty type brake fluid established by the society of
automotive engineers and the standard of specifications established by 49
C.F.R. § 571.116, as amended.
   (B)   All manufacturers, packers, or distributors of brake fluid selling
such fluid in this municipality shall state on the containers that the brake
fluid meets or exceeds the applicable minimum SAE standard of specifications,
and the standard of specifications established in 49 C.F.R. § 571.116, as
amended.
(R.C. § 4513.201)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 74.25 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BRAKES AND COMPONENTS.
   (A)   No brake lining, brake lining material, or brake lining assemblies for
use as repair and replacement parts in motor vehicles shall be sold in this
municipality if these items do not meet or exceed the minimum standard of
specifications established by the Society of Automotive Engineers and the
standard of specifications established in 49 C.F.R. § 571.105, as amended, and
49 C.F.R. § 571.135, as amended.
   (B)   All manufacturers or distributors of brake lining, brake lining
material, or brake lining assemblies selling these items for use as repair and
replacement parts in motor vehicles shall state that the items meet or exceed
the applicable minimum standard of specifications.
   (C)   As used in this section, MINIMUM STANDARD OF SPECIFICATIONS means a
minimum standard for brake system or brake component performance that meets the
need for motor vehicle safety and complies with the applicable SAE standards
and recommended practices, and the federal motor vehicle safety standards that
cover the same aspect of performance for any brake lining, brake lining
material, or brake lining assemblies.
(R.C. § 4513.202)
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 74.26 HORNS, SIRENS, AND WARNING DEVICES.
   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle when operated upon a highway shall be
equipped with a horn which is in good working order and capable of emitting
sound audible, under normal conditions, from a distance of not less than 200
feet.
      (2)   No motor vehicle shall be equipped with, nor shall any person use
upon a vehicle, any siren, whistle, or bell. Any vehicle may be equipped with a
theft alarm signal device which shall be so arranged that it cannot be used as
an ordinary warning signal. Every emergency vehicle shall be equipped with a
siren, whistle or bell, capable of emitting sound audible under normal
conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet and of a type approved by
the Director of Public Safety. Such equipment shall not be used except when
such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or is in the
immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in which case
the driver of the emergency vehicle shall sound such equipment when it is
necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.21)
§ 74.27 MUFFLERS; EXCESSIVE SMOKE OR GAS.
   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle with an internal combustion
engine shall at all times be equipped with a muffler which is in good working
order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise, and no
person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device upon a motor
vehicle on a highway. Every motorcycle muffler shall be equipped with baffle
plates.
      (2)   No person shall own, operate or have in the person’s possession any
motor vehicle or motorcycle equipped with a device for producing excessive
smoke or gas, or so equipped as to permit oil or any other chemical to flow
into or upon the exhaust pipe or muffler of such vehicle, or equipped in any
way to produce or emit smoke or dangerous or annoying gases from any portion of
such vehicle, other than the ordinary gases emitted by the exhaust of an
internal combustion engine under normal operation.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.22)
§ 74.28 REARVIEW MIRRORS.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle shall be equipped with a mirror so
located as to reflect to the operator a view of the highway to the rear of such
vehicle or motorcycle. Operators of vehicles and motorcycles shall have a clear
and unobstructed view to the front and to both sides of their vehicles and
motorcycles and shall have a clear view to the rear of their vehicles and
motorcycles by mirror.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.23)
§ 74.29 WINDSHIELDS AND WIPERS.
   (A)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle on a street or highway in this
municipality, other than a motorcycle or motorized bicycle, that is not
equipped with a windshield.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle, other than a bus, with
any sign, poster, or other nontransparent material upon the front windshield,
sidewings, side, or rear windows of such vehicle other than a certificate or
other paper required to be displayed by law, except that there may be in the
lower left-hand or right-hand corner of the windshield a sign, poster, or decal
not to exceed four inches in height by six inches in width. No sign, poster, or
decal shall be displayed in the front windshield in such a manner as to conceal
the vehicle identification number for the motor vehicle when, in accordance
with federal law, that number is located inside the vehicle passenger
compartment and so placed as to be readable through the vehicle glazing without
moving any part of the vehicle.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a passenger car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if either of
the following apply to the device:
         (a)   It is a “vehicle safety technology” as defined in 49 C.F.R. §
393.5 and complies with 49 C.F.R. § 393.60(e)(1)(ii).
         (b)   It does not restrict the vehicle operator’s sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals, and it does not conceal the vehicle
identification number.
      (3)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a commercial car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if either of
the following apply to the device:
         (a)   It is a “vehicle safety technology” as defined in 49 C.F.R. §
393.5 and complies with 49 C.F.R. § 393.60(e)(1)(ii).
         (b)   It does not restrict the vehicle operator’s sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals, and it is mounted not more than 8.5 inches
below the upper edge of the windshield.
   (C)   The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device
for cleaning rain, snow, or other moisture from the windshield. The device
shall be maintained in good working order and so constructed as to be
controlled or operated by the operator of the vehicle.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.24)
§ 74.30 SOLID TIRE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Every solid tire, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, on a vehicle shall
have rubber or other resilient material on its entire traction surface at least
one inch thick above the edge of the flange of the entire periphery.
(R.C. § 4513.25)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 74.31 USE OF TINTED GLASS AND OTHER VISION-OBSCURING MATERIALS.
   (A)   No person shall operate, on any highway or other public or private
property open to the public for vehicular traffic or parking, lease or rent any
motor vehicle that is registered in this state unless the motor vehicle
conforms to the rules adopted by the Director of Highway Safety, governing the
use of tinted glass and the use of transparent, non-transparent, translucent
and reflectorize materials in or on motor vehicle windshields, side windows,
side wings and rear windows and any applicable rule adopted under R.C. §
4513.241.
   (B)   No person shall install, in or on any motor vehicle, any glass or
other material that fails to conform to the requirements of this section or of
any rule adopted under this section.
   (C)   No used motor vehicle dealer or new motor vehicle dealer, as defined
in R.C. § 4517.01 shall sell any motor vehicle that fails to conform to the
requirements of this section or of any rule adopted under this section.
   (D)   No reflectorized materials shall be permitted upon or in any front
windshield, side windows, sidewings or rear windows.
   (E)   This section does not apply to the manufacturer’s tinting or glazing
of motor vehicle windows or windshields that is otherwise in compliance with or
permitted by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 205.
   (F)   Any person found in violation of this section shall be fined not more
than $100.
(Prior Code, § 74.31) (Ord. 1990-25, passed 8-14-1990)
§ 74.32 DIRECTIONAL SIGNALS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle manufactured or
assembled on or after January 1, 1954, unless the vehicle is equipped with
electrical or mechanical directional signals.
      (2)   No person shall operate any motorcycle or motor-driven cycle
manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1968, unless the vehicle is
equipped with electrical or mechanical directional signals.
   (B)   As used in this section, DIRECTIONAL SIGNALS means an electrical or
mechanical signal device capable of clearly indicating an intention to turn
either to the right or to the left and which shall be visible from both the
front and rear.
   (C)   All mechanical signal devices shall be self-illuminating devices when
in use at the times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.261)
§ 74.33 INSTALLATION AND SALE OF SEAT SAFETY BELTS REQUIRED; DEFINITION.
   (A)   As used in this section and in R.C. § 4513.263 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the component parts of a seat safety belt
include a belt, anchor attachment assembly, and a buckle or closing device.
   (B)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate any passenger car, as
defined in R.C. § 4501.01(E), that is registered or to be registered in this
state and that is manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1962, unless
the passenger car is equipped with sufficient anchorage units at the attachment
points for attaching at least two sets of seat safety belts to its front seat.
Such anchorage units at the attachment points shall be of such construction,
design, and strength to support a loop load pull of not less than 4,000 pounds
for each belt.
   (C)   No person shall sell, lease, or rent any passenger car, as defined in
R.C. § 4501.01(E), that is registered or to be registered in this state and
that is manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1966, unless the
passenger car has installed in its front seat at least two seat safety belt
assemblies.
   (D)   After January 1, 1966, neither any seat safety belt for use in a motor
vehicle nor any component part of any such seat safety belt shall be sold in
this municipality unless the seat safety belt or the component part satisfies
the minimum standard of specifications established by the society of automotive
engineers for automotive seat belts and unless the seat safety belt or
component part is labeled so as to indicate that it meets those minimum
standard specifications.
   (E)   Each sale, lease, or rental in violation of this section constitutes a
separate offense.
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.262)
Statutory reference:
   Child restraint systems, regulations, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-37
§ 74.34 REQUIREMENTS FOR EXTRA SIGNAL EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   No person shall operate any motor truck, bus, or commercial tractor
upon any highway at any time from sunset to sunrise unless there is carried in
such vehicle, except as provided in division (B) of this section, the following
equipment which shall be of the types approved by the Director of
Transportation.
      (1)   At least three flares or three red reflectors or three red electric
lanterns, each of which is capable of being seen and distinguished at a
distance of 500 feet under normal atmospheric conditions at nighttime;
      (2)   At least three red-burning fusees, unless red reflectors or red
electric lanterns are carried;
      (3)   At least two red cloth flags, not less than two inches square, with
standards to support them;
      (4)   The type of red reflectors shall comply with such standards and
specifications in effect on September 16, 1963, or later established by the
Interstate Commerce Commission and must be certified as meeting such standards
by Underwriters Laboratories.
   (B)   No person shall operate at the time and under the conditions stated in
this section any motor vehicle used in transporting flammable liquids in bulk,
or in transporting compressed flammable gases, unless there is carried in such
vehicle three red electric lanterns or three red reflectors meeting the
requirements stated in division (A) of this section. There shall not be carried
in any such vehicle any flare, fusee, or signal produced by a flame.
   (C)   This section does not apply to any person who operates any motor
vehicle in a work area designated by protection equipment devices that are
displayed and used in accordance with the manual adopted by the Department of
Transportation under R.C. § 4511.09.
(R.C. § 4513.27)
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 74.35 DISPLAY OF WARNING DEVICES ON DISABLED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Whenever any motor truck, bus, commercial tractor, trailer,
semitrailer, or pole trailer is disabled upon any freeway, expressway, thruway
and connecting, entering, or exiting ramps within the municipality, at any time
when lighted lamps are required on vehicles, the operator of such vehicle shall
display the following warning devices upon the highway during the time the
vehicle is so disabled on the highway except as provided in division (B) of
this section:
      (1)   A lighted fusee shall be immediately placed on the roadway at the
traffic side of such vehicle, unless red electric lanterns or red reflectors
are displayed.
      (2)   Within the burning period of the fusee and as promptly as possible,
three lighted flares or pot torches, or three red reflectors or three red
electric lanterns shall be placed on the roadway as follows:
         (a)   One at a distance of 40 paces or approximately 100 feet in
advance of the vehicle;
         (b)   One at a distance of 40 paces or approximately 100 feet to the
rear of the vehicle, except as provided in this section, each in the center of
the lane of traffic occupied by the disabled vehicle;
         (c)   One at the traffic side of the vehicle.
   (B)   Whenever any vehicle used in transporting flammable liquids in bulk,
or in transporting compressed flammable gases, is disabled upon a highway at
any time or place mentioned in division (A) of this section, the driver of such
vehicle shall display upon the roadway the following warning devices:
      (1)   One red electric lantern or one red reflector shall be immediately
placed on the roadway at the traffic side of the vehicle;
      (2)   Two other red electric lanterns or two other red reflectors shall
be placed to the front and rear of the vehicle in the same manner prescribed
for flares in division (A) of this section.
   (C)   When a vehicle of a type specified in division (B) of this section is
disabled, the use of flares, fusees, or any signal produced by flame as warning
signals is prohibited.
   (D)   Whenever any vehicle of a type referred to in this section is disabled
upon any freeway, expressway, thruway, and connecting, entering, or exiting
ramps within the municipality, at any time when the display of fusees, flares,
red reflectors, or electric lanterns is not required, the operator of such
vehicle shall display two red flags upon the roadway in the lane of traffic
occupied by the disabled vehicle, one at a distance of 40 paces or
approximately 100 feet in advance of the vehicle, and one at a distance of 40
paces or approximately 100 feet to the rear of the vehicle, except as provided
in this section.
   (E)   The flares, fusees, lanterns, red reflectors, and flags to be
displayed as required in this section shall conform with the applicable
requirements of R.C. § 4513.27 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (F)   In the event the vehicle is disabled near a curve, crest of a hill, or
other obstruction of view, the flare, flag, reflector, or lantern in that
direction shall be placed as to afford ample warning to other users of the
highway, but in no case shall it be placed less than 40 paces or approximately
100 feet nor more than 120 paces or approximately 300 feet from the disabled
vehicle.
   (G)   This section does not apply to the operator of any vehicle in a work
area designated by protection equipment devices that are displayed and used in
accordance with the manual adopted by the Department of Transportation under
R.C. § 4511.09.
   (H)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.28)
§ 74.36 REQUIREMENTS FOR VEHICLES TRANSPORTING EXPLOSIVES.
   (A)   Any person operating any vehicle transporting explosives upon a
highway shall at all times comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   The vehicle shall be marked or placarded on each side and on the
rear with the word “EXPLOSIVES” in letters not less than eight inches high, or
there shall be displayed on the rear of such vehicle a red flag not less than
24 inches square marked with the word “DANGER” in white letters six inches
high, or shall be marked or placarded in accordance with Section 177.823 of the
United States Department of Transportation regulations.
      (2)   The vehicle shall be equipped with not less than two fire
extinguishers, filled and ready for immediate use, and placed at convenient
points on such vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.29)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 74.37 STUDDED TIRES; SEASONAL USE PERMITTED.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, STUDDED TIRE means any tire designed
for use on a vehicle and equipped with metal studs or studs of wear-resisting
material that project beyond the tread of the traction surface of the tire.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, no person
shall operate any motor vehicle other than a public safety vehicle or school
bus that is equipped with studded tires on any street or highway in this
municipality, except during the period extending from the first day of November
of each year through the fifteenth day of April of the succeeding year.
      (2)   A person may operate a motor vehicle that is equipped with
retractable studded tires with the studs retracted at any time of the year, but
shall operate the motor vehicle with the studs extended only as provided in
division (B)(1) of this section.
   (C)   This section does not apply to the use of tire chains when there is
snow or ice on the streets or highways where such chains are being used, or the
immediate vicinity thereof.
(R.C. § 5589.081)
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 5589.99(B))
§ 74.38 SAFETY INSPECTION DECALS FOR BUSES.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      BUS.
         (a)   Means any vehicle used for the transportation of passengers that
meets at least one of the following:
            1.   Was originally designed by the manufacturer to transport more
than 15 passengers, including the driver;
            2.   Either the gross vehicle weight rating or the gross vehicle
weight exceeds 10,000 pounds.
         (b)   The term does not include a church bus as defined in R.C. §
4503.07 or a school bus unless the church bus or school bus is used in the
transportation of passengers by a motor carrier.
         (c)   The term also does not include any of the following:
            1.   Any vehicle operated exclusively on a rail or rails;
            2.   A trolley bus operated by electric power derived from a fixed
overhead wire furnishing local passenger transportation similar to street-
railway service;
            3.   Vehicles owned or leased by government agencies or political
subdivisions.
      MOTOR CARRIER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4923.01
(R.C. § 4513.50)
   (B)   Safety inspection decals.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, on and after
July 1, 2001, no person shall operate a bus, nor shall any person being the
owner of a bus or having supervisory responsibility for a bus, permit the
operation of any bus unless the bus displays a valid, current safety inspection
decal issued by the State Highway Patrol under R.C. § 4513.52.
      (2)   For the purpose of complying with the requirements of this section
and R.C. § 4513.52, the owner or other operator of a bus may drive the bus
directly to an inspection site conducted by the State Highway Patrol and
directly back to the person’s place of business without a valid registration
and without displaying a safety inspection decal, provided that no passengers
may occupy the bus during such operation.
(R.C. § 4513.51(A), (B))
   (C)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4513.51(D))
§ 74.39 AIR BAGS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      AIR BAG. Has the same meaning as in 49 C.F.R. § 579.4, as amended.
      COUNTERFEIT AIR BAG. An air bag displaying a mark identical or similar to
the genuine mark of a motor vehicle manufacturer, without the authorization of
the motor vehicle manufacturer.
      NONFUNCTIONAL AIR BAG. Any of the following:
         (a)   A replacement air bag that has been previously deployed or
damaged;
         (b)   A replacement air bag that has an electrical fault that is
detected by the air bag diagnostic system of a vehicle after the air bag is
installed;
         (c)   A counterfeit air bag, air bag cover, or some other object that
is installed in a vehicle to deceive an owner or operator of the vehicle into
believing that a functional air bag has been installed.
   (B)   No person shall install or reinstall in any motor vehicle a
counterfeit or nonfunctional air bag or any object intended to fulfill the
function of an air bag other than an air bag that was designed in conformance
with or that is regulated by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208
for the make, model, and model year of the vehicle, knowing that the object is
not in accordance with that standard.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly manufacture, import, sell, or offer for sale
any of the following:
      (1)   A counterfeit air bag;
      (2)   A nonfunctional air bag;
      (3)   Any other object that is intended to be installed in a motor
vehicle to fulfill the function of an air bag and that is not in conformance
with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208 for the make, model, and
model year of the vehicle in which the object is intended to be installed.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly sell, install, or reinstall a device in a
motor vehicle that causes the diagnostic system of a vehicle to inaccurately
indicate that the vehicle is equipped with a functional air bag.
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B) or (D) of this section is guilty
of improper replacement of a motor vehicle air bag, a misdemeanor of the first
degree on a first offense. On each subsequent offense, or if the violation
results in serious physical harm to an individual, the person is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (C) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Each manufacture, importation, installation, reinstallation, sale,
or offer for sale in violation of this section shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation.
(R.C. § 4549.20)
LOADS
§ 74.50 PERMIT REQUIRED TO EXCEED LOAD LIMITS.
   (A)   (1)   The municipality, with respect to highways under their
jurisdiction, upon application in writing, shall issue a special regional heavy
hauling permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or
combination of vehicles as follows:
         (a)   At a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum
specified in R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or otherwise not in conformity with
R.C. §§ 4513.01 to 4513.37.
         (b)   Upon any highway under the jurisdiction of municipality except
those highways with a condition insufficient to bear the weight of the vehicle
or combination of vehicles as stated in the application.
         (c)   Issuance of a special regional heavy hauling permit is subject
to the payment of a fee established by the municipality in accordance with this
section.
      (2)   In circumstances where a person is not eligible to receive a permit
under division (A)(1) of this section, the municipality, with respect to
highways under its jurisdiction, upon application in writing and for good cause
shown, may issue a special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to
operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight of
vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in R.C. §§ 5577.01 through
5577.09, or otherwise not in conformity with R.C. §§ 4513.01 through 4513.37,
upon any highway under its jurisdiction.
   (B)   (1)   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 715.22 and 723.01, the holder of a
permit issued by the Ohio Director of Transportation under R.C. § 4513.34 may
move the vehicle or combination of vehicles described in the permit on any
highway that is a part of the state highway system when the movement is partly
within and partly without the corporate limits of the municipality. No local
authority shall require any other permit or license or charge any license fee
or other charge against the holder of a permit for the movement of a vehicle or
combination of vehicles on any highway which is a part of the state highway
system. The Ohio Director of Transportation shall not require the holder of a
permit issued by the municipality to obtain a special permit for the movement
of vehicles or combination of vehicles on highways within the jurisdiction of
the municipality.
      (2)   Except as provided in R.C. § 4513.34(B)(3), permits may be issued
for any period of time not to exceed one year, as the local authority in its
discretion determines advisable or for the duration of any public construction
project.
   (C)   (1)   The application for a permit issued under this section shall be
in the form that the municipality prescribes. The municipality may prescribe a
permit fee to be imposed and collected when any permit described in this
section is issued. The permit fee may be in an amount sufficient to reimburse
the municipality for the administrative costs incurred in issuing the permit,
and also to cover the cost of normal and expected damage caused to the roadway
or a street or highway structure as the result of the operation of the
nonconforming vehicle or combination of vehicles.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section and of rules adopted by the
Director under R.C. § 4513.34, milk transported in bulk by vehicle is deemed a
nondivisible load.
      (3)   For purposes of this section and of rules adopted by the Director
under R.C. § 4513.34, three or fewer aluminum coils, transported by a vehicle,
are deemed a nondivisible load. The Director shall adopt rules establishing
requirements for an aluminum coil permit that are substantially similar to the
requirements for a steel coil permit under O.A.C. Chapter 5501:2-1.
   (D)   The municipality shall issue a special regional heavy hauling permit
under division (A)(1) of this section upon application and payment of the
applicable fee. However, the municipality may issue or withhold a special
permit specified in division (A)(2) of this section. If a permit is to be
issued, the municipality may limit or prescribe conditions of operation for the
vehicle and may require the posting of a bond or other security conditioned
upon the sufficiency of the permit fee to compensate for damage caused to the
roadway or a street or highway structure. In addition, the municipality, as a
condition of issuance of an overweight permit, may require the applicant to
develop and enter into a mutual agreement with the municipality to compensate
for or to repair excess damage caused to the roadway by travel under the
permit.
   (E)   Every permit issued under this section shall be carried in the vehicle
or combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to inspection
by any police officer or authorized agent of any authority granting the permit.
No person shall violate any of the terms of a permit.
   (F)   The Director of Transportation may debar an applicant from applying
for a special permit under this section upon a finding based on a reasonable
belief that the applicant has done any of the actions specified in R.C. §
4513.34(F).
   (G)   Notice and procedures for debarment shall be as provided in R.C. §
4513.34(G).
   (H)   (1)   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this
section that relate to gross load limits.
      (2)   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this
section that relate to axle load by more than 2,000 pounds per axle or group of
axles.
      (3)   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this
section that relate to an approved route except upon order of a law enforcement
officer or authorized agent of the issuing authority.
   (I)   A permit issued by the municipality under this section for the
operation of a vehicle or combination of vehicles is valid for the purposes of
the vehicle operation in accordance with the conditions and limitations
specified on the permit. Such a permit is voidable by law enforcement only for
operation of a vehicle or combination of vehicles in violation of the weight,
dimension, or route provisions of the permit. However, a permit is not voidable
for operation in violation of a route provision of a permit if the operation is
upon the order of a law enforcement officer.
(R.C. § 4513.34)
   (J)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
Statutory reference:
   Overweight or oversized vehicles, state permit regulations, see O.A.C.
Chapter 5501:2-1
§ 74.51 LIMITATION OF LOAD EXTENSION ON LEFT SIDE OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on a highway with any load
carried on the vehicle which extends more than six inches beyond the line of
the fenders on the vehicle’s left side.
(R.C. § 4513.30)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 74.52 ALL LOADS SHALL BE PROPERLY SECURED.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the vehicle
is so constructed, loaded, or covered as to prevent any of its load from
dropping, sifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand
or other substances may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or
water or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or
maintaining the roadway.
   (B)   Except for a farm vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or
agricultural production materials or a rubbish vehicle in the process of
acquiring its load, no vehicle loaded with garbage, swill, cans, bottles, waste
paper, ashes, refuse, trash, rubbish, waste, wire, paper, cartons, boxes,
glass, solid waste, or any other material of an unsanitary nature that is
susceptible to blowing or bouncing from a moving vehicle shall be driven or
moved on any highway unless the load is covered with a sufficient cover to
prevent the load or any part of the load from spilling onto the highway.
(R.C. § 4513.31)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 74.53 TOWING REQUIREMENTS; EXCEPTION TO SIZE AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   When one vehicle is towing another vehicle, the drawbar or other
connection shall be of sufficient strength to pull all the weight towed
thereby, and the drawbar or other connection shall not exceed 15 feet from one
vehicle to the other, except the connection between any two vehicles
transporting poles, pipe, machinery, or other objects of structural nature
which cannot readily be dismembered.
      (2)   When one vehicle is towing another and the connection consists only
of a chain, rope, or cable, there shall be displayed upon such connection a
white flag or cloth not less than 12 inches square.   
      (3)   In addition to such drawbar or other connection, each trailer and
each semitrailer which is not connected to a commercial tractor by means of a
fifth wheel shall be coupled with stay chains or cables to the vehicle by which
it is being drawn. These chains or cables shall be of sufficient size and
strength to prevent the towed vehicle’s parting from the drawing vehicle in
case the drawbar or other connection should break or become disengaged. In case
of a loaded pole trailer, the connecting pole to the drawing vehicle shall be
coupled to the drawing vehicle with stay chains or cables of sufficient size
and strength to prevent the towed vehicle’s parting from the drawing vehicle.
      (4)   Every trailer or semitrailer, except pole and cable trailers and
pole and cable dollies operated by a public utility as defined in R.C. §
5727.01, shall be equipped with a coupling device which shall be so designed
and constructed that the trailer will follow substantially in the path of the
vehicle drawing it, without whipping or swerving from side to side. Vehicles
used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production materials
between a local place of storage and supply and the farm, when drawn or towed
on a street or highway at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less, and vehicles
designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage
and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or
highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per
hour or less, shall have a drawbar or other connection, including the hitch
mounted on the towing vehicle, which shall be of sufficient strength to pull
all the weight towed thereby. Only one such vehicle used to transport
agricultural produce or agricultural production materials as provided in this
section may be towed or drawn at one time except as follows:
         (a)   An agricultural tractor may tow or draw more than one such
vehicle;
         (b)   A pickup truck or straight truck designed by the manufacturer to
carry a load of not less than one-half ton and not more than two tons may tow
or draw not more than two such vehicles that are being used to transport
agricultural produce from the farm to a local place of storage. No vehicle
being so towed by such a pickup truck or straight truck shall be considered to
be a motor vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.32)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
   (C)   Exception to size and weight restrictions.
      (1)   The size and weight provisions of this chapter and R.C. Chapter
5577 do not apply to a any of the following:
         (a)   A person who is engaged in the initial towing or removal of a
wrecked or disabled motor vehicle from the site of an emergency on a public
highway where the vehicle became wrecked or disabled to the nearest site where
the vehicle can be brought into conformance with the requirements of this
chapter and R.C. Chapter 5577, to the nearest storage facility, or to the
nearest qualified repair facility;
         (b)   A person who is en route to the site of an emergency on a public
highway to remove a wrecked or disabled motor vehicle;
         (c)   A person who is returning from delivering a wrecked or disabled
motor vehicle to a site, storage facility, or repair facility as specified in
division (C)(1)(a) of this section.
      (2)   Any subsequent towing of a wrecked or disabled vehicle shall comply
with the size and weight provisions of this chapter and R.C. Chapter 5577.
      (3)   No court shall impose any penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99 or
the civil liability established in R.C. § 5577.12 upon a person who is
operating a vehicle in the manner described in division (C)(1) of this section.
(R.C. § 5577.15)
§ 74.54 WEIGHING OF VEHICLE; REMOVAL OF EXCESS LOAD.
   (A)   Any police officer having reason to believe that the weight of a
vehicle and its load is unlawful may require the driver of the vehicle to stop
and submit to a weighing of it by means of a compact, self-contained, portable,
sealed scale specially adapted to determining the wheel loads of vehicles on
highways; a sealed scale permanently installed in a fixed location, having a
load-receiving element specially adapted to determining the wheel loads of
highway vehicles; a sealed scale, permanently installed in a fixed location,
having a load-receiving element specially adapted to determining the combined
load of all wheels on a single axle or on successive axles of a highway
vehicle; or a sealed scale adapted to weighing highway vehicles, loaded or
unloaded.
   (B)   The driver of the vehicle shall, if necessary, be directed to proceed
to the nearest available sealed scales to accomplish the weighing, provided the
scales are within three miles of the point where the vehicle is stopped.
   (C)   Any vehicle stopped in accordance with this section may be held by the
police officer for a reasonable time only to accomplish the weighing as
prescribed by this section.
   (D)   All scales used in determining the lawful weight of a vehicle and its
load shall be annually compared by a municipal, county or state sealer with the
state standards or standards approved by the state, and the scales shall not be
sealed if they do not conform to the state standards or standards approved by
the state.
   (E)   At each end of a permanently installed scale, there shall be a
straight approach in the same plane as the platform, of sufficient length and
width to insure the level positioning of vehicles during weight determinations.
During determination of weight by compact, self-contained, portable, sealed
scales, specially adapted to determining the wheel loads of vehicles on
highways, they shall always be used on a level terrain of sufficient length and
width to accommodate the entire vehicle being weighed. Such terrain shall be
level, or if not level, it shall be of such elevation that the difference in
elevation between the wheels on any one axle does not exceed two inches and the
difference in elevation between axles being weighed does not exceed one-quarter
inch per foot of the distance between such axles.
   (F)   In all determinations of all weights, except gross weight, by compact,
self-contained, portable, sealed scales, specially adapted to determining the
wheel loads of vehicles on highways, all successive axles, 12 feet or less
apart, shall be weighed simultaneously by placing one such scale under the
outside wheel of each such axle. In determinations of gross weight by the use
of compact, self-contained, portable, sealed scales, specially adapted to
determining the wheel loads of vehicles on highways, all axles shall be weighed
simultaneously by placing one such scale under the outside wheel of each axle.
   (G)   Whenever an officer, upon weighing a vehicle and load, determines that
the weight is unlawful, he or she may require the driver to stop the vehicle in
a suitable place and remain standing until such portion of the load is removed
as is necessary to reduce the weight of the vehicle to the limit permitted
under R.C. §§ 5577.01 through 5577.14 and this chapter.
(R.C. § 4513.33)
Statutory reference:
   Alteration of weight limits, approval of Director required, see R.C. §
4513.33
§ 74.55 OPERATION OF VEHICLE EXCEEDING WEIGHT LIMITS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall operate or move a traction engine, steam roller, or
other vehicle, load, object or structure, whether propelled by muscular or
motor power, over or upon the improved public streets, highways, bridges, or
culverts in this municipality, that weighs in excess of the weights prescribed
in this subchapter or R.C. §§ 5577.01 et seq., unless the person has been
issued a permit under R.C. § 4513.34, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance. The prohibition in this section applies regardless of whether the
weight is moved upon wheels, rollers, or other-wise. Any weight determination
shall include the weight of the vehicle, object, structure, contrivance, and
load.
(R.C. § 5577.02)
   (B)   Whoever violates the weight provisions of this section shall be fined
$80 for the first 2,000 pounds, or fraction thereof, of overload; for overloads
in excess of 2,000 pounds, but not in excess of 5,000 pounds, such person shall
be fined $100, and in addition thereto $1 per 100 pounds of overload; for
overloads in excess of 5,000 pounds but not in excess of 10,000 pounds, such
person shall be fined $130, and in addition thereto $2 per 100 pounds of
overload, or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. For all overloads in
excess of 10,000 pounds, such person shall be fined $160, and in addition
thereto $3 per 100 pounds of overload, or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or
both. Whoever violates the weight provisions of vehicle and load relating to
gross load limits shall be fined not less than $100. No penalty prescribed in
this division (B)(2) shall be imposed on any vehicle combination if the
overload on any one axle does not exceed 1,000 pounds, and if the immediately
preceding or following axle, excepting the front axle of the vehicle
combination, is underloaded by the same or greater amount. For purposes of this
division (B)(2), two axles on one vehicle less than eight feet apart shall be
considered as one axle.
(R.C. § 5577.99(A))
§ 74.56 LOAD LIMITS.
   (A)   Weight of load; width of tire. No person, firm or corporation shall
transport over the improved public streets, alleys, intercounty highways, state
highways, bridges or culverts in this municipality, in any vehicle propelled by
muscular, motor or other power, any burden, including weight of vehicle and
load, greater than the following:
      (1)   (a)   In vehicles having metal tires three inches or less in width,
a load of 500 pounds for each inch of the total width of the tire on all
wheels;
         (b)   When the tires on such vehicles exceed three inches in width, an
additional load of 800 pounds shall be permitted for each inch by which the
total width of the tires on all wheels exceeds 12 inches.
      (2)   In vehicles having tires of rubber or other similar substance, for
each inch of the total width of tires on all wheels, as follows:
         Tire Width         Load Limit
         (in inches)         (in pounds)
         3            450
         3.5            450
         4            500
         5            600
         6 and over         650
      (3)   The total width of tires on all wheels shall be, in the case of
solid tires of rubber or other similar substance, the actual width in inches of
all such tires between the flanges at the base of the tires, but in no event
shall that portion of tire coming in contact with the road surface be less than
two-thirds the width so measured between the flanges.
      (4)   In the case of pneumatic tires, of rubber or other similar
substance, the total width of tires on all wheels shall be the actual width of
all such tires, measured at the widest portion thereof when inflated and not
bearing a load.
      (5)   In no event shall the load, including the proportionate weight of
vehicle that can be concentrated on any wheel, exceed 650 pounds to each inch
in width of the tread as defined in this division (A) for solid tires, or each
inch in the actual diameter of pneumatic tires measured when inflated and not
bearing a load.
(R.C. § 5577.03)
   (B)   Vehicles with pneumatic tires, load limits.
      (1)   The maximum wheel load of any one wheel of any vehicle, load,
object or structure operated or moved upon improved public highways, streets,
bridges or culverts shall not exceed 650 pounds per inch width of pneumatic
tire, measured as prescribed by division (A) of this section.
      (2)   The weight of the vehicle and load imposed upon a road surface that
is part of the interstate system by vehicles with pneumatic tires shall not
exceed any of the following weight limitations:
         (a)   On any one axle, 20,000 pounds;
         (b)   On any tandem axle, 34,000 pounds;
         (c)   On any two or more consecutive axles, the maximum weight as
determined by application of the formula provided in division (B)(3) of this
section.
      (3)   (a)   For purposes of division (B)(2)(c) of this section, the
maximum gross weight on any two or more consecutive axles shall be determined
by application of the following formula: W = 500[(LN/–1) + 12N + 36]
         (b)   In this formula, W equals the overall gross weight on any group
of two or more consecutive axles to the nearest 500 pounds, L equals the
distance in rounded whole feet between the extreme of any group of two or more
consecutive axles, and N equals the number of axles in the group under
consideration. However, two consecutive sets of tandem axles may carry a gross
load of 34,000 pounds each, provided the overall distance between the first and
last axles of such consecutive sets of tandem axles is 36 feet or more.
      (4)   Except as provided in division (B)(9) of this section, the weight
of vehicle and load imposed upon a road surface that is not part of the
interstate system by vehicles with pneumatic tires shall not exceed any of the
following weight limitations:
         (a)   On any one axle, 20,000 pounds.
         (b)   On any two successive axles:
            1.   Spaced four feet or less apart, and weighed simultaneously,
24,000 pounds;
            2.   Spaced more than four feet apart, and weighed simultaneously,
34,000 pounds, plus 1,000 pounds per foot or fraction thereof, over four feet,
not to exceed 40,000 pounds.
         (c)   On any three successive load-bearing axles designed to equalize
the load between such axles and spaced so that each such axle of the three-axle
group is more than four feet from the next axle in the three-axle group and so
that the spacing between the first axle and the third axle in the three-axle
group is no more than nine feet, and with such load-bearing three-axle group
weighed simultaneously as a unit:
            1.   A weight of 48,000 pounds, with the total weight of the
vehicle and load not exceeding 38,000 pounds plus an additional 900 pounds for
each foot of spacing between the front axle and the rearmost axle of the
vehicle;
            2.   As an alternative to division (B)(4)(c)1. of this section,
42,500 pounds, if part of a six-axle vehicle combination with at least 20 feet
of spacing between the front axle and rearmost axle, with the total weight of
the vehicle and load not exceeding 54,000 pounds plus an additional 600 pounds
per each foot of spacing between the front axle and the rearmost axle of the
vehicle.
         (d)   The total weight of the vehicle and load utilizing any
combination of axles, other than as provided for three-axle groups in division
(B)(4) of this section, shall not exceed 38,000 pounds plus an additional 900
pounds for each foot of spacing between the front axle and the rearmost axle of
the vehicle.
      (5)   Notwithstanding divisions (B)(2) and (B)(4) of this section, the
maximum overall gross weight of a vehicle and load imposed upon the road
surface shall not exceed 80,000 pounds.
      (6)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, when a vehicle is
towing another vehicle, such drawbar or other connection shall be of a length
such as will limit the spacing between nearest axles of the respective vehicles
to a distance not in excess of 12.5 feet.
      (7)   As used in division (B)(2) of this section, TANDEM AXLE means two
or more consecutive axles whose centers may be included between parallel
transverse vertical planes spaced more than 40 inches but not more than 96
inches apart, extending across the full width of the vehicle.
      (8)   This division (B) does not apply to passenger bus type vehicles
operated by a regional transit authority pursuant to R.C. §§ 306.30 through
306.54.
      (9)   Either division (B)(2) or (B)(4) of this section applies to the
weight of a vehicle and its load imposed upon any road surface that is not a
part of the interstate system by vehicles with pneumatic tires. As between
divisions (B)(2) and (B)(4) of this section, only the division that yields the
highest total gross vehicle weight limit shall be applied to any such vehicle.
Once that division has been determined, only the limits contained in the
subdivisions of that division shall apply to that vehicle.
(R.C. § 5577.04)
   (C)   Axle and wheel load, gross weights and towing connection length for
solid rubber tires.
      (1)   No vehicle, load, object or structure having a maximum axle load
greater than 16,000 pounds when such vehicle is equipped with solid rubber
tires shall be operated or moved upon the improved public highways, streets,
bridges or culverts. The maximum wheel load of any one wheel of such vehicle
shall not exceed 650 pounds per inch width of tire, measured as prescribed by
division (A) of this section, nor shall any solid tire or rubber or other
resilient material, on any wheel of any such vehicle, be less than one-inch
thick when measure from the top of the flanges of the tire channel.
      (2)   The weight of vehicle and load imposed upon the road surface by any
two successive axles, spaces four feet or less apart, shall not exceed 19,000
pounds for solid tires; or by any two successive axles spaced more than four
feet but less than eight feet apart, shall not exceed 24,000 pounds for solid
tires; or by any two successive axles, spaced eight feet or more apart, shall
not exceed 28,000 pounds for solid tires; nor shall the total weight of vehicle
and load exceed, for solid rubber tires, 28,000 pounds plus an additional 600
pounds for each foot or fraction thereof of spacing between the front axle and
the rear-most axle of the vehicle; nor shall the weight of the vehicle and load
imposed upon the road surface by any vehicle equipped with solid rubber tires
exceed 80% of the permissible weight of vehicle and load as provided for
pneumatic tires.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, when a vehicle is
towing another vehicle, such drawbar or other connection shall be of a length
such as will limit the spacing between the nearest axles of the respective
vehicles to a distance not in excess of 12.5 feet. If the provisions of this
division (C) are held to exceed the weight limitations or other provisions set
forth in the “Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1958”, 72 Stat. 902, 23 U.S.C. § 127,
this division (C) shall become null and void to the extent of such
inconsistency.
(R.C. § 5577.041)
   (D)   Penalties.
      (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second or subsequent offense, such person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 5577.99(C))
      (2)   Whoever violates the weight provisions of this section shall be
punished as set forth in §
74.55(B).
   (E)   Modification of load limits. The load limits established in this
section may be modified or waived upon special permission granted as provided
in R.C. § 4513.34 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
§ 74.57 MAXIMUM WIDTH, HEIGHT, AND LENGTH.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be operated upon the public high-ways, streets,
bridges, and culverts within this municipality whose dimensions exceed those
specified in this section.
   (B)   No such vehicle shall have a width:
      (1)   In excess of 104 inches for passenger bus type vehicles operated
exclusively within the municipality.
      (2)   In excess of 102 inches, excluding such safety devices as are
required by law, for passenger bus type vehicles operated over freeways, and
such other state roads with minimum pavement widths of 22 feet, except those
roads or portions of roads over which operation of 102-inch buses is prohibited
by order of the Director of Transportation.
      (3)   In excess of 132 inches for traction engines.
      (4)   In excess of 102 inches for recreational vehicles, excluding safety
devices and retracted awnings and other appurtenances of six inches or less in
width and except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch
recreational vehicles on designated state highways or portions of highways.
      (5)   In excess of 102 inches, including load, for all other vehicles,
except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch vehicles on
such state highways or portions of state highways as the Director designates.
   (C)   No such vehicle shall have a length:
      (1)   In excess of 66 feet for passenger bus type vehicles and
articulated passenger bus type vehicles operated by a regional transit
authority pursuant to R.C. §§ 306.30 through 306.54.
      (2)   In excess of 45 feet for all other passenger bus type vehicles.
      (3)   In excess of 53 feet for any semitrailer when operated in a
commercial tractor-semitrailer combination, with or without load, except that
the Director may prohibit the operation of any such commercial tractor-
semitrailer combination on such state highways or portions of state highways as
the Director designates.
      (4)   In excess of 28.5 feet for any semitrailer or trailer when operated
in a commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-semitrailer-
semitrailer combination, except that the Director may prohibit the operation of
any such commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-
semitrailer-semitrailer combination on such state highways or portions of state
highways as the Director designates.
      (5)   (a)   In excess of 97 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle
transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle
transporter combinations when operated on any interstate, United States route,
or state route, including reasonable access travel on all other roadways for a
distance not to exceed one road mile from any interstate, United States route,
or state route, not to exceed three saddlemounted vehicles, but which may
include one fullmount;
         (b)   In excess of 75 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle
transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle
transporter combinations when operated on any roadway not designated as an
interstate, United States route, or state route, not to exceed three
saddlemounted vehicles, but which may include one fullmount.
      (6)   In excess of 65 feet for any other combination of vehicles coupled
together, with or without load, except as provided in division (C)(3) and (C)
(4), and in division (E) below.
      (7)   In excess of 45 feet for recreational vehicles.
      (8)   In excess of 50 feet for all other vehicles, except trailers and
semitrailers, with or without load.
   (D)   No such vehicle shall have a height in excess of 13.5 feet, with or
without load.
   (E)   An automobile transporter or boat transporter shall be allowed a
length of 65 feet, and a stinger-steered automobile transporter or stinger-
steered boat transporter shall be allowed a length of 75 feet, except that the
load thereon may extend no more than four feet beyond the rear of such vehicles
and may extend no more than three feet beyond the front of such vehicles, and
except further that the Director may prohibit the operation of a stinger-
steered automobile transporter, stinger-steered boat transporter, or a B-train
assembly on any state highway or portion of any state highway that the Director
designates.
   (F)   (1)   The widths prescribed in division (B) of this section shall not
include side mirrors, turn signal lamps, marker lamps, handholds for cab entry
and egress, flexible fender extensions, mud flaps, splash and spray suppressant
devices, and load-induced tire bulge.
      (2)   The widths prescribed in division (B)(5) of this section shall not
include automatic covering devices, tarp and tarp hardware, and tiedown
assemblies, provided these safety devices do not extend more than three inches
from either side of the vehicle.
      (3)   The lengths prescribed in divisions (C)(2) through (C)(7) shall not
include safety devices, bumpers attached to the front or rear of such bus or
combination, non-property carrying devices or components that do not extend
more than 24 inches beyond the rear of the vehicle and are needed for loading
or unloading, B-train assembly used between the first and second semitrailer of
a commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination, energy conservation
devices as provided in any regulations adopted by the Secretary of the United
States Department of Transportation, or any noncargo-carrying refrigerator
equipment attached to the front of trailers and semitrailers. In special cases,
vehicles that dimensions exceed those prescribed by this section may operate in
accordance with rules adopted by the Director.
   (G)   (1)   This section does not apply to fire engines, fire trucks, or
other vehicles or apparatus belonging to the municipality or to the volunteer
fire department thereof or used by such department in the discharge of its
functions. This section does not apply to vehicles and pole trailers used in
the transportation of wooden and metal poles, nor to the transportation of
pipes or well-drilling equipment, nor to farm machinery and equipment.
      (2)   The owner or operator of any vehicle, machinery, or equipment not
specifically enumerated in this section but the dimensions of which exceed the
dimensions provided by this section, when operating the same on the highways
and streets of the municipality, shall comply with the rules of the Director
governing such movement. Any person adversely affected shall have the same
right of appeal as provided in R.C. Chapter 119.
      (3)   This section does not require the municipality or any railroad or
other private corporation to provide sufficient vertical clearance to permit
the operation of such vehicle, or to make any changes in or about existing
structures now crossing streets, roads, and other public thoroughfares.
   (H)   As used in this section, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 4501.01.
(R.C. § 5577.05)
   (I)   No person shall violate any rule or regulation promulgated by the
Director of Transportation in accordance with R.C. § 5577.05.
(R.C. § 5577.06)
   (J)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second or subsequent offense, such person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 5577.99(C))
§ 74.58 STATEMENT OF GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT.
   (A)   No person shall issue or aid in issuing any bill of lading or other
document of like nature in lieu thereof, which bill or document is to accompany
a shipment of goods or property by truck, trailer, semitrailer, commercial
tractor, or any other commercial vehicle used for the transportation of
property, the gross weight of which, with load, exceeds three tons, with intent
to defraud by misrepresentation thereon the weight of such goods of property to
be so transported.
   (B)   Any driver or operator of a commercial car, trailer or semitrailer may
obtain from any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association,
including the owner, lessee, or operator of such commercial car, trailer or
semitrailer, owning and operating sealed scales in this state, a written
“statement of gross vehicle weight” showing the gross weight of the vehicle
including the cargo on the vehicle, the name and address of the person issuing
the statement, and the date and place where the vehicle and its cargo were
weighed. The driver or operator of the commercial car, trailer or semitrailer
shall retain such statement of gross vehicle weight on his or her person, and
any law enforcement officer may request that such driver or operator exhibit it
to him or her. If, upon examining the statement of gross vehicle weight, the
law enforcement officer has reason to believe that the information contained
therein is correct in every respect, he or she shall indorse it with his or her
name and the date and place where it was exhibited to him or her. The law
enforcement officer may then permit such driver or operator to proceed without
weighing by a law enforcement officer. No person shall willfully issue a
written statement of gross vehicle weight and knowingly give any false
information in such statement.
(R.C. § 5577.10)
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be fined not more
than $5,000 or imprisoned for not less than 30 days nor more than six months,
or both.
(R.C. § 5577.99(D))
§ 74.59 WHEEL PROTECTORS REQUIRED ON HEAVY COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person shall drive or operate, or cause to be driven or operated,
any commercial car, trailer, or semitrailer, used for the transportation of
goods or property, the gross weight of which, with load, exceeds three tons,
upon the public highways, streets, bridges, and culverts within the
municipality, unless such vehicle is equipped with suitable metal protectors or
substantial flexible flaps on the rearmost wheels of such vehicle or
combination of vehicles to prevent, as far as practicable, the wheels from
throwing dirt, water, or other materials on the windshields of following
vehicles. Such protectors or flaps shall have a ground clearance of not more
than one-third of the distance from the center of the rearmost axle to the
center of the flaps under any conditions of loading of the vehicle, and they
shall be at least as wide as the tires they are protecting. If the vehicle is
so designed and constructed that such requirements are accomplished by means of
fenders, body construction, or other means of enclosure, then no such
protectors or flaps are required. Rear wheels not covered at the top by
fenders, bodies, or other parts of the vehicle shall be covered at the top by
protective means extending at least to the center line of the rearmost axle.
(R.C. § 5577.11)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $25.
(R.C. § 5577.99(E))
§ 74.60 LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES; PROSECUTION; APPLICATION OF MONIES.
   Any person violating any law relating to or regulating the use of the
improved public roads shall be liable for all damage resulting to any such
street, highway, bridge or culvert by reason of such violation. In case of any
injury to such street, highway, bridge or culvert, such damages shall be
collected by civil action for recovery of such damages brought by the proper
authorities of the municipality. All damages collected under this section shall
be paid into the treasury of the municipality and credited to any fund for the
repairs of streets, highways, roads, bridges or culverts.
(R.C. § 5577.12)
§ 74.61 WEIGHT EXCEPTIONS FOR CERTAIN VEHICLES.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      COAL TRUCK. Means a truck transporting coal from the site where it is
mined when the truck is operated in accordance with this section.
      FARM COMMODITIES. Includes livestock, bulk milk, corn, soybeans, tobacco
and wheat.
      FARM MACHINERY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      FARM TRUCK. Means a truck used in the transportation from a farm of farm
commodities when the truck is operated in accordance with this section.
      LOG TRUCK. Means a truck used in the transportation of timber from the
site of its cutting when the truck is operated in accordance with this section.
      SOLID WASTE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3743.01.
      SOLID WASTE HAUL VEHICLE. Means a vehicle hauling solid waste for which a
bill of lading has not been issued.
   (B)   (1)   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 5577.02 and 5577.04, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the following vehicles under the
described conditions may exceed by no more than 7.5% the weight provisions of
R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, and no penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be imposed:
         (a)   A coal truck transporting coal, from the place of production to
the first point of delivery where title to the coal is transferred;
         (b)   A farm truck or farm machinery transporting farm commodities,
from the place of production to the first point of delivery where the
commodities are weighed and title to the commodities is transferred;
         (c)   A log truck transporting timber, from the site of its cutting to
the first point of delivery where the timber is transferred;
         (d)   A solid waste haul vehicle hauling solid waste, from the place
of production to the first point of delivery where the solid waste is disposed
of or title to the solid waste is transferred.
      (2)   In addition, if any of the vehicles listed in division (B)(1) of
this section and operated under the conditions described in that division does
not exceed by more than 7.5% the gross vehicle weight provisions of R.C. §§
5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and
does not exceed the wheel or axle-load limits of those sections by more than
7.5%, no penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, for a wheel or axle overload shall be imposed.
   (C)   If any of the vehicles listed in division (B)(1) of this section and
operated under the conditions described in that division exceeds the weight
provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, by more than the percentage allowance of either divisions
(B)(1) or (B)(2) of this section, both of the following apply without regard to
the allowance provided by this division (B) of this section:
      (1)   The applicable penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (2)   The civil liability imposed by R.C. § 5577.12, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (D)   (1)   Division (B) of this section does not apply to the operation of
a farm truck, log truck, or farm machinery transporting farm commodities during
the months of February and March.
      (2)   Regardless of when the operation occurs, division (B) of this
section does not apply to the operation of a vehicle on either of the
following:
         (a)   A highway that is part of the interstate system;
         (b)   A highway, road, or bridge that is subject to reduced maximum
weights under R.C. § 4513.33, 5577.07, 5577.071, 5577.08, 5577.09, or 5591.42,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 5577.042)
   (E)   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 5577.02 and 5577.04, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the following vehicles under the described
conditions may exceed by no more than 7.5% the weight provisions of R.C. §§
5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and no
penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, shall be imposed:
      (1)   A surface mining truck transporting minerals from the place where
the minerals are loaded to any of the following:
         (a)   The construction site where the minerals are discharged;
         (b)   The place where title to the minerals is transferred;
         (c)   The place of processing.
      (2)   A vehicle transporting hot mix asphalt material from the place
where the material is first mixed to the paving site where the material is
discharged;
      (3)   A vehicle transporting concrete from the place where the material
is first mixed to the site where the material is discharged;
      (4)   A vehicle transporting manure, turf, sod, or silage from the site
where the material is first produced to the first place of delivery;
      (5)   A vehicle transporting chips, sawdust, mulch, bark, pulpwood,
biomass, or firewood from the site where the product is first produced or
harvested to first point where the product is transferred.
   (F)   In addition, if any of the vehicles listed in division (E) of this
section and operated under the conditions described in that division do not
exceed by more than 7.5% the gross vehicle weight provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01
to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and do not
exceed the wheel or axle-load limits of those sections by more than 7.5%, no
penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, for a wheel or axle overload shall be imposed.
   (G)   If any of the vehicles listed in division (E) of this section and
operated under the conditions described in that division exceed the weight
provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, by more than the percentage allowance of either divisions
(E) or (F) of this section, both of the following apply without regard to the
allowance provided by division (E) or (F) of this section:
      (1)   The applicable penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (2)   The civil liability imposed by R.C. § 5577.12, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (H)   Divisions (E) and (F) of this section do not apply to the operation of
a vehicle listed in division (E) of this section on either of the following:
      (1)   A highway that is part of the interstate system;
      (2)   A highway, road, or bridge that is subject to reduced maximum
weights under R.C. § 4513.33, 5577.07, 5577.071, 5577.08, 5577.09, or 5591.42,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 5577.043)
   (I)   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 5577.02 and 5577.04, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, a vehicle fueled solely by compressed natural
gas or liquid natural gas or powered primarily by means of an electric battery
may exceed by not more than 2,000 pounds the gross vehicle weight provisions of
R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, or the axle load limits of those sections.
   (J)   If a vehicle described in division (I) of this section exceeds the
weight provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, by more than the allowance provided for in
division (I) of this section, both of the following apply:
      (1)   The applicable penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (2)   The civil liability imposed by R.C. § 5577.12, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (K)   Division (I) of this section does not apply to the operation of a
vehicle on a highway, road, or bridge that is subject to reduced maximum
weights under R.C. § 4513.33, 5577.07, 5577.071, 5577.08, 5577.09, or 5591.42,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 5577.044)
   (L)   Fire engine weight exemptions. 
      (1)   As used in this division (L), FIRE ENGINE means a fire engine, fire
truck, or other vehicle or apparatus belonging to or used by any municipal,
township, or volunteer fire department, while in the discharge of its
functions.
      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 5577.02 and 5577.04, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, a person may do both of the following without a
written permit issued under R.C. § 4513.34, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance:
         (a)   Operate a two-axle fire engine, with a front axle maximum weight
of 24,000 pounds and a rear axle maximum weight of 33,500 pounds and a minimum
wheelbase of 15 feet, on all roadways in the state;
         (b)   Operate a fire engine with a maximum gross vehicle weight of
86,000 pounds on the interstate highway system and within one road mile of an
interstate highway system entrance or exit ramp.
      (3)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 4513.34, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, for any fire engine that requires a permit, the Ohio
Director of Transportation or local authority shall do both of the following:
         (a)   Issue the permit at no cost to the municipal, township, or
volunteer fire department;
         (b)   Issue a permit that expires five years after the date of
issuance.
(R.C. § 5577.045)
§ 74.62 WEIGHT LIMITS ON BRIDGES.
   (A)   The gross weight limit for and loaded motor vehicles traversing the
bridge located on Old U.S. 52 is a maximum of 30 tons.
   (B)   The load limit on the Twelve Mile Creek Bridge within the village is
12 tons, per recommendation of the County Engineer’s Office.
(Ord. 1983-26, passed 11-22-1983; Ord. 1986-5, passed 2-11-1986)
CHAPTER 75: BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES AND
OFF-ROAD VEHICLES
Section
General Provisions
   
75.01   Bicycles; application of Title VII
   
75.02   Operation of motorized bicycle
   
75.03   Electric bicycles
   
75.04   Rules for bicycles, motorcycles, and snowmobiles
   
75.05   Prohibition against attaching bicycles and sleds to vehicles
   
75.06   Riding bicycles; motorcycles abreast
   
75.07   Equipment of bicycles
Snowmobiles, Off-Highway Motorcycles, and All-Purpose Vehicles
   
75.20   Definitions
   
75.21   Equipment
   
75.22   Code application; prohibited operation
   
75.23   Permitted operation
   
75.24   Licensing requirements of operator
   
75.25   Maintenance of vehicles for hire
   
75.26   Accident reports
   
75.27   Impounding of vehicle
   
75.28   Local control within police power
   
75.29   Registration of vehicles
   
75.30   Certificate of title; prohibitions
Golf Carts
   
75.45   Definition
   
75.46   Restrictions
   
75.47   Equipment
   
75.48   Licensing requirement of operator
   
75.49   Village inspection
   
75.50   Usage and restriction; waiver
 
   
75.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Bicycle regulations to be consistent with state law, see R.C. § 4511.07(A)
(8)
   Protective eye devices required for motorcycle operators and passengers;
helmets required for persons under 18 years of age, see O.A.C. § 4501-17-01
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 75.01 BICYCLES; APPLICATION OF TITLE VII.
   (A)   The provisions of this title that are applicable to bicycles and
electric bicycles apply whenever a bicycle or electric bicycle is operated upon
any highway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (D) of this section, a bicycle operator
or electric bicycle operator who violates any provisions of this title
described in division (A) of this section that is applicable to bicycles or
electric bicycles may be issued a ticket, citation, or summons by a law
enforcement officer for the violation in the same manner as the operator of a
motor vehicle would be cited for the same violation. A person who commits any
such violation while operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall not have any
points assessed against the person’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, or probationary license under R.C. §
4510.036.
   (C)   Except as provided in division (D) of this section, in the case of a
violation of any provision of this title described in division (A) of this
section by a bicycle operator, electric bicycle operator, or motor vehicle
operator when the trier of fact finds that the violation by the motor vehicle
operator endangered the lives of bicycle riders or electric bicycle riders at
the time of the violation, the court, notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio
Revised Code to the contrary, may require the bicycle operator, electric
bicycle operator, or motor vehicle operator to take and successfully complete a
bicycling skills course approved by the court in addition to or in lieu of any
penalty otherwise prescribed by this Traffic Code or the Ohio Revised Code for
that violation.
   (D)   Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to violations of
R.C. § 4511.19, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 4511.52)
§ 75.02 OPERATION OF MOTORIZED BICYCLE.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motorized bicycle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking, unless all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The person is 14 or 15 years of age and holds a valid probationary
motorized bicycle license issued after the person has passed the test provided
for in this section, or the person is 16 years of age or older and holds either
a valid commercial driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4506 or a
driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid motorized bicycle
license issued after the person has passed the test provided for in this
section, except that if a person is 16 years of age, has a valid probationary
motorized bicycle license and desires a motorized bicycle license, the person
is not required to comply with the testing requirements provided for in this
section.
      (2)   The motorized bicycle is equipped in accordance with the rules
adopted under division (B) of this section and is in proper working order.
      (3)   The person, if under 18 years of age, is wearing a protective
helmet on the person’s head with the chin strap properly fastened and the
motorized bicycle is equipped with a rearview mirror.
      (4)   The person operates the motorized bicycle when practicable within
three feet of the right edge of the roadway obeying all traffic rules
applicable to vehicles.
   (B)   The Director of Public Safety, subject to R.C. Chapter 119, shall
adopt and promulgate rules concerning protective helmets, the equipment of
motorized bicycles, and the testing and qualifications of persons who do not
hold a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license. The test shall be as near
as practicable to the examination required for a motorcycle operator’s
endorsement under R.C. § 4507.11. The test shall also require the operator to
give an actual demonstration of the operator’s ability to operate and control a
motorized bicycle by driving one under the supervision of an examining officer.
   (C)   Every motorized bicycle license expires on the birthday of the
applicant in the fourth or eighth year after the date it is issued, based on
the period of renewal requested by the applicant. No motorized bicycle license
shall be issued for a period longer than eight years. A person who is 65 years
of age or older may only apply for a motorized bicycle license that expires on
the birthday of the applicant in the fourth year after the date it is issued.
   (D)   No person operating a motorized bicycle shall carry another person
upon the motorized bicycle.
   (E)   The protective helmet and rearview mirror required by division (A)(3)
of this section shall, on and after January 1, 1985, conform with rules adopted
by the Director under division (B) of this section.
   (F)   Whoever violates division (A), (D), or (E) of this section is guilty
of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.521)
Statutory reference:
   Suspension of probationary motorized bicycle license by the state, see R.C.
§ 4510.34
§ 75.03 ELECTRIC BICYCLES.
   (A)   (1)   On and after January 1, 2020, manufacturers and distributors of
electric bicycles shall permanently affix a label, in a prominent location, to
each electric bicycle. The label shall specify whether the electric bicycle is
a class 1, class 2, or class 3 electric bicycle, the top assisted speed that
the electric bicycle is capable of reaching, and the motor wattage of the
electric bicycle.
      (2)   No person shall modify an electric bicycle in a manner that changes
the top assisted speed that the electric bicycle is capable of reaching unless
the person also modifies the label required under division (A)(1) of this
section to reflect the modification.
   (B)   (1)   The manufacturer of an electric bicycle shall ensure that the
electric bicycle complies with the equipment and manufacturing requirements for
bicycles established by the consumer product safety commission under 16 C.F.R.
§§ 1512 et seq.
      (2)   The manufacturer shall manufacture all class 1 electric bicycles
and class 3 electric bicycles so that when the rider ceases pedaling the
electric motor ceases to provide assistance. The manufacturer shall manufacture
all class 2 electric bicycles so that when the rider applies the brakes or
releases or activates a switch or similar mechanism the electric motor ceases
to provide assistance.
      (3)   All class 3 electric bicycles shall be equipped with a speedometer
that displays the speed of the electric bicycle in miles per hour.
   (C)   (1)   The operation of a class 1 electric bicycle and a class 2
electric bicycle is permitted on a path set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles or on a shared-use path, unless the county, township, municipal
corporation, other local authority, or state agency as defined in R.C. § 1.60
with control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule prohibits the use
of a class 1 electric bicycle or class 2 electric bicycle on such a path.
      (2)   No person shall operate a class 3 electric bicycle on a path set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles or a shared-use path unless that path
is within or adjacent to a highway or the county, township, municipal
corporation, or local authority, or state agency as defined in R.C. § 1.60 with
control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule authorizes the use of a
class 3 electric bicycle on such a path.
      (3)   No person shall operate a class 1 electric bicycle, a class 2
electric bicycle, or a class 3 electric bicycle on a path that is intended to
be used primarily for mountain biking, hiking, equestrian use, or other similar
uses, or any other single track or natural surface trail that has historically
been reserved for non-motorized use, unless the county, township, municipal
corporation, other local authority, or state agency as defined in R.C. § 1.60
with control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule authorizes the use
of a class 1 electric bicycle, a class 2 electric bicycle, or a class 3
electric bicycle on such a path.
      (4)   Divisions (C)(2) and (C)(3) of this section do not apply to a law
enforcement officer, or other person sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic
laws of the state, using an electric bicycle while in the performance of the
officer’s duties.
   (D)   (1)   No person under 16 years of age shall operate a class 3 electric
bicycle; however, a person under 16 years of age may ride as a passenger on a
class 3 electric bicycle that is designed to accommodate passengers.
      (2)   No person shall operate or be a passenger on a class 3 electric
bicycle unless the person is wearing a protective helmet that meets the
standards established by the Consumer Product Safety Commission or the American
Society for Testing and Materials.
   (E)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever operates
an electric bicycle in a manner that is prohibited under division (C) of this
section and whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   The offenses established under division (E)(1) of this section are
strict liability offenses and strict liability is a culpable mental state for
purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of these offenses as strict
liability offenses shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
(R.C. § 4511.522)
§ 75.04 RULES FOR BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES, AND SNOWMOBILES.
   (A)   As used in this section, SNOWMOBILE has the same meaning as given that
term in R.C. § 4519.01.
   (B)   (1)   No person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall ride
other than upon or astride the permanent and regular seat attached thereto or
carry any other person upon such bicycle or electric bicycle other than upon a
firmly attached and regular seat thereon, and no person shall ride upon a
bicycle or electric bicycle other than upon such a firmly attached and regular
seat.
      (2)   No person operating a motorcycle shall ride other than upon or
astride the permanent and regular seat or saddle attached thereto, or carry any
other person upon such motorcycle other than upon a firmly attached and regular
seat or saddle thereon, and no person shall ride upon a motorcycle other than
upon such a firmly attached and regular seat or saddle.
      (3)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a
saddle other than while sitting astride the saddle, facing forward, with one
leg on each side of the motorcycle.
      (4)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a seat
other than while sitting upon the seat.
      (5)   No person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall carry any
package, bundle, or article that prevents the driver from keeping at least one
hand upon the handlebars.
      (6)   No bicycle, electric bicycle, or motorcycle shall be used to carry
more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
No motorcycle shall be operated on a highway when the handlebars rise higher
than the shoulders of the operator when the operator is seated in the
operator’s seat or saddle.
   (C)   (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(3) of this section, no person
shall operate or be a passenger on a snowmobile or motorcycle without using
safety glasses or other protective eye device. Except as provided in division
(C)(3) of this section, no person who is under the age of 18 years, or who
holds a motorcycle operator’s endorsement or license bearing a “novice”
designation that is currently in effect as provided in R.C. § 4507.13, shall
operate a motorcycle on a highway, or be a passenger on a motorcycle, unless
wearing a protective helmet on the person’s head, and no other person shall be
a passenger on a motorcycle operated by such a person unless similarly wearing
a protective helmet. The helmet, safety glasses, or other protective eye device
shall conform with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety. The
provisions of this paragraph or a violation thereof shall not be used in the
trial of any civil action.
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (C)(3) of this section, no
person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary instruction permit and
temporary instruction permit identification card issued by the Registrar of
Motor Vehicles pursuant to R.C. § 4507.05 unless the person, at the time of
such operation, is wearing on the person’s head a protective helmet that
conforms with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety.
         (b)   No person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary
instruction permit and temporary instruction permit identification card issued
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles pursuant to R.C. § 4507.05 in any of the
following circumstances:
            1.   At any time when lighted lights are required by R.C. § 4513.03
(A)(1);
            2.   While carrying a passenger;
            3.   On any limited access highway or heavily congested roadway.
      (3)   Divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2)(a) of this section do not apply to a
person who operates or is a passenger in an autocycle or cab-enclosed
motorcycle when the occupant compartment top is in place enclosing the
occupants.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the carrying
of a child in a seat or trailer that is designed for carrying children and is
firmly attached to the bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (B) or (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates division (B) or (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates division (B) or (C)(1) or
(C)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.53)
§ 75.05 PROHIBITION AGAINST ATTACHING BICYCLES AND SLEDS TO VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   No person riding upon any bicycle, electric bicycle, coaster,
roller skates, sled, skateboard, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or self
to any vehicle upon a roadway.
      (2)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person riding upon any
bicycle, electric bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, skateboard, or toy
vehicle to attach the same or self to any vehicle while it is moving upon a
roadway.
      (3)   This section does not apply to towing a disabled vehicle.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.54)
§ 75.06 RIDING BICYCLES; MOTORCYCLES ABREAST.
   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle upon a roadway
shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable obeying all
traffic rules applicable to vehicles and exercising due care when passing a
standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
   (B)   Persons riding bicycles, electric bicycles, or motorcycles upon a
roadway shall ride not more than two abreast in a single lane, except on paths
or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, electric
bicycles, or motorcycles.
   (C)   This section does not require a person operating a bicycle or electric
bicycle to ride at the edge of the roadway when it is unreasonable or unsafe to
do so. Conditions that may require riding away from the edge of the roadway
include when necessary to avoid fixed or moving objects, parked or moving
vehicles, surface hazards, or if it otherwise is unsafe or impracticable to do
so, including if the lane is too narrow for the bicycle or electric bicycle and
an overtaking vehicle to travel safely side by side within the lane.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.55)
§ 75.07 EQUIPMENT OF BICYCLES.
   (A)   Every bicycle or electric bicycle when in use at the times specified
in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall be
equipped with the following:
      (1)   A lamp mounted on the front of either the bicycle or electric
bicycle or the operator that shall emit a white light visible from a distance
of at least 500 feet to the front and 300 feet to the sides. A generator-
powered lamp that emits light only when the bicycle or electric bicycle is
moving may be used to meet this requirement.
      (2)   A red reflector on the rear that shall be visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of
lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle;
      (3)   A lamp emitting either flashing or steady red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear shall be used in addition to the red
reflector. If the red lamp performs as a reflector in that it is visible as
specified in division (A)(2) of this section, the red lamp may serve as the
reflector and a separate reflector is not required.
   (B)   Additional lamps and reflectors may be used in addition to those
required under division (A) of this section, except that red lamps and red
reflectors shall not be used on the front of the bicycle or electric bicycle
and white lamps and white reflectors shall not be used on the rear of the
bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (C)   A bicycle or electric bicycle may be equipped with a device capable of
giving an audible signal, except that a bicycle or electric bicycle shall not
be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle or electric bicycle
any siren or whistle.
   (D)   Every bicycle and electric bicycle shall be equipped with an adequate
brake when used on a street or highway.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.56)
SNOWMOBILES, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLES, AND
ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLES
§ 75.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for
cross-country travel on land and water, or on more than one type of terrain,
and steered by wheels or caterpillar treads, or any combination thereof,
including vehicles that operate on a cushion of air, vehicles commonly known as
all-terrain vehicles, all season vehicles, mini-bikes and trail bikes. The term
does not include a utility vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4501.01 or any vehicle
principally used in playing golf, any motor vehicle or aircraft required to be
registered under R.C. Chapter 4503 or R.C. Chapter 4561, and any vehicle
excepted from definition as a motor vehicle by R.C. § 4501.01(B).
   DEALER. Any person or firm engaged in the business of manufacturing or
selling snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles at
wholesale or retail, or who rents, leases or otherwise furnishes snowmobiles,
off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles for hire.
   ELECTRONIC. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   ELECTRONIC DEALER. A dealer whom the Registrar of Motor Vehicles designates
under R.C. § 4519.511.
   ELECTRONIC RECORD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   HIGHWAY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   INTERSTATE HIGHWAY. Any part of the interstate system of highways as defined
in subsection (e), 90 Stat. 431 (1976), 23 U.S.C. § 103, as amended.
   LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY OR FREEWAY. Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
5511.02.
   MINI-TRUCK. A vehicle that has four wheels, is propelled by an electric
motor with a rated power of 7,500 watts or less or an internal combustion
engine with a piston displacement capacity of 660 cubic centimeters or less,
has a total dry weight of 900 to 2,200 pounds, contains an enclosed cabin and a
seat for the vehicle operator, resembles a pickup truck or van with a cargo
area or bed located at the rear of the vehicle, and was not originally
manufactured to meet federal motor vehicle safety standards.
   OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE. Every motorcycle, as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that
is designed to be operated primarily on lands other than a street or highway.
   OPERATOR. Any person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle.
   OWNER. Any person or firm, other than a lienholder or dealer, having title
to a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle, or other right
to the possession thereof.
   PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4509.01.
   SNOWMOBILE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for use on snow or
ice, and steered by skis, runners or caterpillar treads.
   STATE HIGHWAY and STATE ROUTE. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   STREET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(R.C. § 4519.01)
§ 75.21 EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   In addition to any rules or regulations promulgated by the Ohio
Director of Public Safety pursuant to R.C. § 4519.20 and R.C. Chapter 119,
equipment of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-purpose vehicles
shall include but not necessarily be limited to requirements for the following
items of equipment:
      (1)   At least one headlight having a minimum candlepower of sufficient
intensity to reveal persons and objects at a distance of at least 100 feet
ahead under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;
      (2)   At least one red tail light having a minimum candlepower of
sufficient intensity to be plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the
rear under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;
      (3)   Every snowmobile, while traveling on packed snow, shall be capable
of carrying a driver who weighs 175 pounds or more, and, while carrying such
driver, be capable of stopping in no more than 40 feet from an initial steady
speed of 20 miles per hour, or locking its traction belt; and
      (4)   A muffler system capable of precluding the emission of excessive
smoke or exhaust fumes, and of limiting the engine noise of vehicles. On
snowmobiles manufactured after January 1, 1973, such requirement shall include
sound dampening equipment such that noise does not exceed 82 decibels on the
“A” scale at 50 feet as measured according to SAE J192 (September 1970).
   (B)   No person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or
all-purpose vehicle in violation of this section, except that equipment
specified in division (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section shall not be required
on snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles operated
during the daylight hours.
(R.C. § 4519.20(A), (B))
   (C)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, lease, rent or otherwise furnish
for hire in this municipality any new snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or
all-purpose vehicle that fails to comply with any rule adopted by the Ohio
Director of Public Safety under R.C. § 4519.20 after the effective date of the
rule.
(R.C. § 4519.22(A))
   (D)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (B) of this section shall be fined not more than $50. If the offender
within the preceding year previously has committed a violation of division (B)
of this section or of R.C. § 4519.20(B), whoever violates division (B) of this
section shall be fined not less than $15 nor more than $100, imprisoned not
more than three days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.20(C))
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (C) of this section shall be fined not more than $50. If the offender
within the preceding year previously has committed a violation of division (C)
of this section or of R.C. § 4519.22(A), whoever violates this section shall be
fined not less than $15 nor more than $100, imprisoned not more than three
days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.22(B))
§ 75.22 CODE APPLICATION; PROHIBITED OPERATION.
   (A)   The applicable provisions of this traffic code apply to the operation
of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-purpose vehicles, except that
no person shall operate a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose
vehicle as follows:
      (1)   On any state highway, including a limited access highway or freeway
or the right-of-way thereof, except for emergency travel during such time and
in such manner as the Ohio Director of Public Safety designates or except as
authorized by R.C. § 4519.41(F);
      (2)   On any private property, or in any nursery or planting area,
without the permission of the owner or other person having the right to
possession of the property;
      (3)   On any land or waters controlled by the state, except at those
locations where a sign has been posted permitting such operation;
      (4)   On the tracks or right-of-way of any operating railroad;
      (5)   While transporting any firearm, bow or other implement for hunting
that is not unloaded and securely encased;
      (6)   For the purpose of chasing, pursuing, capturing or killing any
animal or wild fowl; or
      (7)   During the time from sunset to sunrise, unless displaying lighted
lights as required by R.C. § 4519.20 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $50 nor
more than $500, imprisoned not less than 3 nor more than 30 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.40)
§ 75.23 PERMITTED OPERATION.
   Snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-purpose vehicles may be
operated as follows:
   (A)   To make a crossing of a highway, other than a highway as designated in
R.C. § 4519.40(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
whenever the crossing can be made in safety and will not interfere with the
movement of vehicular traffic approaching from any direction on the highway,
and provided that the operator yields the right-of-way to any approaching
traffic that presents an immediate hazard;
   (B)   On highways in the county or township road systems whenever the local
authority having jurisdiction over such highways so permits;
   (C)   Off and alongside street or highway for limited distances from the
point of unloading from a conveyance to the point at which the snowmobile, off-
highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle is intended and authorized to be
operated;
   (D)   On the berm or shoulder of a highway, other than a highway as
designated in R.C. § 4519.40(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, when the terrain permits such operation to be undertaken safely and
without the necessity of entering any traffic lane;
   (E)   On the berm or shoulder or a county or township road, while traveling
from one area of operation of the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-
purpose vehicle to another such area.
   (F)   For snowmobiles without metal studded tracks and all-purpose vehicles,
on state highways located on an island in Lake Erie, including limited access
highways and freeways, between the first day of November and the thirtieth day
of April, provided that all of the following conditions apply:
      (1)   The operator has a valid driver’s license as required under R.C. §
4519.44.
      (2)   The snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle is in compliance with rules
governing safety equipment adopted under R.C. § 4519.20.
      (3)   The owner of the snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle maintains proof
of financial responsibility for both on-road and off-road use of the snowmobile
or all-purpose vehicle.
      (4)   The operator obeys all traffic rules and regulations.
(R.C. § 4519.41)
§ 75.24 LICENSING REQUIREMENTS OF OPERATOR.
   (A)   No person who does not hold a valid, current motor vehicle driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, motorcycle operator’s endorsement or probationary
license, issued under R.C. Chapter 4506 or R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid,
current driver’s license issued by another jurisdiction, shall operate a
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle on any street or
highway in this municipality, on any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or on
any public land or waters.
   (B)   No person who is less than 16 years of age shall operate a snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle on any land or waters other than
private property or waters owned by or leased to the person’s parent or
guardian, unless accompanied by another person who is 18 years of age or older,
and who holds a license as provided in division (A) of this section, except
that the Ohio Department of Natural Resources may permit such operation on
state controlled land under its jurisdiction when such person is less than 16
years of age and is accompanied by a parent or guardian who is a licensed
driver 18 years of age or older.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $50 nor
more than $500, imprisoned not less than 3 nor more than 30 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.44)
§ 75.25 MAINTENANCE OF VEHICLES FOR HIRE.
   (A)   Any dealer who rents, leases or otherwise furnishes a snowmobile, off-
highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle for hire shall maintain the vehicle
in safe operating condition. No dealer, or agent or employee of a dealer, shall
rent, lease or otherwise furnish a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-
purpose vehicle for hire to any person who does not hold a license as required
by R.C. § 4519.44(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or to
any person whom the dealer or an agent or employee of the dealer has reasonable
cause to believe is incompetent to operate the vehicle in a safe and lawful
manner.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $100 nor
more than $500.
(R.C. § 4519.45)
§ 75.26 ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   (A)   The operator of a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose
vehicle involved in any accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of any
person or damage to the property of any person in excess of $100 shall report
the accident within 48 hours to the Chief of Police, and within 30 days shall
forward a written report of the accident to the Ohio Registrar of Motor
Vehicles on a form prescribed by the Registrar. If the operator is physically
incapable of making the reports and there is another participant in the
accident not so incapacitated, the participant shall make the reports. In the
event there is no other participant, and the operator is other than the owner,
the owner, within the prescribed periods of time, shall make the reports.
   (B)   Any law enforcement officer or other person authorized by R.C. §§
4519.42 and 4519.43 who investigates or receives information of an accident
involving a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle shall
forward to the Registrar a written report of the accident within 48 hours.
(R.C. § 4519.46)
§ 75.27 IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLE.
   (A)   Whenever a person is found guilty of operating a snowmobile, off-
highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle in violation of any rule authorized
to be adopted under R.C. § 4519.21 or 4519.42, the trial judge of any court of
record, in addition to or independent of any other penalties provided by law,
may impound for not less than 60 days the certificate of registration and
license plate, if applicable, of that snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or
all-purpose vehicle. The court shall send the impounded certificate of
registration and license plate, if applicable, to the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles, who shall retain the certificate of registration and license plate,
if applicable, until the expiration of the period of impoundment.
   (B)   If a court impounds the certificate of registration and license plate
of an all-purpose vehicle pursuant to R.C. § 2911.21, the court shall send the
impounded certificate of registration and license plate to the Registrar, who
shall retain them until the expiration of the period of impoundment.
(R.C. § 4519.47)
§ 75.28 LOCAL CONTROL WITHIN POLICE POWER.
   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall prevent the municipality from
regulating the operation of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycle, and all-
purpose vehicles on streets and highways and other public property under
municipal jurisdiction, and within the reasonable exercise of the police power,
except that no registration or licensing of any snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle required to be registered or titled under
R.C. Chapter 4519 shall be required.
(R.C. § 4519.48)
§ 75.29 REGISTRATION OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B), (C) and (D) of this section,
no person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose
vehicle within this municipality unless the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle,
or all-purpose vehicle is registered and numbered in accordance with R.C. §§
4519.03 and 4519.04.
      (2)   Except as provided in R.C. § 4511.215 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, no registration is required for a mini-truck that is
operated within this state. A mini-truck may be operated only in accordance
with R.C. § 4511.215 and R.C. § 4519.401, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (B)   (1)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or off-highway
motorcycle that is operated exclusively upon lands owned by the owner of the
snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle, or on lands to which the owner of the
snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle has a contractual right.
      (2)   No registration is required for an all-purpose vehicle that is used
primarily for agricultural purposes when the owner qualifies for the current
agricultural use valuation tax credit, unless it is to be used on any public
land, trail, or right-of-way.
      (3)   Any all-purpose vehicle exempted from registration under division
(B)(2) of this section and operated for agricultural purposes may use public
roads and rights-of-way when traveling from one farm field to another, when
such use does not violate R.C. § 4519.41.
      (4)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle
that is operated on a state highway as authorized by R.C. § 4519.41(F).
   (C)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle,
or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this state by a resident of another
state whenever that state has in effect a registration law similar to R.C.
Chapter 4519 and the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle
is properly registered under that state’s law. Any snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this state by a resident
of a state not having a registration law similar to R.C. Chapter 4519 shall
comply with R.C. § 4519.09.
   (D)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle,
or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this municipality by the United
States, another state or a political subdivision thereof, but the snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle shall display the name of the
owner thereon.
   (E)   The owner or operator of any all-purpose vehicle operated or used upon
the waters in this municipality shall comply with R.C. Chapter 1547 and R.C.
Chapter 1548 relative to the operation of watercraft.
   (F)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be fined not less
than $50 nor more than $100.
(R.C. § 4519.02)
Statutory reference:
   Destruction or disposal of vehicle; transfer of ownership; change of
address; loss of certificate, see R.C. § 4519.05
   Registration of emergency vehicles, see R.C. § 4519.08
   Registration procedure, see R.C. § 4519.03
   Temporary license placards and fees, see R.C. § 4519.10
   Temporary operating permit for certain nonresidents, see R.C. § 4519.09
§ 75.30 CERTIFICATE OF TITLE; PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in this state an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle without having a certificate of title for the off-highway motorcycle or
all-purpose vehicle if such a certificate is required by R.C. Chapter 4519 to
be issued for the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, or, if a
physical certificate of title has not been issued for it, operate an off-
highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle knowing that the ownership
information related to the motorcycle or vehicle has not been entered into the
automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of Common Pleas.
      (2)   Operate in this municipality an off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle is a certificate of title to the off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle has been issued and then has been canceled.
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title upon cancellation of it
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed
in R.C. Chapter 4519.
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas as provided in R.C. Chapter 4519, in case of the destruction or
dismantling of, or change in, the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle
described in the certificate of title.
      (5)   Violate any provision of R.C. §§ 4519.51 through 4519.70 for which
no penalty is otherwise provided or any lawful rules adopted pursuant to those
sections.
      (6)   Operate in this state an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle knowing that the certificate of title to or ownership of the motorcycle
or vehicle as otherwise reflected in the automated title processing system has
been canceled.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $200,
imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.66)
Statutory reference:
   Certificate of title: rules and procedures, see R.C. §§ 4519.51 et seq.
   Stolen vehicles and restrictions on sale or transfer, felony provisions, see
R.C. § 4519.67
GOLF CARTS
§ 75.45 DEFINITION.
   For purposes of this subchapter, a GOLF CART shall be defined as a motor
vehicle as the term is defined under R.C. § 4501(B). This section may also
apply to other underspeed vehicles at the discretion of the Chief of Police
based on the definitions set forth in the state statutes, as amended from time
to time.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 6-8-2021)
§ 75.46 RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall operate a golf cart on the streets within the village
unless the golf cart has first passed an inspection by the Chief of Police, or
his or her designee, for compliance with the state’s requirements that are
applicable to motor vehicles and such golf cart contains all equipment as
required by this subchapter.
   (B)   To operate at night or before sunrise, golf carts must be equipment
with headlights, brake lights, turn signals and reflective warning devices on
the front and rear sides of the vehicle. Headlights should be used 30 minutes
before sunset and 30 minutes after sunrise; headlights should always be used
during inclement weather.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 6-8-2021)
§ 75.47 EQUIPMENT.
   A list of equipment required for safe operation of a motor vehicle in
traffic as set forth by R.C. Chapter 4513 shall be kept at the Police
Department in regards to this subchapter, and shall include:
   (A)   Operational head lights;
   (B)   Operational brake lights;
   (C)   Operational rear tail lights;
   (D)   A functional rearview mirror;
   (E)   A white light illuminating the rear license plate legible from a
distance of 50 feet;
   (F)   An operational horn;
   (G)   A functional rear-view mirror;
   (H)   Directional signals;
   (I)   Operational seat belts; one seat belt per occupant;
   (J)   Rear license plate - pending title and issuance of plates; and
   (K)   A windshield.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 6-8-2021)
§ 75.48 LICENSING REQUIREMENT OF OPERATOR.
   (A)   No person who is less than 16 years of age shall operate a golf cart
on the streets of the village.
   (B)   The operator of a golf cart on permitted streets within the village
must hold a current motor vehicle driver’s license.
   (C)   Effective January 1, 2021, no person who is the owner or operator of a
golf cart shall fail to display a distinctive numbered permit issued by the
village. The permit shall be posted on the lower left (driver’s side) of
windshield.
   (D)   The one-time inspection fee and permit fee will be posted at the Clerk
of Court’s Office.
   (E)   The permit is valid until change of vehicle ownership.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 6-8-2021) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.49 VILLAGE INSPECTION.
   (A)   No person shall operate a golf cart on the streets within the village
unless the golf cart has been inspected for compliance with the statutory
requirements that are applicable to motor vehicle operations including
entitling the owner or operator to secure a title and license for the golf
cart.
   (B)   The inspection sticker will be placed on the lower left driver’s side
of windshield.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 6-8-2021) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.50 USAGE AND RESTRICTION; WAIVER.
   (A)   The village strongly recommends that golf cart drivers do not cross
the intersections located along U.S. 52 due to the inherent dangers of these
busy intersections, but will allow golf carts that have been properly inspected
and permitted to cross at intersections located along U.S. 52 during the period
of dawn to dusk.
   (B)   Per the state statutes, this golf cart permit is only valid within the
village corporate limits. No other authority is permitted.
   (C)   Occupants of golf carts shall be seated at all times in the seat of
the golf cart, buckled by seat belt, when the golf cart is on and in motion.
Standing on any portion of the golf cart while in motion is prohibited.
   (D)   Any child who falls under the child restraint criteria set by R.C. §
4511.81 is prohibited from being a passenger in a golf cart operated on any
village street, right-of-way or public area in the village.
   (E)   No person shall operate golf cars on sidewalks or walking trails.
   (F)   Golf carts must be operated in accordance with all state traffic laws
in addition to all applicable sections of the village resolutions or
ordinances.
   (G)   The provision of this section may be waived during limited period of
special events for which the operators of the golf carts have received prior
approval for the use of golf carts from the Village Chief of Police, or his or
her designee.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 6-8-2021) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
70.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Whoever violates the provisions of §§
75.45 through
75.50 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense. On a second offense
within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the fourth degree.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 6-8-2021)
CHAPTER 76: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
76.01   Prohibition against parking on highways
   
76.02   Condition when motor vehicle left unattended
   
76.03   Police may remove illegally parked vehicle
   
76.04   Prohibited parking
   
76.05   Parking near curb; privileges for persons with disabilities
   
76.06   Parking on private property in violation of posted prohibition
   
76.07   Selling, washing or repairing vehicle upon roadway
   
76.08   Truck loading zones
   
76.09   Bus stops and taxicab stands
   
76.10   Parking in alleys and narrow streets; exceptions
   
76.11   Registered owner prima facie liable for unlawful parking
   
76.12   Waiver
   
76.13   Parking or storage of vehicles prohibited
   
76.14   Parking or storage of loaded garbage trucks prohibited
   
76.15   Parking and storage of commercial vehicles prohibited
   
76.16   Parking of oversized vehicles
   
76.17   Parking on public streets
 
   
76.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Noncriminal parking infractions, local option to create, see R.C. Chapter
4521
§ 76.01 PROHIBITION AGAINST PARKING ON HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   (1)   Upon any highway, no person shall stop, park, or leave standing
any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main traveled
part of the highway if it is practicable to stop, park, or so leave such
vehicle off the paved or main traveled part of the highway. In every event a
clear and unobstructed portion of the highway opposite such standing vehicle
shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles, and a clear view of such
stopped vehicle shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in each
direction upon such highway.
      (2)   This section does not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is
disabled while on the paved or improved or main traveled portion of a highway
in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and
temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in such position.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.66)
§ 76.02 CONDITION WHEN MOTOR VEHICLE LEFT UNATTENDED.
   (A)   (1)   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit
it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition,
removing the key from the ignition, effectively setting the parking brake, and,
when the motor vehicle is standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to
the curb or side of the highway.
      (2)   The requirements of this section relating to the stopping of the
engine, locking of the ignition, and removing the key from the ignition of a
motor vehicle do not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   A motor vehicle that is parked on residential property;
         (b)   A motor vehicle that is locked, regardless of where it is
parked;
         (c)   An emergency vehicle;
         (d)   A public safety vehicle.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.661)
§ 76.03 POLICE MAY REMOVE ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE.
   (A)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a highway in
violation of R.C. § 4511.66 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
such officer may move such vehicle, or require the driver or other person in
charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the paved or improved
or main traveled part of such highway.
   (B)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any
highway, bridge, or causeway, or in any tunnel, where such vehicles constitutes
an obstruction to traffic, such officer may provide for the removal of such
vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety.
(R.C. § 4511.67)
§ 76.04 PROHIBITED PARKING.
   (A)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with the provisions of this
title, or while obeying the directions of a police officer or a traffic-control
device, in any of the following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk, except as provided in division (B) of this section;
      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;
      (3)   Within an intersection;
      (4)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;
      (5)   On a crosswalk;
      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      (7)   Within 30 feet of, and upon the approach to, any flashing beacon,
stop sign, or traffic-control device;
      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by a traffic-control device;
      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      (10)   Within 20 feet of a driveway entrance to any fire station and, on
the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within 75
feet of the entrance when it is properly posted with signs;
      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
such standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      (12)   Alongside any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a
street;
      (13)   Upon any bridge or elevated structure upon a highway, or within a
highway tunnel;
      (14)   At any place where signs prohibit stopping;
      (15)   Within one foot of another parked vehicle;
      (16)   On the roadway portion of a freeway, expressway, or thruway.
   (B)   A person is permitted, without charge or restriction, to stand or park
on a sidewalk a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter that has an engine not
larger than 150 cubic centimeters, a low-speed micromobility device, or a
bicycle or electric bicycle, provided that the motor-driven cycle, motor
scooter, low-speed micromobility device, bicycle, or electric bicycle does not
impede the normal flow of pedestrian traffic. This division does not authorize
any person to operate a vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4511.711, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.68)
§ 76.05 PARKING NEAR CURB; PRIVILEGES FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.
   (A)   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there is an
adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of the
vehicle parallel with and not more than 12 inches from the right-hand curb,
unless it is impossible to approach so close to the curb; in such case the stop
shall be made as close to the curb as possible and only for the time necessary
to discharge and receive passengers or to load or unload merchandise. Local
authorities by ordinance may permit angle parking on any roadway under their
jurisdiction, except that angle parking shall not be permitted on a state route
within the municipality unless an unoccupied roadway width of not less than 25
feet is available for free-moving traffic.
   (B)   Local authorities by ordinance may permit parking of vehicles with the
left-hand wheels adjacent to and within 12 inches of the left-hand curb of a
one-way roadway.
   (C)   (1)   (a)   Except as provided in division (C)(1)(b) of this section,
no vehicle shall be stopped or parked on a road or highway with the vehicle
facing in a direction other than the direction of travel on that side of the
road or highway.
         (b)   The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into an
angled parking space so that when the motorcycle is parked it is facing in a
direction other than the direction of travel on the side of the road or
highway.
      (2)   The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into a parking
space that is located on the side of, and parallel to, a road or highway. The
motorcycle may face any direction when so parked. Not more than two motorcycles
at a time shall be parked in a parking space as described in division (C)(2) of
this section irrespective of whether or not the space is metered.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any statute or any rule, regulation, resolution, or
ordinance, air compressors, tractors, trucks, and other equipment, while being
used in the construction, reconstruction, installation, repair, or removal of
facilities near, on, over, or under a street or highway, may stop, stand, or
park where necessary in order to perform such work, provided a flagperson is on
duty or warning signs or lights are displayed as may be prescribed by the
Director of Transportation.
   (E)   Accessible parking locations and privileges for persons with
disabilities that limit or impair the ability to walk shall be provided and
designated by all political subdivisions and by the state and all agencies and
instrumentalities thereof at all offices and facilities where parking is
provided, whether owned, rented, or leased, and at all publicly owned parking
garages. The locations shall be designated through the posting of an elevated
sign, whether permanently affixed or movable, imprinted with the international
symbol of access and shall be reasonably close to exits, entrances, elevators,
and ramps. All elevated signs posted in accordance with this division and R.C.
§ 3781.111(C) shall be mounted on a fixed or movable post, and the distance
from the ground to the bottom edge of the sign shall measure not less than five
feet. If a new sign or a replacement sign designating an accessible parking
location is posted on or after October 14, 1999, there also shall be affixed
upon the surface of that sign or affixed next to the designating sign a notice
that states the fine applicable for the offense of parking a motor vehicle in
the designated accessible parking location if the motor vehicle is not legally
entitled to be parked in that location.
   (F)   (1)   (a)   No person shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle at
accessible parking locations provided under division (E) of this section, or at
accessible clearly marked parking locations provided in or on privately owned
parking lots, parking garages, or other parking areas and designated in
accordance with that division, unless one of the following applies:
            1.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of
a person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is
displaying a valid removable windshield placard or accessible license plates;
or
            2.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of
a person with a disability and is displaying a parking card or accessible
license plates.
         (b)   Any motor vehicle that is parked in an accessible marked parking
location in violation of division (F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section
may be towed or otherwise removed from the parking location by the law
enforcement agency of the municipality. A motor vehicle that is so towed or
removed shall not be released to its owner until the owner presents proof of
ownership of the motor vehicle and pays all towing and storage fees normally
imposed by the municipality for towing and storing motor vehicles. If the motor
vehicle is a leased vehicle, it shall not be released to the lessee until the
lessee presents proof that that person is the lessee of the motor vehicle and
pays all towing and storage fees normally imposed by the municipality for
towing and storing motor vehicles.
         (c)   If a person is charged with a violation of division (F)(1)(a)1.
or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section, it is an affirmative defense to the charge that
the person suffered an injury not more than 72 hours prior to the time the
person was issued the ticket or citation and that, because of the injury, the
person meets at least one of the criteria contained in R.C. § 4503.44(A)(1).
      (2)    No person shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle in an area
that is commonly known as an access aisle, which area is marked by diagonal
stripes and is located immediately adjacent to an accessible parking location
provided under division (E) of this section or at an accessible clearly marked
parking location provided in or on a privately owned parking lot, parking
garage, or other parking area and designated in accordance with that division.
   (G)   When a motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a
person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is
displaying a removable windshield placard or accessible license plates, or when
a motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a person with a
disability and is displaying a parking card or accessible license plates, the
motor vehicle is permitted to park for a period of two hours in excess of the
legal parking period permitted by local authorities, except where local
ordinances or police rules provide otherwise or where the vehicle is parked in
such a manner as to be clearly a traffic hazard.
   (H)   No owner of an office, facility, or parking garage where accessible
parking locations are required to be designated in accordance with division (E)
of this section shall fail to properly mark the accessible parking locations in
accordance with that division or fail to maintain the markings of the
accessible locations, including the erection and maintenance of the fixed or
movable signs.
   (I)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a person or
organization to apply for a removable windshield placard or accessible license
plates if the parking card or accessible license plates issued to the person or
organization under prior law have not expired or been surrendered or revoked.
   (J)   As used in this section:
      ACCESSIBLE LICENSE PLATES and REMOVABLE WINDSHIELD PLACARD. Mean any
license plates, standard removable windshield placard, permanent removable
windshield placard, or temporary removable windshield placard issued under R.C.
§ 4503.41 or 4503.44, and also mean any substantially similar license plates or
removable windshield placard issued by a state, district, country, or
sovereignty.
      PERSON WITH A DISABILITY. Means any person who has lost the use of one or
both legs or one or both arms, who is blind, deaf, or unable to move without
the aid of crutches or a wheelchair, or whose mobility is restricted by a
permanent cardiovascular, pulmonary, or other disabling condition.
      PERSON WITH A DISABILITY THAT LIMITS OR IMPAIRS THE ABILITY TO WALK. Has
the same meaning as in R.C. § 4503.44.
   (K)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (A) or (C) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in
division (K)(2)(a) and (K)(2)(b) of this section. Except as otherwise provided
in division (K)(2)(a) of this section, an offender who violates division (F)(1)
(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section shall be fined not less than $250 nor more
than $500. An offender who violates division (F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this
section shall be fined not more than $100 if the offender, prior to sentencing,
proves either of the following to the satisfaction of the court:
            1.   At the time of the violation of division (F)(1)(a)1. of this
section, the offender or the person for whose transport the motor vehicle was
being operated had been issued a removable windshield placard that then was
valid or accessible license plates that then were valid but the offender or the
person neglected to display the placard or license plates as described in
division (F)(1)(a)1. of this section.
            2.   At the time of the violation of division (F)(1)(a)2. of this
section, the offender or the person for whose transport the motor vehicle was
being operated had been issued a parking card that then was valid or accessible
license plates that then were valid but the offender or the person neglected to
display the card or license plates as described in division (F)(1)(a)2. of this
section.
         (b)   In no case shall an offender who violates division (F)(1)(a)1.
or (F)(1)(a)2. be sentenced to any term of imprisonment.
         (c)   An arrest or conviction for a violation of division (F)(1)(a)1.
or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section does not constitute a criminal record and need
not be reported by the person so arrested or convicted in response to any
inquiries contained in any application for employment, license, or other right
or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s appearance as a witness.
         (d)   The clerk of the court shall pay every fine collected under
divisions (K)(2) and (K)(3) of this section to the municipality. Except as
provided in division (K)(2) of this section, the municipality shall use the
fine moneys it receives under divisions (K)(2) and (K)(3) of this section to
pay the expenses it incurs in complying with the signage and notice
requirements contained in division (E) of this section. The municipality may
use up to 50% of each fine it receives under divisions (K)(2) and (K)(3) of
this section to pay the costs of educational, advocacy, support, and assistive
technology programs for persons with disabilities, and for public improvements
within the municipality that benefit or assist persons with disabilities, if
governmental agencies or nonprofit organizations offer the programs.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (F)(2) of this section shall be fined not
less than $250 nor more than $500. In no case shall an offender who violates
division (F)(2) of this section be sentenced to any term of imprisonment. An
arrest or conviction for a violation of division (F)(2) of this section does
not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries contained in any application
for employment, license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection
with the person’s appearance as a witness.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (H) of this section shall be punished as
follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (K)(4) of this section,
the offender shall be issued a warning.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (H) of this section or of a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that division, the offender shall
not be issued a warning but shall be fined not more than $25 for each parking
location that is not properly marked or whose markings are not properly
maintained.
(R.C. § 4511.69)
Statutory reference:
   Buildings, access for disabled persons, see R.C. § 3781.111
§ 76.06 PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY IN VIOLATION OF POSTED PROHIBITION.
   (A)   If an owner of private property posts on the property in a conspicuous
manner a prohibition against parking on the property or conditions and
regulations under which parking is permitted, no person shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   Park a vehicle on the property without the owner’s consent;
      (2)   Park a vehicle on the property in violation of any condition or
regulation posted by the owner.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.681)
§ 76.07 SELLING, WASHING OR REPAIRING VEHICLE UPON ROADWAY.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the
principal purpose of:
   (A)   Displaying such vehicle for sale; or
   (B)   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs
necessitated by an emergency.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.08 TRUCK LOADING ZONES.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of
time, other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and
loading of materials, in any place marked as a truck loading zone during hours
when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall
the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.09 BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a
bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or
stand has been officially designated and appropriately posted, except that the
driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of,
and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers when such
stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about
to enter such zone, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes, if
such stopping is not prohibited therein by posted signs.
   (B)   No operator of a bus shall stop, stand or park such vehicle upon any
street or other public way at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading
passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop so designated and posted
as such, except in case of an emergency.
   (C)   No operator of a bus shall fail to enter a bus stop on a street or
other public way in such a manner that the bus when stopped to load or unload
passengers or baggage is in a position with the right front wheel of such
vehicle not further than 18 inches from the curb and the bus approximately
parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular
traffic.
   (D)   No operator of a taxicab shall stand or park such vehicle upon any
street or other public way at any place other than in a taxicab stand so
designated and posted as such. This provision shall not prevent the operator of
a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or
parking provisions at any place for the purpose of, and while actually engaged
in, the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.10 PARKING IN ALLEYS AND NARROW STREETS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street, other
than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available
less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular
traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or
unloading of passengers or when directed to by a police officer or traffic
control signal.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided by law, no person shall stop, stand or
park a vehicle within an alley except while actually loading and unloading, and
then only for a period not to exceed 30 minutes.
§ 76.11 REGISTERED OWNER PRIMA FACIE LIABLE FOR UNLAWFUL PARKING.
   In any hearing on a charge of illegally parking a motor vehicle, testimony
that a vehicle bearing a certain license plate was found unlawfully parked as
prohibited by the provisions of this Traffic Code, and further testimony that
the record of the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles shows that the license plate
was issued to the defendant, shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle
which was unlawfully parked, was so parked by the defendant. A certified
registration copy, showing such fact, from the Registrar shall be proof of such
ownership.
§ 76.12 WAIVER.
   Any person charged with a violation of any provision of this chapter for
which payment of a prescribed fine may be made, may pay such sum in the manner
prescribed on the issued traffic ticket. Such payment shall be deemed a plea of
guilty, waiver of court appearance and acknowledgment of conviction of the
alleged offense and may be accepted in full satisfaction of the prescribed
penalty for such alleged violation. Payment of the prescribed fine need not be
accepted when laws prescribe that a certain number of such offenses shall
require court appearance.
§ 76.13 PARKING OR STORAGE OF VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person being the owner or operator of any vehicle, truck, trailer
or semitrailer hauling a gross vehicle weight of more than 10,000 pounds for
trucks or 3,500 pounds for trailers or a semitrailer length in excess of 20
feet shall cause the vehicle to be parked on the right-of-way of village
streets unless actually engaged in loading or unloading operations.
   (B)   Any vehicle found parked in violation of this section may be removed
to a suitable place by the order of the Police Department and the charge of the
removal, towing and storage thereof shall be added to the impounding penalties
provided in this code of ordinances.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, each separate 24-hour period shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 76.15) (Ord. 1975-6, passed 5-12-1975) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.14 PARKING OR STORAGE OF LOADED GARBAGE TRUCKS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person being the owner or operator of a vehicle designed or used
for the collection and transportation of garbage, trash or rubbish shall cause
or permit such vehicle to be within the limits of the village except while
actually engaged in the picking up or collection of garbage for a period in
excess of three hours.
   (B)   In the event of mechanical malfunction which cannot be corrected
within the three-hour period, it shall be the duty of the owner or operator of
the vehicle to cause the contents of the truck to be removed and unloaded
either to another truck for removal from the village or by towing to an
approved rubbish disposal facility.
   (C)   Any vehicle used for the collection or transportation of garbage that
is intended to be stored in the village overnight shall be thoroughly cleaned
inside and out so as not to create a condition offensive to others.
   (D)   Any facility within the village maintaining any vehicles designed or
used for the collection, transportation and disposal of waste shall thoroughly
keep all premises used for this operation clean and free of nuisance.
   (E)   Each and every violation of any provision of this section shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $100. For purposes of
this section, each separate vehicle found to be in violation of this section
and each successive day upon which any vehicle or condition is found to be in
violation of this section shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 76.16) (Ord. 1975-7, passed 3-24-1975; Ord. 1975-14, passed 8-
11-1975)
§ 76.15 PARKING AND STORAGE OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person being the owner or operator of any vehicle, truck, trailer
or semitrailer having a gross vehicle weight of more than 8,000 pounds for
trucks or 3,500 pounds for trailers, or a semi trailer in excess of 36 feet in
length, shall park such vehicle within the village limits, except in an
industrial zone, or for temporary parking for the delivery of goods and/or
services, or as required for the operation of a conforming business within the
B-2 zoning district.
   (B)   Any vehicle found parked in violation of this section may be removed
to a suitable place by order of the Police Department and the charge for such
removal, towing and storage thereof shall be added to the impounding penalties
provided in this code of ordinances.
   (C)   For purpose of this section, each separate 24-hour period shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 2009-49, passed 11-10-2009)
§ 76.16 PARKING OF OVERSIZED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      LOADING AND UNLOADING. Loading or unloading passengers or material to or
from an oversized vehicle, including the activities required to prepare the
vehicle for travel or storage.
      OVERSIZED VEHICLE. Any of the following:
         (a)   Any motorized vehicle or combination of motorized vehicle(s)
and/or non-motorized vehicle(s), including any attached trailers, vehicles or
loads thereon, which exceeds 22 feet in length or seven feet in width and seven
feet in height; and/or
         (b)   Any camp trailer, camper, fifth wheel travel trailer, house car
or mobile home.
   (B)   Overnight parking prohibition. Unless otherwise authorized by this
section or other sections of this code, no person shall stop, stand, park or
leave standing any oversized vehicle on any public street.
   (C)   Exemptions. This section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Oversized vehicles involved in an emergency or being repaired under
emergency conditions. Emergency parking on public streets may be allowed for 24
consecutive hours where an oversized vehicle is left parked on a village public
street because of mechanical breakdown or because of physical incapacity of the
driver or owner;
      (2)   Oversized vehicles belonging to federal, state or local authorities
or public utilities that are parked on public streets while the operator of the
vehicle is conducting official business;
      (3)   Oversized vehicles actively engaged in loading and unloading or
deliveries of person, merchandise, wares, supplies, goods or other materials in
the course of construction or other work from or to an adjacent residence or
building. Oversized vehicle actively engaging in loading and unloading shall
park at the public street curb immediately adjacent to the residence or
building, or within 400 feet of the residence if this area is not available for
parking due to curb configuration or codified parking restrictions;
      (4)   Oversized vehicles engaged in loading and unloading and/or
preparation for travel and pursuant to administrative guidelines or regulations
that may be established by the Village Administrator as necessary to facilitate
implementation and enforcement of this section;
      (5)   Oversized vehicles parked or standing on a public street in
connection with, and in aid of, the performance of a service to or on a
property in the block in which such oversized vehicle is parked on a public
street; and
      (6)   Any trailer or other device, regardless of size, not attached to a
motor vehicle is prohibited from being parked on any public street in
residential areas of the village.
(Ord. 2020-03, passed 2-11-2020)
§ 76.17 PARKING ON PUBLIC STREETS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall park an unlicensed motor vehicle on a public
street, or other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel,
or upon or within the right-of-way of any road or highway within the village,
for 48 hours or longer, without notification to the Chief of Police of the
reasons for leaving said motor vehicle in such place. The Chief of Police, or
his or her agent, may order into storage any motor vehicle so found, and the
Chief of Police shall dispose of said motor vehicle as provided in R.C. §
4513.61, now in effect, or any substantially similar provision of the state
statutes which may be subsequently enacted.
      (2)   The violation of division (A) above shall constitute prima facie
evidence that the vehicle was parked by or with the authority or permission of
the owner of such motor vehicle.
      (3)   Any person who parks a motor vehicle in violation of the provisions
of this section shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
   (B)   Parking is prohibited within all cul-de-sacs and circles as posted.
(Ord. 1984-45, passed 2-26-1985; Ord. 2010-3, passed 2-23-2010)
§ 76.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
70.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of §
76.16 shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $100. If the violation is of a
continuing nature, each and every day during which the violation continues to
occur will constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. 2020-03, passed 2-11-2020)
CHAPTER 77: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Speed limits
      
II.   One-way streets
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)    Established speed limits.
Street Location Speed Limit Ordinance History
Street       Location                                 Speed Limit Ordinance
                                                                  History
Bethel-New   Within the corporate limit from U.S.                 Ord. 1990-43,
Richmond     Route 52 north to the culvert at St.     30 mph      passed 10-9-
Road         Peter’s Church                                     1990
Bethel-New                                            35 mph; 20  Ord. 1984-19,
Richmond     The Long Hill portion                    mph in the  passed - -
Road                                                  school zone
                                                                  Ord. 2007-28,
Front Street From 12 Mile Bridge to Race Street       25 mph      passed 7-10-
                                                                  2007
Sycamore     From U.S. 52 to Front Street             25 mph      Ord. 2010-13,
Street                                                            passed - -
             For east-bound traffic from the
             emergency turn around to the east
U.S. 52      village corporation line, and for west-  35 mph      Ord. 1995-14,
             bound traffic from the village                       passed - -
             corporation line to the intersection of
             Old U.S. 52 and U.S. 52 at Frisch’s
U.S. Route   From the intersection of Old U.S. Route              Ord. 1994-9,
52           52 West to the end of the village        30 mph      passed 3-8-
             corporation limit                                    1994
Washington                                                        Ord. 2002-40,
Street                                               25 mph      passed 9-10-
                                                                  2002
 
   (B)   Double speeding fines. 
      (1)   The Village Council finds that anyone guilty of a village ordinance
involving a violation of exceeding the posted speed limit in excess of ten mph
or more in the areas set forth in the streets and portions of the village as
detailed in Exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein, shall be fined
at a rate not less than double the standard scheduled fine for such violation.
 
Street   Location
Bethel-
New      Beginning at the intersection of Caroline Street up through the
Richmond intersection of Bethel-New Richmond Road at Union Station Way
Road
Both
lanes of Between the intersection at Front Street up through the village’s east
U.S.     corporation line on U.S. Highway 52 past Adamson/Old U.S. 52
Highway
52
Front    Beginning at the intersection of 1101 Front Street at Cobra Road to the
Street   intersection of 100 Front Street at Union Street
Susanna  Beginning at the intersection of 100 Susanna Way at Union Street to the
Way      intersection of Susanna Way at Western Avenue
 
      (2)   All revenue generated as a result of the additional fines imposed
by this division (B) shall be deposited to Fund 1000 for future appropriation
by Council. The expenditure of these funds shall be limited to creating safer
streets and roadways including, but not limited to, speed reducing
infrastructure such as road/street improvements, speed calming devices and line
of sight maintenance/improvements.
(Ord. 2022-14, passed 12-13-2022)
SCHEDULE II. ONE-WAY STREETS.
   The following streets are designated as one-way streets:
 
Street         Location
Augusta Street From Susanna Way to Washington Street
 
(Prior Code, § 77.01) (Ord. 2006-14, passed 5-9-2006)
CHAPTER 78: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Parking restrictions
SCHEDULE I. PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
Street Location Restriction/Hours Fine
Street          Location             Restriction/Hours      Fine
                                     No parking vehicles
                                     directly in front of
                Regatta subdivision  and five feet from     Not to exceed $500
                                     either side of the
                                     community mailboxes
                East side of the 100 No parking, standing
Augusta Street  block; between       or abandoning vehicles Not more than $100
                Susanna Way and      for a period exceeding
                Washington Street    one hour
Caroline Street Parking for Forest   Restricted from 9:30
                Park                 p.m. to 5:00 a.m.
Caroline Street Parking for Elm Park Restricted from 9:30
                                     p.m. to 5:00 a.m.
Cobra Road                           Prohibited             $200 per day
                In front of the
Market Street   library building at  Two-hour parking
                103 Market Street
Ohio Street     From Western to      Prohibited from 7:00
                Sophia               p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
                Both sides; between  Prohibited between the
Ohio Street     Augusta Street and   hours of 7:00 p.m. to
                Western Street       7:00 a.m. daily
Plenty Street   On the park side     Restricted from 9:30
                                     p.m. to 5:00 a.m.
Sophia Street   On the park side     Restricted from 9:30
                                     p.m. to 5:00 a.m.
                On the river side,
Susanna Way     from Western Avenue  No parking between 11:
                to Augusta Street    00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
                Boat Ramp
Susanna Way                         No parking from 9:30
                                     p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
 
(Prior Code, § 76.04) (Ord. 1984-27, passed - -; Ord. 1979-9, passed 4-9-1979;
Ord. 1980-7, passed 4-14-1981; Ord. 1982-07, passed 5-25-1982; Ord. 1988-9,
passed 7-26-1988; Ord. 2000-16, passed 5-23-2000; Ord. 2007-8, passed 4-10-
2007; Ord. 2008-06, passed 3-11-2008; Ord. 2015-20, passed 10-13-2015; Ord.
2015-21, passed 11-10-2015)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   FIREWORKS, EXPLOSIVES AND FIRE PREVENTION
      
92.   INTOXICATING LIQUORS
      
93.   NUISANCES
      
94.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
95.   UNCLAIMED AND ABANDONED VEHICLES
      
96.   WATERCRAFT
      
97.   PARKS AND PUBLIC FACILITIES
      
98.   PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES; PARADES
      
99.   TREES
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
Animals Running at Large
   
90.01   Dogs or other animals running at large; nuisance, dangerous or vicious
dogs; hearings
   
90.02   Confining animal found at large; publication of notice; lien
   
90.03   Unavoidable escapes
   
90.04   Fees
   
90.05   Rabies quarantine orders of Mayor
   
90.06   Interfering with enforcement of quarantine orders
   
90.07   Dogs may be killed for certain acts
Offenses Relating to Animals
   
90.20   Abandoning animals
   
90.21   Injuring animals
   
90.22   Poisoning animals
   
90.23   Cruelty to animals; cruelty to companion animals
   
90.24   Animal fights
   
90.25   Trapshooting
   
90.26   Loud dog
   
90.27   Dog tags
   
90.28   Nuisance, dangerous and vicious dog defined; transfer of ownership
certificate; form stating dog’s prior behavior
   
90.29   Failure to register dog or dog kennel
   
90.30   Hindering the capture of unregistered dog
   
90.31   Unlawful tag
   
90.32   Assistance dogs with blind, deaf, or hearing impaired person, or person
with a mobility impairment, or trainer
   
90.33   Retail sale and transportation of dogs
   
90.34   Coloring rabbits or baby poultry; regulation of sale and display
   
90.35   Jacklighting prohibited
   
90.36   Restrictions on dog ownership for certain convicted felons
   
90.37   Sexual conduct with an animal
   
90.38   Confinement of dogs
   
90.39   Tethering of dogs and cats prohibited
   
90.40   Dog excrement removal
   
90.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Hunting and fishing regulations, see R.C. Chapter 1533
   Law enforcement canine registration, see R.C. § 955.012
   Nuisance wild animal trapping, see O.A.C. § 1501:31-15-03
   Possession of dangerous wild animals and restricted snakes, requirements and
licensing, see R.C. Chapter 935
   Rabies: report of dog bite, confinement of animal, report of suspected rabid
animal, see O.A.C. §§ 3701-3-28 et seq.
ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE
§ 90.01 DOGS OR OTHER ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE; NUISANCE, DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS
DOGS; HEARINGS.
   (A)   Animals running at large.
      (1)   No person, who is the owner or keeper of horses, mules, cattle,
bison, sheep, goats, swine, llamas, alpacas, or poultry, shall permit them to
run at large in the public road, highway, street, lane, or alley, or upon
unenclosed land, or cause the animals to be herded, kept, or detained for the
purpose of grazing on premises other than those owned or lawfully occupied by
the owner or keeper of the animals.
(R.C. § 951.02)
      (2)   Whoever recklessly violates division (A)(1) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 951.99)
      (3)   The owner or keeper of an animal described in division (A)(1) of
this section who negligently permits it to run at large in violation of
division (A)(1) of this section is liable for all damages resulting from
injury, death, or loss to person or property caused by the animal in any of the
places specified in division (A)(1) of this section or upon the premises of
another without reference to the fence that may enclose the premises.
      (4)   The running at large of any animal specified in division (A)(1) of
this section in or upon any of the places specified in division (A)(1) of this
section is prima facie evidence in a civil action for damages under division
(A)(3) of this section that the owner or keeper of the animal negligently
permitted the animal to run at large in violation of division (A)(1) of this
section.
(R.C. § 951.10)
   (B)   Dogs running at large; dangerous dogs; debarked or surgically silenced
dangerous dogs.
      (1)   As used in this division (B), DANGEROUS DOG has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 955.11.
      (2)   No owner, keeper, or harborer of any female dog shall permit it to
go beyond the premises of the owner, keeper, or harborer at any time the dog is
in heat unless the dog is properly in leash.
      (3)   Except when a dog is lawfully engaged in hunting and accompanied by
the owner, keeper, harborer, or handler of the dog, no owner, keeper, or
harborer of any dog shall fail at any time to do either of the following:
         (a)   Keep the dog physically confined or restrained upon the premises
of the owner, keeper, or harborer by a leash, tether, adequate fence,
supervision, or secure enclosure to prevent escape;
         (b)   Keep the dog under the reasonable control of some person.
      (4)   Except when a dangerous dog is lawfully engaged in hunting or
training for the purpose of hunting and is accompanied by the owner, keeper,
harborer, or handler of the dog, no owner, keeper, or harborer of a dangerous
dog shall fail to do either of the following:
         (a)   While the dog is on the premises of the owner, keeper, or
harborer, securely confine it at all times in a locked pen that has a top,
locked fenced yard, or other locked enclosure that has a top.
         (b)   While the dog is off the premises of the owner, keeper, or
harborer, keep that dog on a chain-link leash or tether that is not more than
six feet in length and additionally do at least one of the following: keep the
dog in a locked pen that has a top, locked fenced yard, or other locked
enclosure that has a top; have the leash or tether controlled by a person who
is of suitable age and discretion or securely attach, tie, or affix the leash
or tether to the ground or a stationary object or fixture so that the dog is
adequately restrained and station a person in close enough proximity to that
dog so as to prevent it from causing injury to any person; or muzzle that dog.
      (5)   No person who has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or
more violations of division (B)(3) of this section involving the same dog and
no owner, keeper, or harborer of a dangerous dog shall fail to do the
following:
         (a)   Obtain liability insurance with an insurer authorized to write
liability insurance in this state providing coverage in each occurrence because
of damage or bodily injury to or death of a person caused by the dangerous dog
if so ordered by a court and provide proof of that liability insurance upon
request to any law enforcement officer, county dog warden, or public health
official charged with enforcing this section;
         (b)   Obtain a dangerous dog registration certificate from the County
Auditor pursuant to division (B)(9) of this section, affix a tag that
identifies the dog as a dangerous dog to the dog’s collar, and ensure that the
dog wears the collar and tag at all times;
         (c)   Notify the local dog warden immediately if any of the following
occurs:
            1.   The dog is loose or unconfined.
            2.   The dog bites a person, unless the dog is on the property of
the owner of the dog, and the person who is bitten is unlawfully trespassing or
committing a criminal act within the boundaries of that property.
            3.   The dog attacks another animal while the dog is off the
property of the owner of the dog.
         (d)   If the dog is sold, given to another person, or dies, notify the
County Auditor within ten days of the sale, transfer, or death.
      (6)   No person shall do any of the following:
         (a)   Debark or surgically silence a dog that the person knows or has
reason to believe is a dangerous dog;
         (b)   Possess a dangerous dog if the person knows or has reason to
believe that the dog has been debarked or surgically silenced;
         (c)   Falsely attest on a waiver form provided by the veterinarian
under division (B)(7) of this section that the person’s dog is not a dangerous
dog or otherwise provide false information on that written waiver form.
      (7)   Before a veterinarian debarks or surgically silences a dog, the
veterinarian may give the owner of the dog a written waiver form that attests
that the dog is not a dangerous dog. The written waiver form shall include all
of the following:
         (a)   The veterinarian’s license number and current business address;
         (b)   The number of the license of the dog if the dog is licensed;
         (c)   A reasonable description of the age, coloring, and gender of the
dog as well as any notable markings on the dog;
         (d)   The signature of the owner of the dog attesting that the owner’s
dog is not a dangerous dog;
         (e)   A statement that R.C. § 955.22(F) prohibits any person from
doing any of the following:
            1.   Debarking or surgically silencing a dog that the person knows
or has reason to believe is a dangerous dog;
            2.   Possessing a dangerous dog if the person knows or has reason
to believe that the dog has been debarked or surgically silenced;
            3.   Falsely attesting on a waiver form provided by the
veterinarian under R.C. § 955.22(G) that the person’s dog is not a dangerous
dog or otherwise provide false information on that written waiver form.
      (8)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of a violation of division
(B)(6) of this section that the veterinarian who is charged with the violation
obtained, prior to debarking or surgically silencing the dog, a written waiver
form that complies with division (B)(7) of this section and that attests that
the dog is not a dangerous dog.
      (9)   (a)   The County Auditor shall issue a dangerous dog registration
certificate to a person who is the owner of a dog, who is 18 years of age or
older, and who provides the following to the County Auditor:
            1.   A fee of $50;
            2.   The person’s address, phone number, and other appropriate
means for the local dog warden or County Auditor to contact the person;
            3.   With respect to the person and the dog for which the
registration is sought, all of the following:
               a.   Either satisfactory evidence of the dog’s current rabies
vaccination or a statement from a licensed veterinarian that a rabies
vaccination is medically contraindicated for the dog;
               b.    Either satisfactory evidence of the fact that the dog has
been neutered or spayed or a statement from a licensed veterinarian that
neutering or spaying of the dog is medically contraindicated;
               c.   Satisfactory evidence of the fact that the person has
posted and will continue to post clearly visible signs at the person’s
residence warning both minors and adults of the presence of a dangerous dog on
the property;
               d.   Satisfactory evidence of the fact that the dog has been
permanently identified by means of a microchip and the dog’s microchip number.
         (b)   Upon the issuance of a dangerous dog registration certificate to
the owner of a dog, the County Auditor shall provide the owner with a uniformly
designed tag that identifies the animal as a dangerous dog. The owner shall
renew the certificate annually for the same fee and in the same manner as the
initial certificate was obtained. If a certificate holder relocates to a new
county, the certificate holder shall follow the procedure in division (B)(9)
(c)2. of this section and, upon the expiration of the certificate issued in the
original county, shall renew the certificate in the new county.
         (c)   1.   If the owner of a dangerous dog for whom a registration
certificate has previously been obtained relocates to a new address within the
same county, the owner shall provide notice of the new address to the County
Auditor within ten days of relocating to the new address.
            2.   If the owner of a dangerous dog for whom a registration
certificate has previously been obtained relocates to a new address within
another county, the owner shall do both of the following within ten days of
relocating to the new address:
               a.   Provide written notice of the new address and a copy of the
original dangerous dog registration certificate to the County Auditor of the
new county;
               b.   Provide written notice of the new address to the County
Auditor of the county where the owner previously resided.
         (d)   The owner of a dangerous dog shall present the dangerous dog
registration certificate upon being requested to do so by any law enforcement
officer, dog warden, or public health official charged with enforcing this
section.
(R.C. § 955.22)
   (C)   Hearing.
      (1)   The municipal court or county court that has territorial
jurisdiction over the residence of the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog
shall conduct any hearing concerning the designation of the dog as a nuisance
dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog.
      (2)   If a person who is authorized to enforce this chapter has
reasonable cause to believe that a dog in the person’s jurisdiction is a
nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog, the person shall notify the owner,
keeper, or harborer of that dog, by certified mail or in person, of both of the
following:
         (a)   That the person has designated the dog a nuisance dog, dangerous
dog, or vicious dog, as applicable;
         (b)   That the owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog may request a
hearing regarding the designation in accordance with this division (C). The
notice shall include instructions for filing a request for a hearing in the
county in which the dog’s owner, keeper, or harborer resides.
      (3)   If the owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog disagrees with the
designation of the dog as a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog, as
applicable, the owner, keeper, or harborer, not later than ten days after
receiving notification of the designation, may request a hearing regarding the
determination. The request for a hearing shall be in writing and shall be filed
with the municipal court or county court that has territorial jurisdiction over
the residence of the dog’s owner, keeper, or harborer. At the hearing, the
person who designated the dog as a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog
has the burden of proving, by clear and convincing evidence, that the dog is a
nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog. The owner, keeper, or harborer of
the dog or the person who designated the dog as a nuisance dog, dangerous dog,
or vicious dog may appeal the court’s final determination as in any other case
filed in that court.
      (4)   A court, upon motion of an owner, keeper, or harborer or an
attorney representing the owner, keeper, or harborer, may order that the dog
designated as a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog be held in the
possession of the owner, keeper, or harborer until the court makes a final
determination under this section or during the pendency of an appeal, as
applicable. Until the court makes a final determination and during the pendency
of any appeal, the dog shall be confined or restrained in accordance with the
provisions of division (B)(4) that apply to dangerous dogs regardless of
whether the dog has been designated as a vicious dog or a nuisance dog rather
than a dangerous dog. The owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog shall not be
required to comply with any other requirements established in this Code or the
Ohio Revised Code that concern a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog,
as applicable, until the court makes a final determination and during the
pendency of any appeal.
      (5)   If a dog is finally determined under this division (C), or on
appeal as described in this division (C), to be a vicious dog, §
90.28(D) and divisions (B)(4) to (B)(9) of this section apply with respect to
the dog and the owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog as if the dog were a
dangerous dog, and §
90.36 applies with respect to the dog as if it were a dangerous dog, and the
court shall issue an order that specifies that those provisions apply with
respect to the dog and the owner, keeper, or harborer in that manner. As part
of the order, the court shall require the owner, keeper, or harborer to obtain
the liability insurance required under division (B)(5)(a) in an amount
described in division (D)(4)(b) of this section.
      (6)   As used in this division (C), NUISANCE DOG, DANGEROUS DOG, and
VICIOUS DOG have the same meanings as in R.C. § 955.11.
(R.C. § 955.222)
   (D)   Penalty.
      (1)   (a)   Whoever violates division (B)(2) of this section or commits a
violation of division (B)(3) of this section that involves a dog that is not a
nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog shall be fined not less than $25 or
more than $100 on a first offense, and on each subsequent offense shall be
fined not less than $75 or more than $250 and may be imprisoned for not more
than 30 days.
         (b)   In addition to the penalties prescribed in division (D)(1)(a) of
this section, if the offender is guilty of a violation of division (B)(2) of
this section or a violation of division (B)(3) of this section that involves a
dog that is not a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog, the court may
order the offender to personally supervise the dog that the offender owns,
keeps, or harbors, to cause that dog to complete dog obedience training, or to
do both.
(R.C. § 955.99(E))
      (2)   (a)   Whoever commits a violation of division (B)(3) of this
section that involves a nuisance dog is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on the
first offense and of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on each subsequent
offense involving the same dog. Upon a person being convicted of or pleading
guilty to a third violation of division (B)(3) of this section involving the
same dog, the court shall require the offender to register the involved dog as
a dangerous dog.
         (b)   In addition to the penalties prescribed in division (D)(2)(a) of
this section, if a violation of division (B)(3) of this section involves a
nuisance dog, the court may order the offender to personally supervise the
nuisance dog that the offender owns, keeps, or harbors, to cause that dog to
complete dog obedience training, or to do both.
(R.C. § 955.99(F))
      (3)   Whoever commits a violation of division (B)(3) of this section that
involves a dangerous dog, or a violation of division (B)(4) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and of a
misdemeanor of the third degree on each subsequent offense. Additionally, the
court may order the offender to personally supervise the dangerous dog that the
offender owns, keeps, or harbors, to cause that dog to complete dog obedience
training, or to do both, and the court may order the offender to obtain
liability insurance pursuant to division (B)(5) of this section. The court, in
the alternative, may order the dangerous dog to be humanely destroyed by a
licensed veterinarian, the county dog warden, or the county humane society at
the owner’s expense. With respect to a violation of division (B)(3) of this
section that involves a dangerous dog, until the court makes a final
determination and during the pendency of any appeal of a violation of that
division and at the discretion of the dog warden, the dog shall be confined or
restrained in accordance with division (B)(4) of this section or at the county
dog pound at the owner’s expense.
(R.C. § 955.99(G))
      (4)   (a)   Whoever commits a violation of division (B)(3) of this
section that involves a vicious dog is guilty of one of the following:
            1.   A felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the
dog kills or seriously injures a person. Additionally, the court shall order
that the vicious dog be humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, the
county dog warden, or the county humane society at the owner’s expense.
            2.   A misdemeanor of the first degree if the dog causes serious
injury to a person. Additionally, the court may order the vicious dog to be
humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, the county dog warden, or the
county humane society at the owner’s expense.
         (b)   If the court does not order the vicious dog to be destroyed
under division (D)(4)(a)2. of this section, the court shall issue an order that
specifies that §
90.28(D) and divisions (B)(4) to (B)(9) of this section apply with respect to
the dog and the owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog as if the dog were a
dangerous dog and that §
90.36 applies with respect to the dog as if it were a dangerous dog. As part of
the order, the court shall order the offender to obtain the liability insurance
required under division (B)(5)(a) of this section in an amount, exclusive of
interest and costs, that equals or exceeds $100,000. Until the court makes a
final determination and during the pendency of any appeal of a violation of
division (B)(3) of this section and at the discretion of the dog warden, the
dog shall be confined or restrained in accordance with the provisions described
in division (B)(4) of this section or at the county dog pound at the owner’s
expense.
(R.C. § 955.99(H))
      (5)   Whoever violates division (B)(5)(b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 955.99(J))
      (6)   Whoever violates division (B)(6)(a), (B)(6)(b), or (B)(6)(c) of
this section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law. Additionally, the court shall order that the dog involved in the violation
be humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, the county dog warden, or the
county humane society. Until the court makes a final determination and during
the pendency of any appeal of a violation of division (B)(6)(a), (B)(6)(b), or
(B)(6)(c) of this section and at the discretion of the dog warden, the dog
shall be confined or restrained in accordance with the provisions of division
(B)(4) of this section or at the county dog pound at the owner’s expense.
(R.C. § 955.99(L))
      (7)   Whoever violates division (B)(5)(a), (B)(5)(c), or (B)(5)(d) of
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 955.99(M))
      (8)   Whoever violates division (B)(9)(d) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 955.99(N))
      (9)   (a)   If a dog is confined at the county dog pound pursuant to
division (D)(3), (D)(4), or (D)(6) of this section, the county dog warden shall
give written notice of the confinement to the owner of the dog. If the county
dog warden is unable to give the notice to the owner of the dog, the county dog
warden shall post the notice on the door of the residence of the owner of the
dog or in another conspicuous place on the premises at which the dog was
seized. The notice shall include a statement that a security in the amount of
$100 is due to the county dog warden within ten days to secure payment of all
reasonable expenses, including medical care and boarding of the dog for 60
days, expected to be incurred by the county dog pound in caring for the dog
pending the determination. The county dog warden may draw from the security any
actual costs incurred in caring for the dog.
         (b)   If the person ordered to post security under division (D)(9)(a)
of this section does not do so within ten days of the confinement of the
animal, the dog is forfeited, and the county dog warden may determine the
disposition of the dog unless the court issues an order that specifies
otherwise.
         (c)   Not more than ten days after the court makes a final
determination under division (D)(3), (D)(4), or (D)(6) of this section, the
county dog warden shall provide the owner of the dog with the actual cost of
the confinement of the dog. If the county dog warden finds that the security
provided under division (D)(9)(a) of this section is less than the actual cost
of confinement of the dog, the owner shall remit the difference between the
security provided and the actual cost to the county dog warden within 30 days
after the court’s determination. If the county dog warden finds that the
security provided under division (D)(9)(a) of this section is greater than that
actual cost, the county dog warden shall remit the difference between the
security provided and the actual cost to the owner within 30 days after the
court’s determination.
(R.C. § 955.99(P))
      (10)   As used in this division (D), NUISANCE DOG, DANGEROUS DOG, and
VICIOUS DOG have the same meanings as in R.C. § 955.11.
(R.C. § 955.99(Q))
Statutory reference:
   Power of municipality to regulate animals running at large, see R.C. §§
715.23 and 955.221
§ 90.02 CONFINING ANIMAL FOUND AT LARGE; PUBLICATION OF NOTICE; LIEN.
   A person finding an animal at large in violation of §
90.01(A)(1) may, and a law enforcement officer of the municipality on view or
information shall, take and confine that animal, promptly giving notice of the
taking and confining of the animal to the owner or keeper, if known, and if not
known, by publishing a notice describing the animal once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the county or municipality where the animal was found.
If the owner or keeper does not appear and claim the animal and pay the
compensation prescribed in §
90.04 for so taking, advertising, and keeping it within ten days from the date
of the notice, that person or the county shall have a lien for that
compensation and the animal may be sold at public auction as provided in R.C. §
1311.49. The residue of the proceeds of sale shall be paid and deposited by the
Treasurer in the General Funds of the county.
(R.C. § 951.11)
§ 90.03 UNAVOIDABLE ESCAPES.
   If it is proven that an animal running at large in violation of §
90.01(A)(1) escaped from its owner or keeper without the owner’s or keeper’s
knowledge or fault, the animal shall be returned to its owner or keeper upon
payment of the compensation prescribed in §
90.04 for its taking, advertising and keeping.
(R.C. § 951.12)
§ 90.04 FEES.
   (A)   The person or municipality whose law enforcement officer takes an
animal running at large in violation of §
90.01(A)(1) is entitled to receive from the owner or keeper of the animal the
following compensation:
      (1)   For taking and advertising each animal, $5.00; and
      (2)   Reasonable expenses actually incurred for keeping each animal.
   (B)   Compensation for taking, advertising, and keeping a single herd or
flock shall not exceed $50.00 when the flock or herd belongs to one person.
(R.C. § 951.13)
§ 90.05 RABIES QUARANTINE ORDERS OF MAYOR.
   (A)   Whenever, in the judgment of the Mayor or his or her designee, rabies
is prevalent, he or she shall declare a quarantine of all dogs in the
municipality or a part thereof. During the quarantine, the owner, keeper, or
harborer of any dog shall keep it confined on the premises of the owner,
keeper, or harborer or in a pound, kennel, or other suitable place, at the
expense of the owner, keeper, or harborer, except that a dog may be permitted
to leave the premises of its owner, keeper, or harborer if it is under leash or
under the control of a responsible person. The quarantine order shall be
considered an emergency and need not be published.
   (B)   When the quarantine has been declared, the Mayor or his or her
designee may require the vaccination for rabies of all dogs within the
municipality or part thereof.
(R.C. § 955.26)
   (C)   No person shall violate a rabies quarantine order issued under this
section or R.C. § 955.26.
(R.C. § 955.39)
   (D)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor for a first offense; for each subsequent offense such person is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 955.99(C))
§ 90.06 INTERFERING WITH ENFORCEMENT OF QUARANTINE ORDERS.
   (A)   No person shall hinder, obstruct, resist or interfere with any
enforcing officer while engaged in enforcing an order issued under §
90.05.
   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the hindrance,
obstruction, resistance, or interference alleged consisted of constitutionally
protected speech only.
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.07 DOGS MAY BE KILLED FOR CERTAIN ACTS.
   Subject to R.C. § 955.261(A)(2) and (A)(3), a dog that is chasing or
approaching in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack that attempts
to bite or otherwise endanger, or that kills or injures a person, or a dog that
chases, threatens, harasses, injures, or kills livestock, poultry, other
domestic animal, or other animal that is the property of another person, except
a cat or another dog, can be killed at the time of that chasing, threatening,
harassment, approaching, attempt, killing or injury. If, in attempting to kill
such a dog, a person wounds it, the person is not liable to prosecution under
the criminal laws or ordinances that punish cruelty to animals. Nothing in this
section precludes a law enforcement officer from killing a dog that attacks a
police dog as defined in R.C. § 2921.321.
(R.C. § 955.28(A))
OFFENSES RELATING TO ANIMALS
§ 90.20 ABANDONING ANIMALS.
   (A)   No owner or keeper of a dog, cat, or other domestic animal shall
abandon the animal.
(R.C. § 959.01)
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
first degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 959.99(E)(3))
§ 90.21 INJURING ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall maliciously, or willfully and without the consent of
the owner, kill or injure a dog, cat, or any other domestic animal that is the
property of another. This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian
acting in an official capacity.
(R.C. § 959.02)
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
If the value of the animal killed or the injury done amounts to $300 or more,
whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(R.C. § 959.99(B))
   (C)   This section does not apply to a person killing or injuring an animal
or attempting to do so while endeavoring to prevent it from trespassing upon
his or her enclosure, or while it is so trespassing, or while driving it away
from his or her premises; provided within 15 days thereafter, payment is made
for damages done to such animal by killing or injuring, less the actual amount
of damage done by such animal while so trespassing, or a sufficient sum of
money is deposited with the nearest judge of a county court or judge of a
municipal court having jurisdiction within such time to cover the damages. The
deposit shall remain in the custody of such judge until there is a
determination of the damage resulting from such killing or injury and from the
trespass. The judge and his or her bondsmen shall be responsible for the
safekeeping of such money and for the payment thereof as for money collected
upon a judgment.
(R.C. § 959.04)
§ 90.22 POISONING ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall maliciously, or willfully and without the consent of
the owner, administer poison, except a licensed veterinarian acting in such
capacity, to a dog, cat, or any other domestic animal that is the property of
another; and no person shall, willfully and without the consent of the owner,
place any poisoned food where it may be easily found and eaten by any such
animal, either upon his or her own lands or the lands of another.
(R.C. § 959.03)
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 959.99(C))
   (C)   This section does not apply to a person killing or injuring an animal
or attempting to do so while endeavoring to prevent it from trespassing upon
his or her enclosure, or while it is so trespassing, or while driving it away
from his or her premises; provided that within 15 days thereafter, payment is
made for damages done to such animal by killing or injuring, less the actual
amount of damage done by such animal while so trespassing, or a sufficient sum
of money is deposited with the nearest judge of a county court or judge of a
municipal court having jurisdiction within such time to cover the damages. The
deposit shall remain in the custody of such judge until there is a
determination of the damage resulting from such killing or injury and from the
trespass. The judge and his or her bondsmen shall be responsible for the
safekeeping of such money and for the payment thereof as for money collected
upon a judgment.
(R.C. § 959.04)
§ 90.23 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS; CRUELTY TO COMPANION ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall:
      (1)   Torture an animal, deprive one of necessary sustenance,
unnecessarily or cruelly beat, needlessly mutilate or kill, or impound or
confine an animal without supplying it during the confinement with a sufficient
quantity of good wholesome food and water;
      (2)   Impound or confine an animal without affording it, during the
confinement, access to shelter from wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct
sunlight, if it can reasonably be expected that the animal would otherwise
become sick or in some other way suffer. This division does not apply to
animals impounded or confined prior to slaughter. For the purpose of this
section, SHELTER means an artificial enclosure, windbreak, sunshade, or natural
windbreak or sunshade that is developed from the earth’s contour, tree
development, or vegetation;
      (3)   Carry or convey an animal in a cruel or inhuman manner;
      (4)   Keep animals other than cattle, poultry or fowl, swine, sheep, or
goats in an enclosure without wholesome exercise and change of air, nor feed
cows on food that produces impure or unwholesome milk;
      (5)   Detain livestock in railroad cars or compartments longer than 28
hours after they are so placed without supplying them with necessary food,
water, and attention, nor permit the stock to be so crowded as to overlie,
crush, wound, or kill each other.
   (B)   Upon the written request of the owner or person in custody of any
particular shipment of livestock, which written request shall be separate and
apart from any printed bill of lading or other railroad form, the length of
time in which the livestock may be detained in any cars or compartment without
food, water, and attention may be extended to 36 hours without penalty
therefor. Division (A) of this section does not prevent the dehorning of
cattle.
   (C)   All fines collected for violations of division (A) of this section
shall be paid to the society or association for the prevention of cruelty to
animals, if there is one in the municipality; otherwise, all fines shall be
paid to the General Fund.
(R.C. § 959.13)
   (D)   Cruelty to companion animals.
      (1)   As used in this section:
         ANIMAL RESCUE FOR DOGS. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 956.01.
         BOARDING KENNEL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 956.01.
         CAPTIVE WHITE-TAILED DEER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1531.01.
         COMPANION ANIMAL. Means any animal that is kept inside a residential
dwelling and any dog or cat regardless of where it is kept, including a pet
store as defined in R.C. § 956.01. The term does not include livestock or any
wild animal.
         CRUELTY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1717.01.
         DOG KENNEL. Means an animal rescue for dogs, a boarding kennel, or a
training kennel.
         FEDERAL ANIMAL WELFARE ACT. Means the “Laboratory Animal Act of 1966”,
Pub. L. No. 89-544, 80 Stat. 350 (1966), 7 U.S.C. §§ 2131 et seq., as amended
by the “Animal Welfare Act of 1970”, Pub. L. No. 91-579, 84 Stat. 1560 (1970),
the “Animal Welfare Act Amendments of 1976”, Pub. L. No. 94-279, 90 Stat. 417
(1976), and the “Food Security Act of 1985”, Pub. L. No. 99-198, 99 Stat. 1354
(1985), and as it may be subsequently amended.
         LIVESTOCK. Means horses, mules, and other equidae; cattle, sheep,
goats, and other bovidae; swine and other suidae; poultry; alpacas; llamas;
captive white-tailed deer; and any other animal that is raised or maintained
domestically for food or fiber.
         PRACTICE OF VETERINARY MEDICINE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4741.01.
         RESIDENTIAL DWELLING. Means a structure or shelter or the portion of a
structure or shelter that is used by one or more humans for the purpose of a
habitation.
         SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM. Means any of the following:
            1.   Physical harm that carries an unnecessary or unjustifiable
substantial risk of death;
            2.   Physical harm that involves either partial or total permanent
incapacity;
            3.   Physical harm that involves acute pain of a duration that
results in substantial suffering or that involves any degree of prolonged or
intractable pain.
         TORMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1717.01.
         TORTURE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1717.01.
         TRAINING KENNEL. Means an establishment operating for profit that
keeps, houses, and maintains dogs for the purpose of training the dogs in
return for a fee or other consideration.
         WILD ANIMAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1531.01.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly torture, torment, needlessly mutilate or
maim, cruelly beat, poison, needlessly kill, or commit an act of cruelty
against a companion animal.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly cause serious physical harm to a
companion animal.
      (4)   No person who confines or who is the custodian or caretaker of a
companion animal shall negligently do any of the following:
         (a)   Torture, torment, or commit an act of cruelty against the
companion animal;
         (b)   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if it can reasonably be
expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way
as a result of or due to the deprivation or confinement;
         (c)   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it can reasonably be expected
that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way as a
result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
      (5)   No person who confines or who is the custodian or caretaker of a
companion animal shall recklessly deprive the companion animal of necessary
sustenance or confine the companion animal without supplying it during the
confinement with sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water.
      (6)   No owner, manager, or employee of a dog kennel who confines or is
the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall knowingly do any of the
following:
         (a)   Torture, torment, needlessly mutilate or maim, cruelly beat,
poison, needlessly kill, or commit an act of cruelty against the companion
animal;
         (b)   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if it is reasonably
expected that the companion animal would die or experience unnecessary or
unjustifiable pain or suffering as a result of the deprivation or confinement;
         (c)   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it is reasonably expected
that the companion animal would die or experience unnecessary or unjustifiable
pain or suffering as a result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
      (7)   No owner, manager, or employee of a dog kennel who confines or is
the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall negligently do any of
the following:
         (a)   Torture, torment, or commit an act of cruelty against the
companion animal;
         (b)   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if it can reasonably be
expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way
as a result of or due to the deprivation or confinement;
         (c)   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it can reasonably be expected
that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way as a
result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
      (8)   Divisions (D)(2), (D)(3), (D)(4), (D)(5), (D)(6), and (D)(7) of
this section do not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   A companion animal used in scientific research conducted by an
institution in accordance with the federal animal welfare act and related
regulations;
         (b)   The lawful practice of veterinary medicine by a person who has
been issued a license, temporary permit, or registration certificate to do so
under R.C. Chapter 4741;
         (c)   Dogs being used or intended for use for hunting or field trial
purposes, provided that the dogs are being treated in accordance with usual and
commonly accepted practices for the care of hunting dogs;
         (d)   The use of common training devices, if the companion animal is
being treated in accordance with usual and commonly accepted practices for the
training of animals;
         (e)   The administering of medicine to a companion animal that was
properly prescribed by a person who has been issued a license, temporary
permit, or registration certificate under R.C. Chapter 4741.
      (9)   Notwithstanding any section of the Ohio Revised Code that otherwise
provides for the distribution of fine moneys, the Clerk of Court shall forward
all fines the Clerk collects that are so imposed for any violation of this
division (D) to the Treasurer of the municipality, whose county humane society
or law enforcement agency is to be paid the fine money as determined under this
division. The Treasurer shall pay the fine moneys to the county humane society
or the county, township, municipal corporation, or state law enforcement agency
in this state that primarily was responsible for or involved in the
investigation and prosecution of the violation. If a county humane society
receives any fine moneys under this division, the county humane society shall
use the fine moneys either to provide the training that is required for humane
society agents under R.C. § 1717.061 or to provide additional training for
humane society agents.
(R.C. § 959.131)
   (E)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree. In addition, the court may order the offender
to forfeit the animal or livestock and may provide for its disposition
including but not limited to the sale of the animal or livestock. If an animal
or livestock is forfeited and sold pursuant to this division, the proceeds from
the sale first shall be applied to pay the expenses incurred with regard to the
care of the animal from the time it was taken from the custody of the former
owner. The balance of the proceeds from the sale, if any, shall be paid to the
former owner of the animal.
(R.C. § 959.99(D))
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (D)(2) or (D)(5) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (D)(3) of this section is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (D)(4) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
first degree on each subsequent offense.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (D)(6) of this section is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (D)(7) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (6)   (a)   A court may order a person who is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of division (D) of this section to forfeit to an
impounding agency, as defined in R.C. § 959.132, any or all of the companion
animals in that person’s ownership or care. The court also may prohibit or
place limitations on the person’s ability to own or care for any companion
animals for a specified or indefinite period of time.
         (b)   A court may order a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty
to a violation of division (A) of this section or division (D) of this section
to reimburse an impounding agency for the reasonably necessary costs incurred
by the agency for the care of a companion animal that the agency impounded as a
result of the investigation or prosecution of the violation, provided that the
costs were not otherwise paid under R.C. § 959.132.
      (7)   If a court has reason to believe that a person who is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of division (D) of this section has a mental or
emotional disorder that contributed to the violation, the court may impose as a
community control sanction or as a condition of probation a requirement that
the offender undergo psychological evaluation or counseling. The court shall
order the offender to pay the costs of the evaluation or counseling.
(R.C. § 959.99(E))
Statutory reference:
   Impoundment of companion animals; notice and hearing, see R.C. § 959.132
§ 90.24 ANIMAL FIGHTS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly do either of the following:
      (1)   Engage in cockfighting, bearbaiting, or pitting an animal against
another;
      (2)   Use, train, or possess any animal for seizing, detaining, or
maltreating a domestic animal.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly do either of the following:
      (1)   Be employed at cockfighting, bearbaiting, or pitting an animal
against another;
      (2)   Do any of the following regarding an event involving cockfighting,
bearbaiting, or pitting an animal against another:
         (a)   Wager money or anything else of value on the results of the
event;
         (b)   Pay money or give anything else of value in exchange for
admission to or being present at the event;
         (c)   Receive money or anything else of value in exchange for the
admission of another person to the event or for another person to be present at
the event;
         (d)   Use, possess, or permit or cause to be present at the event any
device or substance intended to enhance an animal’s ability to fight or to
inflict injury on another animal;
         (e)   Permit or cause a minor to be present at the event if any person
present at or involved with the event is conducting any of the activities
described in division (B)(1) or (B)(2)(a), (B)(2)(b), (B)(2)(c), or (B)(2)(d)
of this section.
   (C)   A person who knowingly witnesses cockfighting, bearbaiting, or an
event in which one animal is pitted against another when a violation of
division (B) of this section is occurring at the cockfighting, bearbaiting, or
event is an aider and abettor and has committed a violation of this division.
(R.C. § 959.15)
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) or (C) of this section is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 959.99(C), (I))
Statutory reference:
   Dogfighting, felony provisions, see R.C. § 959.16
§ 90.25 TRAPSHOOTING.
   (A)   Live birds or fowl shall not be used as targets in trapshooting.
(R.C. § 959.17)
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 959.99(C))
§ 90.26 LOUD DOG.
   (A)   No person shall own, harbor or keep in custody a dog which disturbs
the peace by barking, yelping, howling or making other loud noises to the
annoyance and/or discomfort of any person. Continuous barking, yelping, howling
and/or making other loud noises for 15 consecutive minutes by such dog, whether
confined inside a residence or building or to the outside area, shall be deemed
to have disturbed the peace and to have caused the annoyance and discomfort of
persons; provided, that at the time of the complaint, no person or persons were
trespassing or threatening to trespass upon the private property of the owner,
and provided that the dog was not being teased or provoked in any manner.
   (B)   Any person who shall allow any dog habitually to remain, be lodged or
fed within any dwelling, building, yard or enclosure owned or occupied by such
person shall be considered as harboring or keeping such dog.
   (C)   Upon an initial complaint, an enforcement officer shall warn the
person in writing of the violation. Upon a second such complaint within 30
days, the enforcement officer shall charge the person with a violation of this
section.
   (D)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to owners, operators or
employees of licensed veterinary hospitals, licensed kennels, or licensed
animal boarding establishments, nor does this section apply to blind, deaf, or
hearing impaired, or mobility impaired persons when the dog serves as an
assistance dog.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 90.27 DOG TAGS.
   (A)   No owner of a dog, except a dog constantly confined to a dog kennel
registered under R.C. Chapter 955 or one licensed under R.C. Chapter 956, shall
fail to require the dog to wear, at all times, a valid tag issued in connection
with a certificate of registration. A dog found not wearing at any time a valid
tag shall be prima-facie evidence of lack of registration and shall subject any
dog found not wearing such a tag to impounding, sale, or destruction.
(R.C. § 955.10)
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 955.99(B))
§ 90.28 NUISANCE, DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOG DEFINED; TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP
CERTIFICATE; FORM STATING DOG’S PRIOR BEHAVIOR.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      DANGEROUS DOG.
         (a)   A dog that, without provocation, and subject to division (b) of
this definition, has done any of the following:
            1.   Caused injury, other than killing or serious injury, to any
person;
            2.   Killed another dog;
            3.   Been the subject of a third or subsequent violation of R.C. §
955.22(C) or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
         (b)   “Dangerous dog” does not include a police dog that has caused
injury, other than killing or serious injury, to any person or has killed
another dog while the police dog is being used to assist one or more law
enforcement officers in the performance of their official duties.
      MENACING FASHION. Means a dog that would cause any person being chased or
approached to reasonably believe that the dog will cause physical injury to
that person.
      NUISANCE DOG.
         (a)   Subject to division (b) of this definition, “nuisance dog” means
a dog that without provocation and while off the premises of its owner, keeper,
or harborer has chased or approached a person in either a menacing fashion or
an apparent attitude of attack or has attempted to bite or otherwise endanger
any person.
         (b)   “Nuisance dog” does not include a police dog that, while being
used to assist one or more law enforcement officers in the performance of
official duties, has chased or approached a person in either a menacing fashion
or an apparent attitude of attack or has attempted to bite or otherwise
endanger any person.
      POLICE DOG. Means a dog that has been trained and may be used to assist
one or more law enforcement officers in the performance of their official
duties.
      SERIOUS INJURY. Any of the following:
         (a)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death;
         (b)   Any physical harm that involves a permanent incapacity, whether
partial or total, or a temporary, substantial incapacity;
         (c)   Any physical harm that involves a permanent disfigurement or a
temporary, serious disfigurement;
         (d)   Any physical harm that involves acute pain of a duration that
results in substantial suffering or any degree of prolonged or intractable
pain.
      VICIOUS DOG.
         (a)   A dog that, without provocation and subject to division (b) of
this definition, has killed or caused serious injury to any person.
         (b)   “Vicious dog” does not include either of the following:
            1.   A police dog that has killed or caused serious injury to any
person while the police dog is being used to assist one or more law enforcement
officers in the performance of their official duties;
            2.   A dog that has killed or caused serious injury to any person
while a person was committing or attempting to commit a trespass or other
criminal offense on the property of the owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog.
      WITHOUT PROVOCATION. A dog acts without provocation when it was not
teased, tormented, or abused by a person, or it was not coming to the aid or
the defense of a person who was not engaged in illegal or criminal activity and
who was not using the dog as a means of carrying out such activity.
   (B)   Upon the transfer of ownership of any dog, the seller of the dog shall
give the buyer a transfer of ownership certificate that shall be signed by the
seller. The certificate shall contain the registration number of the dog, the
name of the seller, and a brief description of the dog. Blank forms of the
certificate may be obtained from the County Auditor. A transfer of ownership
shall be recorded by the Auditor upon presentation of a transfer of ownership
certificate that is signed by the former owner of a dog and that is accompanied
by a fee of $5.
   (C)   Prior to the transfer of ownership or possession of any dog, upon the
buyer’s or other transferee’s request, the seller or other transferor of the
dog shall give to the person a written notice relative to the behavior and
propensities of the dog.
   (D)   Within ten days after the transfer of ownership or possession of any
dog, if the seller or transferor of the dog has knowledge that the dog is a
dangerous dog, the seller or other transferor shall give to the buyer or
transferee, the Board of Health for the district in which the buyer or other
transferee resides, and the dog warden of the county in which the buyer or
other transferee resides a completed copy of a written form on which the seller
shall furnish the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the buyer or other transferee of the dog;
      (2)   The age, sex, color, breed and current registration number of the
dog;
      (3)   In addition, the seller shall answer the following questions which
shall be specifically stated on the form as follows:
   Has the dog ever chased or attempted to attack or bite a person? If yes,
describe the incident(s) in which the behavior occurred.
   Has the dog ever bitten a person? If yes, describe the incident(s) in which
the behavior occurred.
   Has the dog ever seriously injured or killed a person? If yes, describe the
incident(s) in which the behavior occurred.
      (4)   The dog warden of the county in which the seller resides furnishes
the form to the seller at no cost.
   (E)   No seller or other transferor of a dog shall fail to comply with the
applicable requirements of divisions (B) to (D) of this section.
(R.C. § 955.11)
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section because failure to
comply with division (B) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section because of a failure
to comply with division (C) or (D) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor on a first offense and of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on
each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 955.99(A))
§ 90.29 FAILURE TO REGISTER DOG OR DOG KENNEL.
   (A)   No owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog more than three months of age,
nor owner of a dog kennel, shall fail to file an application for registration
required by R.C. § 955.01, nor shall he or she fail to pay the legal fee
therefor.
(R.C. § 955.21)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $25 nor
more than $100 on a first offense, and on each subsequent offense shall be
fined not less than $75 nor more than $250 and may be imprisoned for not more
than 30 days.
(R.C. § 955.99(E))
§ 90.30 HINDERING THE CAPTURE OF UNREGISTERED DOG.
   (A)   No person shall obstruct or interfere with anyone lawfully engaged in
capturing an unlicensed dog or making an examination of a dog wearing a tag.
(R.C. § 955.24)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 955.99(B))
   (C)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the hindrance,
obstruction, resistance, or interference alleged consisted of constitutionally
protected speech only.
§ 90.31 UNLAWFUL TAG.
   (A)   No person shall own, keep, or harbor a dog wearing a fictitious,
altered, or invalid registration tag or a registration tag not issued by the
County Auditor in connection with the registration of that animal.
(R.C. § 955.25)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 955.99(B))
§ 90.32 ASSISTANCE DOG WITH BLIND, DEAF, OR HEARING IMPAIRED PERSON, OR PERSON
WITH A MOBILITY IMPAIRMENT, OR TRAINER.
   (A)   When a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired, a person with a
mobility impairment, or a trainer of an assistance dog is accompanied by an
assistance dog, the person or trainer, as applicable, is entitled to the full
and equal accommodations, advantages, facilities, and privileges of all public
conveyances, hotels, and lodging places, all places of public accommodation,
amusement, or resort, and other places to which the general public is invited,
and may take the dog into such conveyances and places, subject only to the
conditions and limitations applicable to all persons not so accompanied, except
that:
      (1)   The dog shall not occupy a seat in any public conveyance; and
      (2)   The dog shall be leashed while using the facilities of a common
carrier.
      (3)   Any dog in training to become an assistance dog shall be covered by
a liability insurance policy provided by the nonprofit special agency engaged
in such work protecting members of the public against personal injury or
property damage caused by the dog.
   (B)   No person shall deprive a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing
impaired, a person who has a mobility impairment, or a trainer of an assistance
dog when the person or trainer, as applicable, is accompanied by an assistance
dog of any of the advantages, facilities, or privileges provided in division
(A) of this section, and no person shall charge the person or trainer a fee or
charge for the dog.
(R.C. § 955.43(A), (B))
   (C)   As used in this section:
      ASSISTANCE DOG. A dog that has been trained by a nonprofit or for-profit
special agency and that is one of the following:
         (a)   A guide dog;
         (b)   A hearing dog;
         (c)   A service dog.
      BLIND. Means either of the following:
         (a)   Vision 20/200 or less in the better eye with proper correction;
         (b)   Field defect in the better eye with proper correction that
contracts the peripheral field so that the diameter of the visual field
subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees.
      GUIDE DOG. Means a dog that has been trained or is in training to assist
a blind person.
      HEARING DOG. Means a dog that has been trained or is in training to
assist a deaf or hearing-impaired person.
      INSTITUTIONS OF EDUCATION. Means:
         (a)   Any state university or college as defined in R.C. § 3345.32;
         (b)   Any private college or university that holds a certificate of
authorization issued by the Ohio Board of Regents pursuant to R.C. Chapter
1713;
         (c)   Any elementary or secondary school operated by a board of
education;
         (d)   Any chartered or nonchartered nonpublic elementary or secondary
school; or
         (e)   Any school issued a certificate of registration by the state
Board of Career Colleges and Schools.
      PERSON WITH A MOBILITY IMPAIRMENT. Any person, regardless of age, who is
subject to a physiological impairment regardless of its cause, nature, or
extent that renders the person unable to move about without the aid of
crutches, a wheelchair, or any other form of support, or that limits the
person’s functional ability to ambulate, climb, descend, sit, rise, or perform
any related function. The phrase includes a person with a neurological or
psychological disability that limits the person’
      SERVICE DOG. Means a dog that has been trained or is in training to
assist a person with a mobility impairment.
(R.C. §§ 955.011(B), 955.43(C))
   (D)   Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 955.99(D))
§ 90.33 RETAIL SALE AND TRANSPORTATION OF DOGS.
   (A)   No person shall sell, offer to sell, or expose for sale to the general
public at retail any dog under the age of eight weeks.
   (B)   No person shall receive or ship, for sale to the general public at
retail, any dog that is not accompanied by a certificate, issued by a licensed
veterinarian who is accredited by the United States Department of Agriculture
and authorized to issue health certificates for animals in interstate commerce,
certifying that the dog is sufficiently sound and healthy to be reasonably
expected to withstand the intended transportation without adverse effect.
   (C)   This section does not apply to the transportation of dogs in
interstate commerce by common carrier, provided that neither the point of
shipment nor the point of receiving is within this state.
   (D)   No person responsible for the transportation of a pregnant dog shall
be liable in damages for any injury or illness of, or the death of, the dog or
any puppies, whenever the injuries, illness or death results from the birth of
such puppies during the time the dog is being transported.
(R.C. § 955.50)
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for a
first offense; each subsequent offense is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 955.99(C))
§ 90.34 COLORING RABBITS OR BABY POULTRY; REGULATION OF SALE AND DISPLAY.
   (A)   No person shall dye or otherwise color any rabbit or baby poultry,
including but not limited to chicks and ducklings. No person shall sell, offer
for sale, expose for sale, raffle or give away any rabbit or baby poultry which
has been dyed or otherwise colored. No poultry younger than four weeks of age
may be sold, given away or otherwise distributed to any person in lots of less
than three. Stores, shops, vendors and others offering young poultry for sale
or other distribution shall provide and operate brooders or other heating
devices that may be necessary to maintain poultry in good health, and shall
keep adequate food and water available to the poultry at all times.
(R.C. § 925.62)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree on a first offense; each subsequent offense is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
(R.C. § 925.99(B))
§ 90.35 JACKLIGHTING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall throw or cast the rays of a spotlight or other
artificial light from any vehicle into any field, woodland, or forest while
having in his or her possession a hunting device, or throw or cast the rays of
a spotlight or other artificial light from any vehicle into any field,
woodland, or forest for the purpose of locating a wild animal.
   (B)   This section does not apply to law enforcement officers, wildlife
officers, military personnel, and officers or employees of the Department of
Natural Resources while in the performance of their duties, or to any landowner
or lessee having a reason to use a light while engaged in surveillance or
protection of his or her property.
   (C)   An officer whose duty it is to enforce this chapter may arrest a
person whom he or she has reasonable grounds to believe is violating this
section, search the vehicle for firearms or other hunting implements in the
possession or under the control of that person, and seize the same.
(R.C. § 1533.161)
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 1533.99(B))
§ 90.36 RESTRICTIONS ON DOG OWNERSHIP FOR CERTAIN CONVICTED FELONS.
   (A)   No person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a felony offense of
violence committed on or after May 22, 2012 or a felony violation of any
provision of R.C. Chapter 959, R.C. Chapter 2923 or R.C. Chapter 2925 committed
on or after May 22, 2012 shall knowingly own, possess, have custody of, or
reside in a residence with either of the following for a period of three years
commencing either upon the date of release of the person from any period of
incarceration imposed for the offense or violation or, if the person is not
incarcerated for the offense or violation, upon the date of the person’s final
release from the other sanctions imposed for the offense or violation:
      (1)   An unspayed or unneutered dog older than 12 weeks of age;
      (2)   Any dog that has been determined to be a dangerous dog under R.C.
Chapter 955 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (B)   A person described in division (A) of this section shall microchip for
permanent identification any dog owned, possessed by, or in the custody of the
person.
   (C)   (1)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any person who is
confined in a correctional institution of the Department of Rehabilitation and
Correction.
      (2)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any person with
respect to any dog that the person owned, possessed, had custody of, or resided
in a residence with prior to May 22, 2012.
(R.C. § 955.54)
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) or (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 955.99(O))
§ 90.37 SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH AN ANIMAL.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      ANIMAL. Means a nonhuman mammal, bird, reptile, or amphibian, either dead
or alive.
      OFFENSE. Means a violation of this section or an attempt, in violation of
R.C. § 2923.02, to violate this section.
      OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 959.132.
      SEXUAL CONDUCT. Means either of the following committed for the purpose
of sexual gratification:
         (a)   Any act done between a person and animal that involves contact
of the penis of one and the vulva of the other, the penis of one and the penis
of the other, the penis of one and the anus of the other, the mouth of one and
the penis of the other, the mouth of one and the anus of the other, the vulva
of one and the vulva of the other, the mouth of one and the vulva of the other,
any other contact between a reproductive organ of one and a reproductive organ
of the other, or any other insertion of a reproductive organ of one into an
orifice of the other;
         (b)   Without a bona fide veterinary or animal husbandry purpose to do
so, the insertion, however slight, of any part of a person’s body or any
instrument, apparatus, or other object into the vaginal, anal, or reproductive
opening of an animal.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly engage in sexual conduct with an animal or
knowingly possess, sell, or purchase an animal with the intent that it be
subjected to sexual conduct.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly organize, promote, aid, or abet in the
conduct of an act involving any sexual conduct with an animal.
(R.C. § 959.21)
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
second degree. In addition, the court may order the offender to forfeit the
animal or livestock and may provide for its disposition including but not
limited to the sale of the animal or livestock. If an animal or livestock is
forfeited and sold pursuant to this division, the proceeds from the sale first
shall be applied to pay the expenses incurred with regard to the care of the
animal from the time it was taken from the custody of the former owner. The
balance of the proceeds from the sale, if any, shall be paid to the former
owner of the animal.
(R.C. § 959.99(D))
      (2)   If a court has reason to believe that a person who is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of this section suffers from a mental or
emotional disorder that contributed to the violation, the court may impose as a
community control sanction or as a condition of probation a requirement that
the offender undergo psychological evaluation or counseling. The court shall
order the offender to pay the costs of the evaluation or counseling.
(R.C. § 959.99(E)(7))
§ 90.38 CONFINEMENT OF DOGS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper or harborer of any female
dog to permit such dog to go beyond the premises of such owner or keeper at any
time such dog is in heat, unless such dog is properly on a leash.
   (B)   The owner or keeper of every dog shall, at all times, keep such dog
either confined upon the premises of the owner or under reasonable control of
some person, except when lawfully engaged in hunting accompanied by an owner or
handler.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $10 or more
than $25.
(Prior Code, § 90.26) (Ord. 1981-9, passed 9-22-1981) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.39 TETHERING OF DOGS AND CATS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Any person owning and/or controlling animals, whether vaccinated or
unvaccinated, licensed or unlicensed, shall not allow said animal to be tied or
chained to dog houses, trees, barrels, fences or other stationary objects as a
means of confinement to property. Confinement by tethering shall be considered
cruel treatment.
   (B)   No person shall, at any time, fasten, chain or tie any animal or cause
such animal to be fastened, chained or tied while such animal is on the animal
owner’s property or on the property of the animal owner’s landlord, or on any
property within the limits of the village.
   (C)   Dogs shall not be allowed to run at large. All dogs must be restrained
by some physical means; however, a dog shall not be considered at large when
restrained within the owner’s property or on the property of the animal owner’s
landlord by means of an invisible fence (or similar product); or held or
controlled by some person by means of a collar, properly fitting harness and
leash. A chain or rope may not be used in place of a leash when walking dogs.
   (D)   From and after the passage of this section, any person owning animals
shall confine such animal within an adequate fence or enclosure, or within a
house, garage or other building. Sterilized cats are exempt from confinement.
   (E)   Any dogs, six months or older, confined within a fenced yard or
enclosure must have an adequate space for exercise based on a dimension of at
least 150 square feet per dog. Provided further, that where dogs are kept or
housed on property without a fenced yard, the owner of such dogs or persons who
have custody of such dogs shall provide an enclosure for such dogs meeting the
150 square foot per dog dimension. Such enclosure shall be constructed of chain
link or similar type materials with all four sides enclosed. The enclosure
shall be sufficient height to prevent the dog from escaping from such
enclosure. A person may not keep six or more dogs, other than puppies less than
six months old, in an enclosure unless the enclosure meets the requirements
outlined herein.
   (F)   (1)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit owners or
others from:
         (a)   Walking dogs with a hand-held leash during a lawful animal
event, veterinary treatment, grooming, training or law enforcement activity; or
         (b)   What is required to protect the safety or welfare of a person or
the dog if the dog’s owner or handler remains with the dog throughout the
period of the restraint.
      (2)   A person temporarily restraining a dog with a chain or tether shall
attach the chain or tether to a properly fitting collar (at least two human
fingers must fit between the collar and the dog’s neck) or harness worn by the
dog.
      (3)   A person may not wrap a chain or tether directly around a dog’s
neck. A person may not temporarily restrain a dog with a chain or tether that
weighs more than one-eighteenth of the dog’s body weight. A chain or tether
used to temporarily restrain a dog must, by design and placement, be unlikely
to become entangled.
      (4)   A person may not temporarily restrain a dog in a manner that does
not allow the dog to have access to necessary shelter and water.
      (5)   A person may not temporarily restrain a dog in a manner that allows
the dog to move outside the person’s property.
   (G)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit owners from
allowing dogs to be attached to overhead runs or trolley systems (i.e., leash
or chain attached to an overhead wire at least ten feet long, that allows the
dog to move unheeded) if the owner is present; to tether the dog only to allow
for the cleaning of the dog’s enclosure; or while the owner is outside with the
dog and is in visual contact of the animal at all times to prevent injury to
the dog.
   (H)   (1)   Shelter must be sanitary, of sound construction, and provide
adequate protection from precipitation, cold and heat. Shelter must be placed
in a dry area free of debris, feces and standing water. It must have at least
three sides and a weatherproof roof; have a solid sanitary floor, be adequately
ventilated; provide shelter from wind, rain, sun and the elements at all times.
Suitable drainage must be provided so that water is not standing in or around
the shelter.
      (2)   Shelter must be small enough to retain the animal’s body heat and
must be large enough for the animal to stand, turn around and lie down without
touching the sides or top of the shelter.
      (3)   In cases of extreme weather (outdoor temperatures reach freezing
levels (32°F) or a heat advisory has been issued by a local or state authority
or jurisdiction), all cats, dogs and small domestic animals must be moved
indoors or to an area that provides shelter from the weather.
      (4)   All areas where animals are kept shall be cleaned regularly so that
fecal matter is disposed of so not to attract insects or rodents, become
unsightly or cause objectionable odor.
      (5)   If multiple animals are present in one location, each animal must
have a separate and clean food bowl. Each animal must have access to shelter,
and the owner must meet all standards as detailed in this section.
   (I)   A person that is the owner or custodian of any animal may be found to
be guilty of animal neglect by finding that any one or more of the following
conditions were allowed to exist:
      (1)   Lack of immediately available proper drinking water or inadequate
supply of drinkable water;
      (2)   Lack of wholesome, palatable, free from contamination food or
sustenance to be provided in sufficient quantity;
      (3)   Failure to provide an animal sufficient space to stand to full
height, turn around and lay down and make normal postural adjustments for
comfort;
      (4)   The lack of providing a stationary shelter from weather such as
sun, rain, wind or inclement weather or to maintain said shelter in a clean,
sanitary condition free of excrement and unreasonable objectionable odors; and/
or
      (5)   To have an animal in possession that is known to or suspected to
have an injury, accidental or deliberate, or to exhibit any signs of disease,
shock, parasite infestation, temperature fluctuations, tremors, swelling, open
wounds, inability to eat, blistering or abnormal bleeding, partial paralysis,
discharge blood or mucus, failure to arrange for medical care.
(Prior Code, § 90.27) (Ord. 2007-53, passed 12-11-2007) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.40 DOG EXCREMENT REMOVAL.
   No person shall allow a dog under his or her control to be upon public
property or upon the property of another, absent the consent of the owner or
occupant of the property, without some device or means for the removal and
containment of such dog’s excrement; nor shall any person fail to remove any
excrement deposited by any dog under his or her control on public or private
property.
(Prior Code, § 90.28) (Ord. 1993-36, passed 12-14-1993) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.99 PENALTY
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which another
penalty is not specifically provided shall be subject to the penalty as
provided in §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   A person who violates §
90.39 is guilty of an infraction of a misdemeanor.
      (2)   An infraction under §
90.39 is punishable upon conviction by a fine of up to $150 as to each animal
with respect to which a violation occurs.
      (3)   (a)   An animal control officer may issue a correction warning to a
person who violates §
90.39, requiring the owner to correct the violation within five business days,
in lieu of an infraction or misdemeanor, unless the violation endangers the
health or safety of the animal, the animal has been wounded as a result of the
violation or a correction warning has previously been issued to the individual.
         (b)   An animal control officer may remove an animal that is living in
conditions that do not meet the minimum standards outlined herein. If
modifications to the shelter or living conditions do not meet the minimum
standards within five business days, that animal becomes property of the
village.
(Prior Code, § 90.27) (Ord. 2007-53, passed 12-11-2007)
CHAPTER 91: FIREWORKS, EXPLOSIVES AND FIRE PREVENTION
Section
Fireworks and Explosives
   
91.01   Definitions
   
91.02   Possession, sale, and use of fireworks
   
91.03   Permit to use fireworks
   
91.04   Manufacturing or wholesale sale without a license; prohibitions
   
91.05   Purchasers to comply with law; unauthorized purchases
   
91.06   Exhibition without a license; prohibitions for exhibitions
   
91.07   Unauthorized transportation or shipping
   
91.08   Application of subchapter
   
91.09   Arrest of offender; seizure and forfeiture of fireworks; distribution
of fines
   
91.10   Safety requirements for fireworks showroom structures
   
91.11   Storage of explosives
   
91.12   Blasting permit
Fire Prevention
   
91.30   Removal of flammable materials or obstructions
   
91.31   Protective appliances
   
91.32   Compliance with order
   
91.33   Waste receptacles
   
91.34   Hotel to have fire warning device producing visible signal
   
91.35   Fire suppression systems
   
91.36   Violations of State Fire Code prohibited
   
91.37   Posting arson notices in hotels, motels and other places
   
91.38   Negligent burning
   
91.39   Spreading alarm of unfriendly fire
   
91.40   Unvented heaters
Open Burning
   
91.55   Definitions
   
91.56   Relations to other prohibitions
   
91.57   Open burning in restricted areas
   
91.58   Permission and notice to open burn
   
91.59   Freestanding outdoor furnaces prohibited
   
91.60   State Fire Code adopted by reference
 
   
91.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Fire Marshal, fire safety, see R.C. Chapter 3737
   Fireworks, state law provisions, see R.C. Chapter 3743
   Ohio Fire Code, see O.A.C. Chapter 1301:7-7
   Open burning, see O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19
   Power to regulate explosives, see R.C. § 715.60
FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES
§ 91.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   1.3G FIREWORKS. Display fireworks consistent with regulations of the United
States Department of Transportation as expressed using the designation
“Division 1.3” in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
   1.4G FIREWORKS. Consumer fireworks consistent with regulations of the United
States Department of Transportation as expressed using the designation
“Division 1.4” in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
   BEER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4301.01.
   BOOBY TRAP. A small tube that has a string protruding from both ends that
has a friction-sensitive composition and that is ignited by pulling the ends of
the string.
   CIGARETTE LOAD. A small wooden peg that is coated with a small quantity of
explosive composition and that is ignited in a cigarette.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   DISCHARGE SITE. An area immediately surrounding the mortars used to fire
aerial shells.
   FIREWORKS. Any composition or device prepared for the purpose of producing a
visible or an audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, except
ordinary matches and except as provided in R.C. § 3743.80.
   FIREWORKS INCIDENT. Any action or omission that occurs at a fireworks
exhibition that results in injury or death, or a substantial risk of injury or
death, to any person, and that involves either of the following:
      (1)   The handling or other use, or the results of the handling or other
use, of fireworks or associated equipment or other materials;
      (2)   The failure of any person to comply with any applicable requirement
imposed by this chapter or R.C. Chapter 3743, or any applicable rule adopted
under this chapter or R.C. Chapter 3743.
   FIREWORKS INCIDENT SITE. A discharge site or other location at a fireworks
exhibition where a fireworks incident occurs, a location where an injury or
death associated with a fireworks incident occurs, or a location where evidence
of a fireworks incident or an injury or death associated with a fireworks
incident is found.
   FIREWORKS PLANT. All buildings and other structures in which the
manufacturing of fireworks, or the storage or sale of manufactured fireworks by
a manufacturer, takes place.
   FOUNTAIN DEVICE. Means a specific type of 1.4G firework that meets all of
the following criteria:
      (1)   It is nonaerial and nonreport producing.
      (2)   It is recognized and manufactured in accordance with sections 3.1.1
and 3.5 of APA standard 87-1 (2001 edition).
      (3)   It is a ground-based or hand-held sparkler with one or more tubes
containing a nonexplosive pyrotechnic mixture that produces a shower of sparks
upon ignition, with or without additional effects that may include a colored
flame, audible crackling effect, audible whistle effect, or smoke.
      (4)   It contains not more than 75 grams of the nonexplosive pyrotechnic
mixture in any individual tube and not more than 500 grams or less for multiple
tubes.
   HIGHWAY. Any public street, road, alley, way, lane or other public
thoroughfare.
   INTOXICATING LIQUOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4301.01.
   LICENSED BUILDING. A building on the licensed premises of a licensed
manufacturer or wholesaler of fireworks that is approved for occupancy by the
building official having jurisdiction.
   LICENSED EXHIBITOR OF FIREWORKS or LICENSED EXHIBITOR. A person licensed
pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.50 through 3743.55.
   LICENSED FOUNTAIN DEVICE RETAILER or LICENSED RETAILER. Means a person
licensed pursuant to R.C. § 3743.26.
   LICENSED MANUFACTURER OF FIREWORKS or LICENSED MANUFACTURER. A person
licensed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.02 through 3743.08.
   LICENSED PREMISES. The real estate upon which a licensed manufacturer or
wholesaler of fireworks conducts business.
   LICENSED WHOLESALER OF FIREWORKS or LICENSED WHOLESALER. A person licensed
pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.15 through 3743.21.
   LIST OF LICENSED EXHIBITORS. The list required by R.C. § 3743.51(C).
   LIST OF LICENSED MANUFACTURERS. The list required by R.C. § 3743.03(C).
   LIST OF LICENSED WHOLESALERS. The list required by R.C. § 3743.16(C).
   MANUFACTURING OF FIREWORKS. The making of fireworks from raw materials, none
of which in and of themselves constitute fireworks, or the processing of
fireworks.
   NAVIGABLE WATERS. Any body of water susceptible of being used in its
ordinary condition as a highway of commerce over which trade and travel is or
may be conducted in the customary modes, but does not include a body of water
that is not capable of navigation by barges, tugboats, and other large vessels.
   NOVELTIES and TRICK NOISEMAKERS.
      (1)   Devices that produce a small report intended to surprise the user,
including but not limited to booby traps, cigarette loads, party poppers, and
snappers;
      (2)   Snakes or glow worms;
      (3)   Smoke devices;
      (4)   Trick matches.
   PARTY POPPER. A small plastic or paper item that contains not more than 16
milligrams of friction-sensitive explosive composition that is ignited by
pulling a string protruding from the item, and from which paper streamers are
expelled when the item is ignited.
   PROCESSING OF FIREWORKS. The making of fireworks from materials all or part
of which in and of themselves constitute fireworks, but does not include the
mere packaging or repackaging of fireworks.
   RAILROAD. Any railway or railroad that carries freight or passengers for
hire, but does not include auxiliary tracks, spurs, and sidings installed and
primarily used in serving a mine, quarry or plant.
   RETAIL SALE or SELL AT RETAIL. A sale of fireworks to a purchaser who
intends to use the fireworks and not to resell them.
   SMOKE DEVICE. A tube or sphere that contains pyrotechnic composition that,
upon ignition, produces white or colored smoke as the primary effect.
   SNAKE or GLOW WORM. A device that consists of a pressed pellet of
pyrotechnic composition that produces a large snake-like ash upon burning,
which ash expands in length as the pellet burns.
   SNAPPER. A small paper-wrapped item that contains a minute quantity of
explosive composition coated on small bits of sand and that, when dropped,
implodes.
   STORAGE LOCATION. A single parcel or contiguous parcels of real estate
approved by the Ohio Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. § 3743.04(I) or R.C. §
3743.17(F) that are separate from a licensed premises containing a retail
showroom, and which parcel or parcels a licensed manufacturer or wholesaler of
fireworks may use only for the distribution, possession, and storage of
fireworks in accordance with this chapter.
   TRICK MATCH. A kitchen or book match that is coated with a small quantity of
explosive composition and that, upon ignition, produces a small report or a
shower of sparks.
   WHOLESALE SALE or SELL AT WHOLESALE. A sale of fireworks to a purchaser who
intends to resell the fireworks so purchased.
   WIRE SPARKLER. A sparkler consisting of a wire or stick coated with a
nonexplosive pyrotechnic mixture that produces a shower of sparks upon ignition
and that contains no more than 100 grams of this mixture.
(R.C. § 3743.01)
§ 91.02 POSSESSION, SALE, AND USE OF FIREWORKS.
   (A)   No person shall possess fireworks in this municipality or shall
possess for sale or sell fireworks in this municipality, except a licensed
manufacturer of fireworks as authorized by R.C. §§ 3743.02 to 3743.08, a
licensed wholesaler of fireworks as authorized by R.C. §§ 3743.15 to 3743.21, a
shipping permit holder as authorized by R.C. § 3743.40, a licensed fountain
device retailer as authorized by R.C. § 3743.27, a person as authorized by R.C.
§§ 3743.44 and 3743.45, or a licensed exhibitor of fireworks as authorized by
R.C. §§ 3743.50 to 3743.55, or as authorized by any municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to any of these statutes, and except as provided in
R.C. § 3743.80 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (H), R.C. §§ 3743.45 and 3743.80 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and except for licensed
exhibitors of fireworks authorized to conduct a fireworks exhibition pursuant
to R.C. §§ 3743.50 through 3743.55 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, no person shall discharge, ignite, or explode any fireworks in this
municipality.
   (C)   No person shall use in a theater or public hall what is technically
known as fireworks showers, or a mixture containing potassium chlorate and
sulphur.
   (D)   No person shall sell fireworks of any kind to a person under 18 years
of age. No person under 18 years of age shall enter a fireworks sales showroom
unless that person is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or other
responsible adult. No person under 18 years of age shall touch or possess
fireworks on a licensed premises without the consent of the licensee. A
licensee may eject any person from a licensed premises that is in any way
disruptive to the safe operation of the premises.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 3743.44, no person, other than
a licensed manufacturer, licensed wholesaler, licensed exhibitor, or shipping
permit holder shall possess 1.3G fireworks in this municipality.
   (F)   No person shall negligently discharge, ignite, or explode fireworks
while in possession or control of, or under the influence of, any intoxicating
liquor, beer, or controlled substance.
   (G)   No person shall negligently discharge, ignite, or explode fireworks on
the property of another person without that person’s permission to use
fireworks on that property.
(R.C. § 3743.65(A) - (E), (G), (H))
   (H)   Purchase, use, and local regulation of consumer-grade fireworks.
      (1)   Any person who intends to obtain possession in this state of 1.4G
fireworks purchased in this state shall obtain possession of the 1.4G fireworks
only from a licensed retailer, licensed manufacturer, or licensed wholesaler
and shall be subject to this division (H).
      (2)   Any person authorized under this division (H) to possess 1.4G
fireworks in this state may discharge, ignite, or explode those fireworks on
private property, with authorization from the property owner, on the following
days each year:
         (a)   January 1st;
         (b)   Chinese new year’s day;
         (c)   May 5th;
         (d)   The last Monday in May, and the Saturday and Sunday immediately
preceding that day;
         (e)   June 19th;
         (f)   July 3rd, 4th, and 5th;
         (g)   The first Friday, Saturday, and Sunday before and after July
4th;
         (h)   The first Monday of September, and the Saturday and Sunday
immediately preceding that day;
         (i)   Diwali;
         (j)   December 31st.
      (3)   Fireworks discharged, ignited, or exploded pursuant to this
division (H) shall not be considered a public exhibition.
      (4)   The municipality may do either of the following:
         (a)   Restrict the dates and times a person may discharge, ignite, or
explode fireworks purchased pursuant to this division (H).
         (b)   Ban the discharge, ignition, or explosion of fireworks purchased
pursuant to this division (H).
      (5)   This division (H) does not limit the enforcement of any ordinance,
resolution, or statute that regulates noise, disturbance of the peace, or
disorderly conduct.
(R.C. § 3743.45) Penalty, see §
91.99
Statutory reference:
   Felony offense for disabling a fire suppression system, see R.C. § 3743.65
(F)
§ 91.03 PERMIT TO USE FIREWORKS.
   (A)   An exhibitor of fireworks licensed under R.C. §§ 3743.50 through
3743.55 who wishes to conduct a public fireworks exhibition shall apply for
approval to conduct the exhibition to the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer
and to the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the
designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
having jurisdiction over the premises.
   (B)   The approval required by division (A) of this section shall be
evidenced by the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief
or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police
Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer, signing a permit for the
exhibition. Any exhibitor of fireworks who wishes to conduct a public fireworks
exhibition may obtain a copy of the form from the State Fire Marshal or, if
available, from the Fire Chief, a fire prevention officer, the Police Chief or
other similar chief law enforcement officer, or a designee of the Police Chief
or other similar chief law enforcement officer.
   (C)   Before a permit is signed and issued to a licensed exhibitor of
fireworks, the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in consultation with the
Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of
the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, shall inspect
the premises on which the exhibition will take place and shall determine that,
in fact, the applicant for the permit is a licensed exhibitor of fireworks.
Each applicant shall show his or her license as an exhibitor of fireworks to
the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer.
   (D)   The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and the Police Chief or
other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police
Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, shall give approval to
conduct a public fireworks exhibition only if satisfied, based on the
inspection, that the premises on which the exhibition will be conducted allow
the exhibitor to comply with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal
pursuant to R.C. § 3743.53(B) and (E) and that the applicant is, in fact, a
licensed exhibitor of fireworks. The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in
consultation with the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement
officer or with the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, may inspect the premises immediately prior to the
exhibition to determine if the exhibitor has complied with the rules, and may
revoke a permit for noncompliance with the rules.
   (E)   If the Legislative Authority has prescribed a fee for the issuance of
a permit for a public fireworks exhibition, the Fire Chief or fire prevention
officer and Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or
their designee, shall not issue a permit until the exhibitor pays the requisite
fee.
   (F)   Each exhibitor shall provide an indemnity bond in the amount of at
least one million dollars with surety satisfactory to the Fire Chief or fire
prevention officer and to the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief
law enforcement officer, conditioned for the payment of all final judgments
that may be rendered against the exhibitor on account of injury, death, or loss
to person or property emanating from the fireworks exhibitor, or proof of
insurance coverage of at least one million dollars for liability arising from
injury, death, or loss of persons or property emanating from the fireworks
exhibition. The Legislative Authority may require the exhibitor to provide an
indemnity bond or proof of insurance coverage in amounts greater than those
required by this division. The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and Police
Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or their designee, shall
not issue a permit until the exhibitor provides the bond or proof of the
insurance coverage required by this division or by the Legislative Authority.
   (G)   Each permit for a fireworks exhibition issued by the Fire Chief or
fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief
law enforcement officer, shall contain a distinct number, designate the
municipality, and identify the certified fire safety inspector, Fire Chief, or
fire prevention officer who will be present before, during and after the
exhibition, where appropriate. A copy of each permit issued shall be forwarded
by the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, or designee of the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, issuing it to the State Fire Marshal. A
permit is not transferable or assignable.
   (H)   The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, or designee of the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, shall keep a record of issued permits
for fireworks exhibitions. In this list, the Fire Chief, fire prevention
officer, Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or
designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
shall list the name of the exhibitor, his or her license number, the premises
on which the exhibition will be conducted, the date and time of the exhibition,
and the number and political subdivision designation of the permit issued to
the exhibitor for the exhibition.
   (I)   The Legislative Authority shall require that a certified fire safety
inspector, Fire Chief or fire prevention officer be present before, during and
after the exhibition, and shall require the certified fire safety inspector,
Fire Chief or fire prevention officer to inspect the premises where the
exhibition is to take place and determine whether the exhibition is in
compliance with this chapter and R.C. Chapter 3743.
(R.C. § 3743.54(B) - (F)) Penalty, see §
91.99
Statutory reference:
   Notice of fireworks incident, see R.C. § 3743.541
§ 91.04 MANUFACTURING OR WHOLESALE SALE WITHOUT A LICENSE; PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No licensed manufacturer or licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall
knowingly fail to comply with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal
pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.05 and 3743.18 or the requirements of R.C. §§ 3743.06
and 3743.19.
   (B)   No licensed manufacturer or licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall
fail to maintain complete inventory, wholesale sale and retail records as
required by R.C. §§ 3743.07 and 3743.20, or to permit an inspection of these
records or the premises of a fireworks plant or the wholesaler pursuant to R.C.
§§ 3743.08 and 3743.21.
   (C)   No licensed manufacturer or licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall
fail to comply with an order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to R.C.
§§ 3743.01(B)(1) and 3743.21(B)(1) within the specified period of time.
   (D)   No licensed manufacturer or licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall
fail to comply with an order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to R.C.
§§ 3743.08(B)(2) and 3743.21(B)(2) until the nonconformities are eliminated,
corrected or otherwise remedied or the 72 hour period specified in those
divisions has expired, whichever occurs first.
   (E)   No person shall smoke or shall carry a pipe, cigarette, or cigar, or a
match, lighter, other flame-producing item, or open flame on, or shall carry a
concealed source of ignition into, the premises of a fireworks plant or on the
premises of a wholesaler of fireworks, except as smoking is authorized in
specified lunchrooms or restrooms by a manufacturer or wholesaler pursuant to
R.C. § 3743.06(C) or R.C. § 3743.19(D).
   (F)   No person shall have possession or control of, or be under the
influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer, or controlled substance while on
the premises of the fireworks plant or on the premises of a wholesaler of
fireworks.
   (G)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks or licensed wholesaler of
fireworks shall negligently fail to furnish a safety pamphlet to a purchaser of
1.4G fireworks as required by R.C. § 3743.47(A).
   (H)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks or licensed wholesaler of
fireworks shall negligently fail to have safety glasses available for sale as
required by R.C. § 3743.47(B).
(R.C. §§ 3743.60(E) - (L), 3743.61(E) - (L)) Penalty, see §
91.99
Statutory reference:
   Felony provisions, see R.C. §§ 3743.60(A) through (D) and 3743.61(A) through
(D)
§ 91.05 PURCHASERS TO COMPLY WITH LAW; UNAUTHORIZED PURCHASES.
   (A)   No person who purchases fireworks in this municipality shall obtain
possession of the fireworks in this municipality unless the person complies
with R.C. §§ 3743.44 to 3743.46.
   (B)   Except for the purchase of 1.4G fireworks made under R.C. § 3743.45,
no person who resides in another state and who purchases fireworks in this
state shall obtain possession of fireworks in this state other than from a
licensed manufacturer or wholesaler, or fail, when transporting 1.3G fireworks,
to transport them directly out of this state within 72 hours after the time of
their purchase.
   (C)   No person who purchases fireworks in this state under R.C. § 3743.45
shall give or sell to any other person in this municipality fireworks that the
person has acquired in this state.
(R.C. § 3743.63) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.06 EXHIBITION WITHOUT A LICENSE; PROHIBITIONS FOR EXHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall fail to comply with the
applicable requirements of the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant
to R.C. § 3743.53(B) and (E) or to comply with R.C. § 3743.53(C) and (D).
   (B)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall conduct a fireworks
exhibition unless a permit has been secured for the exhibition pursuant to R.C.
§ 3743.54 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or if a permit so
secured is revoked by a Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in consultation
with a Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or with a
designee of a Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
pursuant to those sections.
   (C)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall acquire fireworks for use at
a fireworks exhibition other than in accordance with R.C. §§ 3743.54 and
3743.55, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (D)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks or other person associated with the
conduct of a fireworks exhibition shall have possession or control of, or be
under the influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer, or controlled substance
while on the premises on which the exhibition is being conducted.
   (E)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall permit an employee to assist
the licensed exhibitor in conducting fireworks exhibitions unless the employee
is registered with the State Fire Marshal under R.C. § 3743.56.
(R.C. § 3743.64(C) - (G)) Penalty, see §
91.99
Statutory reference:
   Felony provisions, see R.C. § 3743.64(A), (B), and (H)
   Notice of fireworks incident, see R.C. § 3743.541
§ 91.07 UNAUTHORIZED TRANSPORTATION OR SHIPPING.
   (A)   No person shall transport fireworks in this municipality except in
accordance with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. §
3743.58.
   (B)   As used in this division, FIREWORKS includes only 1.3G and 1.4G
fireworks. No person shall ship fireworks into this municipality by mail,
parcel post, or common carrier unless the person possesses a valid shipping
permit issued under R.C. § 3743.40, and the fireworks are shipped directly to
the holder of a license issued under R.C. § 3743.03, 3743.16 or 3743.51.
   (C)   No person shall ship fireworks within this municipality by mail,
parcel post, or common carrier unless the fireworks are shipped directly to the
holder of a license issued under R.C. § 3743.01, 3743.16 or 3743.51.
(R.C. § 3743.66) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.08 APPLICATION OF SUBCHAPTER.
   This subchapter does not apply to the following:
   (A)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage, or use in
emergency situations of pyrotechnic signaling devices and distress signals for
marine, aviation, or highway use;
   (B)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of
fusees, torpedoes, or other signals necessary for the safe operation of
railroads;
   (C)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of
blank cartridges in connection with theaters or shows, or in connection with
athletics as signals for ceremonial purposes;
   (D)   The manufacture for, the transportation, storage, possession or use
by, or the sale to the armed forces of the United States and the militia of
this state, as recognized by the Adjutant General of Ohio, of pyrotechnic
devices;
   (E)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of
toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper or plastic
caps containing 0.25 grains or less of explosive material are used, provided
that they are constructed so that a hand cannot come into contact with a cap
when it is in place for explosion, or apply to the manufacture, sale,
possession, transportation, storage or use of those caps;
   (F)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of
novelties and trick noisemakers, auto burglar alarms, or model rockets and
model rocket motors designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling
recoverable aero models;
   (G)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of
wire sparklers.
   (H)   The conduct of radio-controlled special effect exhibitions that use an
explosive black powder charge of not more than one-quarter pound per charge,
and that are not connected in any manner to propellant charges; provided, that
the exhibition complies with all of the following:
      (1)   No explosive aerial display is conducted in the exhibition;
      (2)   The exhibition is separated from spectators by not less than 200
feet;
      (3)   The person conducting the exhibition complies with regulations of
the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms of the United States Department of
the Treasury and the United States Department of Transportation with respect to
the storage and transport of the explosive black powder used in the exhibition.
(R.C. § 3743.80)
§ 91.09 ARREST OF OFFENDER; SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE OF FIREWORKS; DISTRIBUTION
OF FINES.
   (A)   The Fire Marshal, an assistant fire marshal, or a certified fire
safety inspector may arrest, or may cause the arrest of, any person whom he or
she finds in the act of violating, or who he or she has reasonable cause to
believe has violated, any provision of this subchapter. Any arrest shall be
made in accordance with statutory and constitutional provisions governing
arrests by law enforcement officers.
   (B)   If the Fire Marshal, an assistant fire marshal, or certified fire
safety inspector has probable cause to believe that fireworks are being
manufactured, sold, possessed, transported, or used in violation of this
subchapter, he or she may seize the fireworks. Any seizure of fireworks shall
be made in accordance with statutory and constitutional provisions governing
searches and seizures by law enforcement officers. The Fire Marshal’s office or
certified fire safety inspector’s office shall impound at the site or safely
keep seized fireworks pending the time they are no longer needed as evidence. A
sample of the seized fireworks is sufficient for evidentiary purposes. The
remainder of the seized fireworks may be disposed of pursuant to an order from
a court of competent jurisdiction after notice and a hearing.
   (C)   Fireworks manufactured, sold, possessed, transported, or used in
violation of this subchapter shall be forfeited by the offender. The Fire
Marshal’s office or certified fire safety inspector’s office shall dispose of
seized fireworks pursuant to the procedures specified in R.C. §§ 2981.11 to
2981.13 for the disposal of forfeited property by law enforcement agencies, and
the Fire Marshal or that office is not liable for claims for the loss of or
damages to the seized fireworks.
   (D)   This section does not affect the authority of peace officers, as
defined in R.C. § 2935.01, to make arrests for violations of this subchapter or
to seize fireworks manufactured, sold, possessed, transported, or used in
violation of this subchapter.
   (E)   Any fines imposed for a violation of this subchapter relating to the
sale, purchase, possession, or discharge of fireworks shall be distributed as
set forth in R.C. § 3743.68(D).
(R.C. § 3743.68)
§ 91.10 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS FOR FIREWORKS SHOWROOM STRUCTURES.
   (A)   (1)   Except as described in division (A)(2) of this section, all
retail sales of 1.4G fireworks by a licensed manufacturer or wholesaler shall
only occur from an approved retail sales showroom on a licensed premises or
from a representative sample showroom as described in this section on a
licensed premises. For the purposes of this section, a retail sale includes the
transfer of the possession of the 1.4G fireworks from the licensed manufacturer
or wholesaler to the purchaser of the fireworks.
      (2)   Sales of 1.4G fireworks to a licensed exhibitor for a properly
permitted exhibition shall occur in accordance with the provisions of the Ohio
Revised Code and rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal under R.C. Chapter
119. Such rules shall specify, at a minimum, that the licensed exhibitor holds
a license under R.C. § 3743.51, that the exhibitor possesses a valid exhibition
permit issued in accordance with R.C. § 3743.54, and that the fireworks shipped
are to be used at the specifically permitted exhibition.
   (B)   All wholesale sales of fireworks by a licensed manufacturer or
wholesaler shall only occur from a licensed premises to persons who intend to
resell the fireworks purchased at wholesale. A wholesale sale by a licensed
manufacturer or wholesaler may occur as follows:
      (1)   The direct sale and shipment of fireworks to a person outside of
this state;
      (2)   From an approved retail sales showroom as described in this
section;
      (3)   From a representative sample showroom as described in this section;
      (4)   By delivery of wholesale fireworks to a purchaser at a licensed
premises outside of a structure or building on that premises. All other
portions of the wholesale sales transaction may occur at any location on a
licensed premises.
      (5)   Any other method as described in rules adopted by the Fire Marshal
under R.C. Chapter 119.
   (C)   (1)   A licensed manufacturer or wholesaler shall only sell 1.4G
fireworks from a representative sample showroom or a retail sales showroom.
Each licensed premises shall only contain one sales structure.
      (2)   A representative sample showroom shall consist of a structure
constructed and maintained in accordance with the Nonresidential Building Code
adopted under R.C. Chapter 3781 and the Fire Code adopted under R.C. § 3737.82
for a use and occupancy group that permits mercantile sales. A representative
sample showroom shall not contain any pyrotechnics, pyrotechnic materials,
fireworks, explosives, explosive materials, or any similar hazardous materials
or substances. A representative sample showroom shall be used only for the
public viewing of fireworks product representations, including paper materials,
packaging materials, catalogs, photographs, or other similar product
depictions. The delivery of product to a purchaser of fireworks at a licensed
premises that has a representative sample structure shall not occur inside any
structure on a licensed premises. Such product delivery shall occur on the
licensed premises in a manner prescribed by rules adopted by the State Fire
Marshal pursuant to R.C. Chapter 119.
      (3)   If a manufacturer or wholesaler elects to conduct sales from a
retail sales showroom, the showroom structures, to which the public may have
any access and in which employees are required to work, on all licensed
premises, shall comply with the following safety requirements:
         (a)   A fireworks showroom that is constructed or upon which expansion
is undertaken on and after June 30, 1997, shall be equipped with interlinked
fire detection, fire suppression, smoke exhaust, and smoke evacuation systems
that are approved by the Superintendent of Industrial Compliance in the
Department of Commerce.
         (b)   1.   A fireworks showroom that first begins to operate on or
after June 30, 1997, or that resumes operations at any time after a period of
inactive status of licensure greater than one year, and to which the public has
access for retail purposes shall not exceed 7,500 square feet in floor area.
            2.   A fireworks showroom that, through construction of a new
showroom, expansion of an existing showroom, or similar means, first exceeds
5,000 square feet, to which the public has access for retail purposes, after
February 7, 2022, shall be equipped with a sprinkler system that meets the
criteria for sprinkler systems in extra hazard (group 2) occupancies under
“NFPA 13, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems (2019 Edition)”.
            3.   Notwithstanding division (D) of this section, the State Fire
Marshal may provide a variance to the requirements of division (C)(3)(b)2. of
this section pursuant to R.C. § 3743.59 for a sprinkler system that matches or
exceeds the degree of safety provided by a sprinkler system that meets the
criteria for sprinkler systems in extra hazard (group 2) occupancies under
“NFPA 13, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems (2019 Edition)”.
         (c)   A newly constructed or an existing fireworks showroom structure
that exists on September 23, 2008, but that, on or after September 23, 2008, is
altered or added to in a manner requiring the submission of plans, drawings,
specifications, or data pursuant to R.C. § 3791.04, shall comply with a graphic
floor plan layout that is approved by the State Fire Marshal and Superintendent
of Industrial Compliance showing width of aisles, parallel arrangement of
aisles to exits, number of exits per wall, maximum occupancy load, evacuation
plan for occupants, height of storage or display of merchandise, and other
information as may be required by the State Fire Marshal and Superintendent of
Industrial Compliance.
         (d)   A fireworks showroom structure that exists on June 30, 1997,
shall be in compliance on or after June 30, 1997, with floor plans showing
occupancy load limits and internal circulation and egress patterns that are
approved by the State Fire Marshal and Superintendent of Industrial Compliance,
and that are submitted under seal as required by R.C. § 3791.04.
   (D)   The safety requirements established in division (C) of this section
are not subject to any variance, waiver, or exclusion pursuant to this chapter
or any applicable building code.
(R.C. § 3743.25) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.11 STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES.
   It shall be unlawful to store at any time within the municipality a quantity
of gunpowder or other similar explosive weighing in excess of 100 pounds.
Penalty, see §
91.99
Statutory reference:
   Illegal manufacture or processing of explosives, felony provisions, see R.C.
§ 2923.17
§ 91.12 BLASTING PERMIT.
   No person shall cause a blast to occur within the municipality without
making application in writing beforehand, setting forth the exact nature of the
intended operation, and receiving a permit to blast from the Mayor or other
proper municipal officer. The Mayor or other proper municipal officer before
granting such permit may require the applicant to provide a bond to indemnify
the municipality and all other persons against injury or damages which might
result from the proposed blasting.
Penalty, see §
91.99
FIRE PREVENTION
§ 91.30 REMOVAL OF FLAMMABLE MATERIALS OR OBSTRUCTIONS.
   Any flammable or combustible materials not arranged or stored in such a
manner as to afford reasonable safety against the danger of fire, or any matter
stored or arranged in such a manner as to impede or prevent access to, or exit
from, any premises in case of fire, shall be ordered by the Fire Chief to be
removed or rearranged in such manner as to eliminate any fire hazard. The order
shall be in writing and delivered to the owner, lessee, or occupant of the
premises.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.31 PROTECTIVE APPLIANCES.
   If the Fire Chief finds upon inspection that the appliances for protection
against fire are wholly wanting or are inadequate in number, condition, size,
arrangement, or efficiency for the reasonable protection of the premises
against fire, he or she shall cause an order in writing to be delivered to the
owner, lessee, or occupant requiring the installation, replacement, or repair
of appliances adequate for the reasonable protection of the premises in case of
fire.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.32 COMPLIANCE WITH ORDER.
   An order to correct the hazardous conditions specified in either §
91.30 or
91.31 shall be directed to the owner, lessee, or occupant of the premises,
building, or structure, or to the person in control of the articles, material,
goods, wares, or merchandise, or to the owner thereof, as the circumstances may
require. It is made the duty of the owner, lessee, or occupant of the premises,
building, or structure, and of the person in control of such articles,
materials, goods, wares, and merchandise, or the owner thereof, to comply with
the order with all reasonable dispatch and diligence.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.33 WASTE RECEPTACLES.
   Waste paper, ashes, oil rags, waste rags, excelsior, or any material of a
similar hazardous nature shall not be accumulated in any cellar or any other
portion of any building of any kind. Proper fireproof receptacles shall be
provided for such hazardous materials.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.34 HOTEL TO HAVE FIRE WARNING DEVICE PRODUCING VISIBLE SIGNAL.
   (A)   Every hotel shall have available at least one operational single
station automatic fire warning device approved by the Fire Chief that produces
a visible warning signal when activated by every product of combustion. The
device, at the discretion of the owner, may also be activated by an early
warning fire protection system. Hotels having fewer than 75 rooms shall have at
least one warning device available for its guests. Hotels having more than 75
rooms shall have available for its guests one device for every group of 75
rooms. Upon the request of a guest, such a device, if available, shall be
installed in the guest’s room.
   (B)   As used in this section, HOTEL means every establishment kept, used,
maintained, advertised, or held out to the public to be a place where sleeping
accommodations are offered to guests in which five or more rooms are used for
accommodation of such guests, whether the rooms are in one or several
structures, except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 5739.091.
(R.C. §§ 3781.107, 5739.01(M))
   (C)   Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not
more than $1,000.
(R.C. §§ 3791.02, 3791.03)
§ 91.35 FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Every building constructed in this municipality with floors used for
human occupancy located more than 75 feet in height above the lower level of
fire department vehicle access shall have a fire suppression system installed
and in operation in conformity with the rules of the state Board of Building
Standards adopted pursuant to R.C. § 3781.10.
   (B)   As used in this section:
      FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEM. Means a system that includes devices and
equipment to detect a fire, actuates an alarm, and suppress or control a fire.
      HUMAN OCCUPANCY. Does not include floors of buildings where occupancy by
humans is limited to ingress, egress, and limited access for maintenance and
repair.
(R.C. § 3781.108(A), (B))
   (C)   Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not
more than $1,000.
(R.C. §§ 3791.02, 3791.03)
§ 91.36 VIOLATIONS OF STATE FIRE CODE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly violate any provision of the State Fire Code
or any order made pursuant to it.
(R.C. § 3737.51(A))
   (B)   Except as a violation of R.C. § 2923.17, regarding the felonies of
unlawful possession of a dangerous ordnance and illegal manufacture or
processing of explosives, involves subject matter covered by the State Fire
Code, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
(R.C. § 3737.99(B))
Statutory reference:
   Fire Code violations, see R.C. §§ 3737.41 et seq.
   Ohio Fire Code, see O.A.C. Chapter 1301:7-7
§ 91.37 POSTING ARSON NOTICES IN HOTELS, MOTELS AND OTHER PLACES.
   (A)   The owner, operator or lessee of any hotel, motel or transient
residential building shall post the provisions of R.C. §§ 2909.02 and 2909.03,
regarding aggravated arson and arson, in a conspicuous place in each room
occupied by guests in such building. The owner, operator or lessee of any
nontransient residential building, institution, school or place of assembly
shall post the provisions of such sections in conspicuous places upon such
premises. No person shall fail to comply with this section.
(R.C. § 3737.61)
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3737.99(C))
§ 91.38 NEGLIGENT BURNING.
   (A)   No person shall set, kindle, or cause to be set or kindled any fire
which, through his or her negligence, spreads beyond its immediate confines to
any structure, field or wooded lot.
(R.C. § 3737.62)
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 3737.99(D))
§ 91.39 SPREADING ALARM OF UNFRIENDLY FIRE.
   (A)   The owner, operator or lessee, an employee of any owner, operator or
lessee, an occupant, and any person in direct control of any building regulated
under the state building code, upon the discovery of an unfriendly fire, or
upon receiving information that there is an unfriendly fire upon the premises,
shall immediately, and with all reasonable dispatch and diligence, call or
otherwise notify the fire department concerning the fire, and shall spread an
alarm immediately to all occupants of the building.
   (B)   As used in this section, UNFRIENDLY FIRE means a fire of a destructive
nature as distinguished from a controlled fire intended for a beneficial
purpose.
(R.C. § 3737.63)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 3737.99(E))
§ 91.40 UNVENTED HEATERS.
   (A)   The use of a brazier, salamander, space heater, room heater, furnace,
water heater, or other burner or heater using wood, coal, coke, fuel oil,
kerosene, gasoline, natural gas, liquid petroleum gas or similar fuel, and
tending to give off carbon monoxide or other harmful gases must comply with the
following provisions;
      (1)   When used in living quarters, or in any enclosed building or space
in which persons are usually present, shall be used with a flue or vent so
designed, installed, and maintained as to vent the products of combustion
outdoors; except in storage, factory, or industrial buildings which are
provided with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide
poisoning.
      (2)   When used as a portable or temporary burner or heater at a
construction site, or in a warehouse, shed, or structure in which persons are
temporarily present, shall be vented as provided in division (A)(1) or used
with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide poisoning.
   (B)   This section does not apply to domestic ranges, laundry stoves, gas
logs installed in a fireplace with an adequate flue, or hot plates, unless the
same are used as space or room heaters.
   (C)   No person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in
charge, or occupant of premises, negligently permit the use of a burner or
heater in violation of the standards for venting and ventilation provided in
this section.
   (D)   Division (A) above does not apply to any kerosene-fired space or room
heater that is equipped with an automatic extinguishing tip-over device, or to
any natural gas-fired or liquid petroleum gas-fired space or room heater that
is equipped with an oxygen depletion safety shut-off system, and that has its
fuel piped from a source outside the building in which it is located, that are
approved by an authoritative source recognized by the State Fire Marshal in the
State Fire Code adopted by him or her under R.C. § 3737.82.
   (E)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules to ensure the safe use of
unvented kerosene, natural gas, or liquid petroleum gas heaters exempted from
division (A) above when used in assembly buildings, business buildings, high
hazard buildings, institutional buildings, mercantile buildings, and type R-
1 and R-2 residential buildings, as these groups of buildings are defined in
rules adopted by the Board of Building Standards under R.C. § 3781.10. No
person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in charge or occupant
of premises, negligently permit the use of a heater in violation of any rules
adopted under this division.
   (F)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules prescribing standards for
written instructions containing ventilation requirements and warning of any
potential fire hazards that may occur in using a kerosene, natural gas, or
liquid petroleum gas heater. No person shall sell or offer for sale any
kerosene, natural gas, or liquid petroleum gas heater unless the manufacturer
provides with the heater written instructions that comply with any rules
adopted under this division.
   (G)   No product labeled as a fuel additive for kerosene heaters and having
a flash point below 100°F or 37.8°C shall be sold, offered for sale, or used in
any kerosene space heater.
   (H)   No device that prohibits any safety feature on a kerosene, natural
gas, or liquid petroleum gas space heater from operating shall be sold, offered
for sale, or used in connection with any kerosene, natural gas, or liquid
petroleum gas space heater.
   (I)   No person shall sell or offer for sale any kerosene-fired, natural
gas, or liquid petroleum gas-fired heater that is not exempt from division (A)
above, unless it is marked conspicuously by the manufacturer on the container
with the phrase “Not Approved For Home Use”.
   (J)   No person shall use a cabinet-type, liquid petroleum gas-fired heater
having a fuel source within the heater, inside any building, except as
permitted by the State Fire Marshal in the State Fire Code adopted by him or
her under R.C. § 3737.82.
(R.C. § 3701.82)
   (K)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 3701.99(B))
OPEN BURNING
§ 91.55 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AGRICULTURAL WASTE. Any waste material generated by crop, horticultural,
or livestock production practices, and includes such items as woody debris and
plant matter from stream flooding, bags, cartons, structural materials, and
landscape wastes that are generated in agricultural activities, but does not
include land clearing waste; buildings (including dismantled/fallen barns);
garbage; dead animals; animal waste; motor vehicles and parts thereof; nor
economic poisons and containers thereof, unless the manufacturer has identified
open burning as a safe disposal procedure.
      AIR CURTAIN BURNER. An engineered apparatus consisting of a motorized
high-velocity fan and an air distribution system designed to aid in the
efficient combustion of materials placed in a manufactured steel structure and
for which a permit-to-install has been obtained as required in O.A.C. Chapter
3745-31 and a permit-to-operate has been obtained as required in O.A.C. Chapter
3745-77.
      AIR CURTAIN DESTRUCTOR. An engineered apparatus consisting of a motorized
high-velocity fan and an air distribution system designed to aid in the
efficient combustion of materials placed in an adjacent pit. An air curtain
burner may be used in place of an air curtain destructor, but an air curtain
destructor may not be used in place of an air curtain burner.
      BUILDING MATERIALS. Those materials resulting from the alteration,
construction, destruction, rehabilitation, or repair of any human-made physical
structure, including, without limitation, houses, buildings, industrial or
commercial facilities, or roadways.
      ECONOMIC POISONS. Include but are not restricted to pesticides such as
insecticides, fungicides, rodenticides, miticides, nematocides and fumigants;
herbicides; seed disinfectants; and defoliants.
      EMERGENCY BURNING. The burning of clean wood waste or deceased animals
caused by a natural disaster or an uncontrolled event such as the following:
         (a)   A tornado.
         (b)   High winds.
         (c)   An earthquake.
         (d)   An explosion.
         (e)   A flood.
         (f)   A hail storm, a rain storm, or an ice storm.
      GARBAGE. Any waste material resulting from the handling, processing,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food or food products.
      INHABITED BUILDING. Any inhabited private dwelling house and any public
structure which may be used as a place of resort, assembly, education,
entertainment, lodging, trade, manufacture, repair, storage, traffic, or
occupancy by the public. Examples would include, but are not limited to,
highway rest stops, restaurants, motels, hotels and gas stations.
      LAND CLEARING WASTE. Plant waste material which is removed from land,
including plant waste material removed from stream banks during projects
involving more than one property owner, for the purpose of rendering the land
useful for residential, commercial, or industrial development. Land clearing
waste also includes the plant waste material generated during the clearing of
land for new agricultural development.
      LANDSCAPE WASTE. Any plant waste material, except garbage, including
trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves, grass,
shrubbery, yard trimmings, and crop residues.
      OHIO EPA. The Ohio Environmental Protection Agency Director or agencies
delegated authority by the Director of the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency
pursuant to R.C. §
      OPEN BURNING. The burning of any materials wherein air contaminants
resulting from combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without
passing through a stack or chimney. Open burning includes the burning of any
refuse or salvageable material in any device not subject to or designed
specifically to comply with the requirements of O.A.C. 3745-17-09 or O.A.C.
3745-17-10.
      RESIDENTIAL WASTE. Any waste material, including landscape waste,
generated on the property of a one-, two- or three-family residence as a result
of residential activities, but not including garbage, rubber, grease, asphalt,
liquid petroleum products, or plastics.
      RESTRICTED AREA. The area within the boundary of the municipality, plus a
zone extending 1,000 feet beyond the boundaries of a municipality having a
population of 1,000 to 10,000 persons and a zone extending one mile beyond any
municipality having a population of 10,000 persons or more according to the
latest federal census.
      UNRESTRICTED AREA. All areas outside the boundaries of a restricted area
as defined in this section.
   (B)   Referenced materials. This subchapter includes references to certain
matter or materials. The text of the referenced materials is not included in
the legislation contained in this subchapter. Information on the availability
of the referenced materials as well as the date of, and/or the particular
edition or version of the material is included in this section. For materials
subject to change, only the specific versions specified in this section are
referenced. Material is referenced as it exists on the effective date of this
section. Except for subsequent annual publication of existing (unmodified) Code
of Federal Regulation compilations, any amendment or revision to a referenced
document is not applicable unless and until this section has been amended to
specify the new dates.
      (1)   Availability. The referenced materials are available as follows:
         (a)   Clean Air Act. Information and copies may be obtained by writing
to: Superintendent of Documents, Attn: New Orders, PO Box 371954, Pittsburgh,
PA 15250-7954. The full text of the act as amended in 1990 is also available in
electronic format at www.epa.gov/oar/caa/. A copy of the act is also available
for inspection and use at most public libraries and the State Library of Ohio.
         (b)   Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.). Information and copies may
be obtained by writing to: Superintendent of Documents, Attn: New Orders, PO
Box 371954, Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954. The full text of the C.F.R. is also
available in electronic format at http://www.ecfr.gov. The C.F.R. compilations
are also available for inspection and use at most public libraries and the
State Library of Ohio.
         (c)   National Fire Protection Association. Information on the
National Fire Protection Association codes may be obtained by contacting the
Association at 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts 02169-7471, 617-770-
3000. Codes may be ordered at www.nfpa.org/catalog/home/index.asp. Copies of
the code exist or are available at most public libraries and the State Library
of Ohio.
      (2)   Referenced materials.
         (a)   40 C.F.R. § 60.2974: “Am I required to apply for and obtain a
title V operating permit for my air curtain incinerator that burns only wood
waste, clean lumber, and yard waste?” as published in the July 1, 2017 Code of
Federal Regulations.
         (b)   40 C.F.R. § 60.3069: “Am I required to apply for and obtain a
title V operating permit for my air curtain incinerator that burns only wood
waste, clean lumber, and yard waste?” as published in the July 1, 2017 Code of
Federal Regulations.
         (c)   NFPA publication 1403: “Standard on Live Fire Training
Evolutions, Chapter 4, Acquired Structures” published April 30, 2007.
         (d)   Section 129 of the Clean Air Act, contained in 42 U.S.C. § 7429:
“Solid waste combustion” published January 6, 2017 in Supplement IV of the 2012
Edition of the United States Code.
(O.A.C. § 3745-19-01)
§ 91.56 RELATIONS TO OTHER PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any provision in O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19, no open
burning shall be conducted in an area where an air alert, warning or emergency
under O.A.C. Chapter 3745-25 is in effect.
   (B)   No provisions of O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19 permitting open burning, and
no permission to open burn granted by the Ohio EPA, shall exempt any person
from compliance with any section of the Ohio Revised Code, or any regulation of
any state department, or any local ordinance or regulation dealing with open
burning.
(O.A.C. § 3745-19-02) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.57 OPEN BURNING IN RESTRICTED AREAS.
   (A)   No person or property owner shall cause or allow open burning in a
restricted area except as provided in divisions (B) to (D) of this section or
in R.C. § 3704.11.
   (B)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes without
notification to or permission from the Ohio EPA:
      (1)   Heating tar, welding, acetylene torches, highway safety flares,
heating for warmth of outdoor workers and strikers, smudge pots and similar
occupational needs.
      (2)   Bonfires, campfires and outdoor fireplace equipment, whether for
cooking food for human consumption, pleasure, religious, ceremonial, warmth,
recreational, or similar purposes, if the following conditions are met:
         (a)   They are fueled with clean seasoned firewood, natural gas or
equivalent, or any clean burning fuel with emissions that are equivalent to or
lower than those created from the burning of seasoned firewood;
         (b)   They are not used for waste disposal purposes; and
         (c)   They shall have a total fuel area of three feet or less in
diameter and two feet or less in height.
      (3)   Disposal of hazardous explosive materials, military munitions or
explosive devices that require immediate action to prevent endangerment of
human health, public safety, property or the environment and that are excluded
from the requirement to obtain a hazardous waste permit pursuant to O.A.C.
3745-50-45(D)(1)(d).
      (4)   Recognized training in the use of fire extinguishers for commercial
or industrial fire prevention.
      (5)   Fires set at the direction of federal, state, and local law
enforcement officials for the purpose of destruction of cannabis sativa
(marijuana) plant vegetation, processed marijuana material and/or other drugs
seized by federal, state, or local law enforcement officials.
      (6)   Fires allowed by divisions (B)(1), (B)(2), and (B)(4) of this
section shall not be used for waste disposal purposes and shall be of minimum
size sufficient for their intended purpose; the fuel shall be chosen to
minimize the generation and emission of air contaminants.
   (C)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes with prior
notification to the Ohio EPA in accordance with §
91.58(B):
      (1)   Prevention or control of disease or pests, with written or oral
verification to the Ohio EPA from the Ohio Department of Health or local health
department, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, cooperative
extension service, Ohio Department of Agriculture, or U.S. Department of
Agriculture, that open burning is the only appropriate disposal method.
      (2)   Bonfires or campfires used for ceremonial purposes that do not meet
the requirements of division (B)(2) of this section, provided the following
conditions are met:
         (a)   They have a total fuel area no greater than five feet in
diameter by five feet in height and burn no longer than three hours;
         (b)   They are not used for waste disposal purposes; and
         (c)   They are fueled with clean seasoned firewood, natural gas or
equivalent, or any clean burning fuel with emissions that are equivalent to or
lower than those created from the burning of seasoned firewood.
      (3)   Disposal of agricultural waste generated on the premises if the
following conditions are observed:
         (a)   The fire is set only when atmospheric conditions will readily
dissipate contaminants;
         (b)   The fire does not create a visibility hazard on the roadways,
railroad tracks, or air fields;
         (c)   The fire is located at a point on the premises no less than
1,000 feet from any inhabited building not located on said premises;
         (d)   The wastes are stacked and dried to provide the best practicable
condition for efficient burning; and
         (e)   No materials are burned which contain rubber, grease, asphalt,
liquid petroleum products, plastics or building materials.
      (4)   Recognized horticultural, silvicultural (forestry), range
management, prairie and grassland management, invasive species management, or
wildlife management practices, if all of the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The fire shall be performed within 180 days of submitting the
notification.
         (b)   The fire shall be performed when it is anticipated weather
conditions will minimize the dispersion of smoke near populated areas and the
smoke does not create a visibility hazard on roadways, railroad tracks, or air
fields. Smoke dispersion conditions shall be evaluated before, during, and
after the fire and actions taken to minimize smoke impacts.
         (c)   The person making the notification shall notify the local fire
department having jurisdiction over the burn area at least 24 hours before the
fire is anticipated to occur.
         (d)   The person making the notification shall provide reasonable
notification to populations potentially impacted by the smoke before the fire
occurs. Populations potentially impacted shall include, at a minimum, those
within one-quarter mile of the burn site. Reasonable notification shall include
one of the following:
            1.   Posting notice of intent to burn, including contact
information for the person making the notification and the anticipated date
that the fire will occur, within open view from a public roadway adjacent to
and outside of the property on which the fire will occur.
            2.   Posting a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the
local community in which the fire will occur. The notice shall include, at a
minimum, the address of the property at which the fire will occur, contact
information for the person making the notification and the anticipated date
that the fire will occur.
            3.   Delivering written notice directly to residences and
businesses within a minimum of one-quarter mile of the burn site. Notices shall
include, at a minimum, the address of the property at which the fire will
occur, contact information for the person making the notification and the
anticipated date that the fire will occur.
         (e)   The person making the notification shall document information on
the weather, smoke conditions, any air quality concerns before, during, and
after the fire, the actual number of acres burned, the time the fire was
initially kindled, the time when active kindling ceased and the time at which
mop up activities ceased. The person making the notification shall maintain
this information for a minimum of one year from the date of the fire and shall
provide this information to the appropriate Ohio EPA district office or local
air agency within ten days upon request.
         (f)   Reasonable access to the burn site shall be provided to Ohio EPA
representatives at any time during the fire.
   (D)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes upon receipt
of written permission from the Ohio EPA, in accordance with §
91.58(A), provided that any conditions specified in the permission are
followed:
      (1)   Disposal of ignitable or explosive materials where the Ohio EPA
determines that there is no practical alternate method of disposal, excluding
those materials identified in division (B)(3) of this section;
      (2)   Instruction in methods of fire fighting or for research in the
control of fires as recognized by the State Fire Marshal Division of the Ohio
Department of Commerce and the guidelines set forth in the National Fire
Protection Association’s (NFPA) publication 1403, Standard on Live Fire
Training Evolutions, Chapter 4, Acquired Structures, provided that the
application required in §
91.58(A)(1) is submitted by the commercial or public entity responsible for the
instruction;
      (3)   In emergency or other extraordinary circumstances for any purpose
determined to be necessary by the Director and performed as identified in the
appendix to O.A.C. § 3745-19-03. If deemed necessary, the open burning may be
authorized with prior oral approval by the Director followed by the issuance of
a written permission to open burn within seven working days of the oral
approval;
      (4)   Fires or pyrotechnic effects, for purposes other than waste
disposal, set as part of commercial film-making or video production activities
for motion pictures and television.
(O.A.C. § 3745-19-03) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.58 PERMISSION AND NOTICE TO OPEN BURN.
   (A)   Permission.
      (1)   An application for permission to open burn shall be submitted in
writing to Ohio EPA. The applicant shall allow Ohio EPA at least ten working
days to review the permit. Applicant may proceed with burn upon receipt of
written permission from Ohio EPA. Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays shall
not be considered working days. The application shall be in such form and
contain such information as required by the Ohio EPA.
      (2)   Except as provided in divisions (A)(6) and (A)(7) of this section,
such applications shall contain, as a minimum, the following information:
         (a)   The purpose of the proposed burning;
         (b)   The quantity or acreage and the nature of the materials to be
burned;
         (c)   The date or dates when such burning will take place;
         (d)   The location of the burning site, including a map showing
distances to residences, populated areas, roadways, air fields, and other
pertinent landmarks; and
         (e)   The methods or actions which will be taken to reduce the
emissions of air contaminants.
      (3)   Permission to open burn shall not be granted unless the applicant
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Ohio EPA that open burning is necessary
to the public interest; will be conducted in a time, place, and manner as to
minimize the emission of air contaminants, when atmospheric conditions are
appropriate; and will have no serious detrimental effect upon adjacent
properties or the occupants thereof. The Ohio EPA may impose such conditions as
may be necessary to accomplish the purpose of O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19.
      (4)   Except as provided in division (A)(6) of this section, permission
to open burn must be obtained for each specific project. In emergencies where
public health or environmental quality will be seriously threatened by delay
while written permission is sought, the fire may be set with oral permission of
the Ohio EPA.
      (5)   Violations of any of the conditions set forth by the Ohio EPA in
granting permission to open burn shall be grounds for revocation of such
permission and refusal to grant future permission, as well as for the
imposition of other sanctions provided by law.
      (6)   The Ohio Department of Commerce, Division of State Fire Marshal,
may request permission to open burn on an annual basis for the purpose of
training firefighters on pre-flashover conditions using the Ohio Fire Academy’s
mobile training laboratory at either the academy or at other training sites in
Ohio. The annual application required pursuant to division (A)(1) of this
section shall contain information as required in division (A)(2) of this
section, except the information required in divisions (A)(2)(c) and (A)(2)(d)
of this section need not be provided unless it is available at the time of
submittal of the application. The Academy shall contact the appropriate Ohio
EPA District Office or local air agency at least five working days before each
training session of the date or dates when the training session will take place
and its location. Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays shall not be considered
a working day.
      (7)   For open burning defined under §
91.57(D)(2) and O.A.C. 3745-19-04(C)(2), permission to open burn shall not be
granted unless the applicant provides proof of written notice of intent to
demolish received by the appropriate Ohio EPA field office in accordance with
O.A.C. 3745-20-03.
   (B)   Notification.
      (1)   Notification shall be submitted in writing at least ten working
days before the fire is to be set. Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays shall
not be considered a working day. It shall be in such form and contain such
information as shall be required by the Ohio EPA.
      (2)   Such notification shall inform the Ohio EPA regarding the
following:
         (a)   The purpose of the proposed burning;
         (b)   The nature and quantities of materials to be burned;
         (c)   The date or dates when such burning will take place; and
         (d)   The location of the burning site.
      (3)   The Ohio EPA, after receiving notification, may determine that the
open burning is not allowed under O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19 and the Ohio EPA shall
notify the applicant to this effect.
(O.A.C. § 3745-19-05) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.59 FREESTANDING OUTDOOR FURNACES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      FREESTANDING OUTDOOR FURNACE. Includes, but is not limited to, any
device, apparatus or structure or any part thereof:
         (a)   Designed to burn wood or other fuel including, but not limited
to, coal, paper or agricultural products;
         (b)   The unit is not located within a building intended for
habitation by humans or domestic animals; and
         (c)   Which is installed for the primary purpose of combustion of such
fuel to produce heat, energy and/or hot water to be used as a component of a
heating system which provides heat for any interior space.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to install or operate a freestanding outdoor
furnace, or to cause or permit the installation or operation of a freestanding
outdoor furnace, within the village. This prohibition does not include the
installation of a freestanding outdoor furnace on a parcel which is five acres
or more in size and the furnace is placed no less than 100 feet from any
property line.
   (C)   This section shall in no way be construed, nor is the same intended,
to prohibit the installation, operation or use of exterior chimneys, stove
pipes or similar apparatuses that are otherwise in conformity with other
federal or state laws, rules or regulations constituting any part of any
interior furnace system, interior stove system, interior fireplace system or
operation of any system that provides the exhaust of waste heat, smoke or
similar substances from interior spaces.
   (D)   No existing freestanding outdoor furnace in existence on the effective
date of this section shall be replaced or upgraded.
(Prior Code, § 91.60) (Ord. 2007-19, passed - -) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.60 STATE FIRE CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The 2011 State Fire Code, as published by the International Code Council,
Incorporated is adopted as the Fire Code for the village.
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 7-24-2012)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which another
penalty is not specifically provided shall be subject to the penalty as
provided in §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2) or (B)(3) of
this section, whoever violates any provisions of §§
91.01 through
91.08 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of R.C. § 3743.60(I) or R.C. § 3743.61(I), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, a violation of §
91.04(E) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates §
91.06(A) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to any
other penalties that may be imposed on a licensed exhibitor of fireworks under
this division (B)(3) and unless the third sentence of this division applies,
the person’s license as an exhibitor of fireworks or as an assistant exhibitor
of fireworks shall be suspended. If the violation of §
91.06(A) results in serious physical harm to persons or serious physical harm
to property, the person’s license as an exhibitor of fireworks or as an
assistant exhibitor of fireworks shall be revoked.
      (4)   Whoever violates §
91.02(F) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. Notwithstanding any
other provision of law to the contrary, a person may be convicted at the same
trial or proceeding of a violation of §
91.02(F) and a violation of R.C. § 2917.11(B), or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, that constitutes the basis of the charge of the violation
of §
91.02(F).
      (5)   Whoever violates §
91.04(G) or (H) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (6)   Whoever violates §
91.02(G) is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3743.99(C), (D), (F) - (H))
   (C)   Any person or corporation who shall violate the provisions of § 91.51
shall, for each and every violation or non-compliance, be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Each day such violation shall be permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate and additional offense.
(Prior Code, § 91.60) (Ord. 2007-19, passed - -)
Statutory reference:
   Civil penalties for violations of State Fire Code, see R.C. § 3737.51(B)
through (H)
CHAPTER 92: INTOXICATING LIQUORS
Section
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Exemptions from chapter
   
92.03   Restrictions applicable to sale of beer and intoxicating liquor for
consumption on the premises
   
92.04   Restrictions on sale of beer and liquor
   
92.05   Permit required; activities prohibited without permit
   
92.06   Illegal transportation prohibited
   
92.07   Open container prohibited; exception
   
92.08   Underage person shall not purchase intoxicating liquor or beer
   
92.09   Prohibitions; minors under 18 years; low-alcohol beverages
   
92.10   Alcohol vaporizing devices prohibited
   
92.11   Misrepresentation to obtain alcoholic beverage for a minor prohibited
   
92.12   Misrepresentation by a minor under 21 years
   
92.13   Sale to underage persons prohibited
   
92.14   Posting of card
   
92.15   Good faith acceptances of spurious identification
   
92.16   Consumption in motor vehicle prohibited
   
92.17   Hours of sale or consumption
   
92.18   Obstructing search of premises prohibited
   
92.19   Illegal possession of intoxicating liquor prohibited
   
92.20   Sale or possession of diluted liquor and refilled containers prohibited
   
92.21   Keeping place where beer or intoxicating liquors are sold in violation
of law
   
92.22   Intoxicating liquors shall not be sold in brothels
   
92.23   Use of intoxicating liquor in a public dance hall prohibited;
exceptions
   
92.24   Poisonously adulterated liquors
   
92.25   Tavern keeper permitting rioting or drunkenness
   
92.26   Notice of action to prohibit liquor business
   
92.27   Procedure when injunction violated
   
92.28   Liquor transaction scans
   
92.29   Affirmative defenses
 
   
92.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Liquor permits, see R.C. Chapter 4303
   Local option elections, see R.C. §§ 4301.32 et seq.
   Use of license to violate liquor laws; suspension; procedures, see R.C. §
4510.33
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, whether rectified or diluted with water or not,
whatever its origin may be, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol. The term does
not include denatured alcohol and wood alcohol.
   AT RETAIL. For use or consumption by the purchaser and not for resale.
   BEER.
      (1)   Includes all beverages brewed or fermented wholly or in part from
malt products and containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume.
      (2)   Beer, regardless of the percent of alcohol by volume, is not
intoxicating liquor for purposes of this code, the Ohio Revised Code, or any
rules adopted under it.
   CIDER. All liquids that are fit to use for beverage purposes that contain
0.5% of alcohol by volume, but not more than 6% of alcohol by weight that are
made through the normal alcoholic fermentation of the juice of sound, ripe
apples, including, without limitation, flavored, sparkling, or carbonated cider
and cider made from pure condensed apple must.
   CLUB. A corporation or association of individuals organized in good faith
for social, recreational, benevolent, charitable, fraternal, political,
patriotic, or athletic purposes, which is the owner, lessor, or occupant of a
permanent building or part of a permanent building operated solely for such
purposes, membership in which entails the prepayment of regular dues, and
includes the place so operated.
   COMMUNITY FACILITY. Means either of the following:
      (1)   Any convention, sports or entertainment facility or complex, or any
combination of these, that is used by or accessible to the general public and
that is owned or operated in whole or in part by the state, a state agency, or
a political subdivision of the state or that is leased from, or located on
property owned by or leased from, the state, a state agency, a political
subdivision of the state, or a convention facilities authority created pursuant
to R.C. § 351.02;
      (2)   An area designated as a community entertainment district pursuant
to R.C. § 4301.80.
   CONTROLLED ACCESS ALCOHOL AND BEVERAGE CABINET. A closed container, either
refrigerated, in whole or in part, or nonrefrigerated, access to the interior
of which is restricted by means of a device that requires the use of a key,
magnetic card, or similar device and from which beer, intoxicating liquor,
other beverages, or food may be sold.
   HOTEL. The same meaning as in R.C. § 3731.01, subject to the exceptions
mentioned in R.C. § 3731.03.
   INTOXICATING LIQUOR and LIQUOR. All liquids and compounds, other than beer,
containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume which are fit to use for beverage
purposes, from whatever source and by whatever process produced, by whatever
name called, and whether they are medicated, proprietary, or patented. The
terms include cider and alcohol, and all solids and confections which contain
0.5% or more of alcohol by volume.
   LOW-ALCOHOL BEVERAGE. Any brewed or fermented malt product or any product
made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits, or other agricultural
products that contains either no alcohol or less than 0.5% of alcohol by
volume. The beverages described in this definition do not include a soft drink
such as root beer, birch beer, or ginger beer.
   MANUFACTURE. All processes by which beer or intoxicating liquor is produced,
whether by distillation, rectifying, fortifying, blending, fermentation,
brewing, or in any other manner.
   MANUFACTURER. Any person engaged in the business of manufacturing beer or
intoxicating liquor.
   MIXED BEVERAGES. Include bottled and prepared cordials, cocktails,
highballs, and solids and confections that are obtained by mixing any type of
whiskey, neutral spirits, brandy, gin or other distilled spirits with, or over,
carbonated or plain water, pure juices from flowers and plants, and other
flavoring materials. The completed product shall contain not less than 0.5% of
alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume. The phrase
includes the contents of a pod.
   NIGHTCLUB. A place habitually operated for profit, where food is served for
consumption on the premises, and one or more forms of amusement are provided or
permitted for a consideration that may be in the form of a cover charge or may
be included in the price of the food and beverages, or both, purchased by
patrons.
   PERSON. Includes firms and corporations.
   PHARMACY. An establishment as defined in R.C. § 4729.01, that is under the
management or control of a licensed pharmacist in accordance with R.C. §
4729.27.
   POD. Means a sealed capsule made from plastic, glass, aluminum, or a
combination thereof to which all of the following apply:
      (1)   The capsule contains intoxicating liquor of more than 21% of
alcohol by volume.
      (2)   The capsule also contains a concentrated flavoring mixture.
      (3)   The contents of the capsule are not readily accessible or intended
for consumption unless certain manufacturer’s processing instructions are
followed.
      (4)   The instructions include releasing the contents of the capsule
through a machine specifically designed to process the contents.
      (5)   After being properly processed according to the manufacturer’s
instructions, the final product produced from the capsule contains not less
than 0.5% of alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume.
   RESTAURANT. A place located in a permanent building provided with space and
accommodations wherein, in consideration of the payment of money, hot meals are
habitually prepared, sold, and served at noon and evening, as the principal
business of the place. The term does not include pharmacies, confectionery
stores, lunch stands, nightclubs, and filling stations.
   SALE and SELL. The exchange, barter, gift, offer for sale, sale,
distribution, and delivery of any kind, and the transfer of title or possession
of beer and intoxicating liquor either by constructive or actual delivery by
any means or devices whatever, including the sale of beer or intoxicating
liquor by means of a controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet pursuant to
R.C. § 4301.21. Such terms do not include the mere solicitation of orders for
beer or intoxicating liquor from the holders of permits issued by the Division
of Liquor Control authorizing the sale of the beer or intoxicating liquor, but
no solicitor shall solicit any orders until the solicitor has been registered
with the Division pursuant to R.C. § 4303.25.
   SALES AREA OR TERRITORY. An exclusive geographic area or territory that is
assigned to a particular A or B permit holder and that either has one or more
political subdivisions as its boundaries or consists of an area of land with
readily identifiable geographic boundaries. The term does not include, however,
any particular retail location in an exclusive geographic area or territory
that had been assigned to another A or B permit holder before April 9, 2001.
   SEALED CONTAINER. Any container having a capacity of not more than 128 fluid
ounces, the opening of which is closed to prevent the entrance of air.
   SPIRITUOUS LIQUOR. All intoxicating liquors containing more than 21% of
alcohol by volume. The phrase does not include the contents of a pod.
   VEHICLE. All means of transportation by land, by water, or by air, and
everything made use of in any way for such transportation.
   WHOLESALE DISTRIBUTOR and DISTRIBUTOR. A person engaged in the business of
selling to retail dealers for purposes of resale.
   WINE. All liquids fit to use for beverage purposes containing not less than
0.5% of alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume, that is
made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits, or other agricultural
products. The term includes cider, except as used in R.C. §§ 4301.13, 4301.421,
4301.422, 4301.432, and 4301.44, and, for purposes of determining the rate of
the tax that applies, R.C. § 4301.43(B), the term does not include cider.
(R.C. §§ 4301.01, 4301.244)
§ 92.02 EXEMPTIONS FROM CHAPTER.
   The provisions of this chapter do not prevent the following:
   (A)   The storage of intoxicating liquor in bonded warehouses, established
in accordance with the Acts of Congress and under the regulation of the United
States, located in the municipality, or the transportation of intoxicating
liquor to or from bonded warehouses of the United States wherever located.
   (B)   A bona fide resident of this state who is the owner of a warehouse
receipt from obtaining or transporting to the resident’s residence for the
resident’s own consumption and not for resale spirituous liquor stored in a
government bonded warehouse in this state or in another state prior to December
1933, subject to such terms as are prescribed by the Division of Liquor
Control.
   (C)   The manufacture of cider from fruit for the purpose of making vinegar,
and nonintoxicating cider and fruit juices for use and sale.
   (D)   A licensed physician or dentist from administering or dispensing
intoxicating liquor or alcohol to a patient in good faith in the actual course
of the practice of the physician’s or dentist’s profession.
   (E)   The sale of alcohol to physicians, dentists, druggists, veterinary
surgeons, manufacturers, hospitals, infirmaries, or medical or educational
institutions using the alcohol for medicinal, mechanical, chemical or
scientific purposes.
   (F)   The sale, gift, or keeping for sale by druggists and others of any of
the medicinal preparations manufactured in accordance with the formulas
prescribed by the United States Pharmacopoeia and National Formulary, patent or
proprietary preparations, and other bona fide medicinal and technical
preparations, which contain no more alcohol than is necessary to hold the
medicinal agents in solution and to preserve the same, which are manufactured
and sold as medicines and not as beverages, are unfit for use for beverage
purposes, and the sale of which does not require the payment of a United States
liquor dealer’s tax.
   (G)   The manufacture and sale of tinctures or of toilet, medicinal and
antiseptic preparations and solutions not intended for internal human use nor
to be sold as beverages, and which are unfit for beverage purposes, if upon the
outside of each bottle, box, or package of which there is printed in English,
conspicuously and legibly, the quantity by volume of alcohol in the preparation
or solution.
   (H)   The manufacture and keeping for sale of the food products known as
flavoring extracts when manufactured and sold for cooking, culinary or
flavoring purposes, and which are unfit for use for beverage purposes.
   (I)   The lawful sale of wood alcohol or of ethyl alcohol for external use
when combined with other substances as to make it unfit for internal use.
   (J)   The manufacture, sale, and transport of ethanol or ethyl alcohol for
use as fuel. As used in this division, ETHANOL has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 122.075.
   (K)   The purchase and importation into the municipality or the purchase at
wholesale from A or B permit holders in this state of beer and intoxicating
liquor for use in manufacturing processes of nonbeverage food products under
terms prescribed by the Division, provided that the terms prescribed by the
Division shall not increase the cost of the beer or intoxicating liquor to any
person, firm or corporation purchasing and importing it into this municipality
or purchasing it from an A or B permit holder for that use.
   (L)   Any resident of this state or any member of the armed forces of the
United States who has attained the age of 21 years from bringing into this
municipality for personal use and not for resale not more than one liter of
spirituous liquor, 4.5 liters of wine, or 288 ounces of beer in any 30-day
period, and the same is free of any tax consent fee when the resident or member
of the armed forces physically possesses and accompanies the spirituous liquor,
wine or beer on returning from a foreign country, another state, or an insular
possession of the United States.
   (M)   Persons at least 21 years of age who collect ceramic commemorative
bottles containing spirituous liquor that have unbroken federal tax stamps on
them from selling or trading the bottles to other collectors. The bottles shall
originally have been purchased at retail from the Division, legally imported
under division (L) of this section, or legally imported pursuant to a supplier
registration issued by the Division. The sales shall be for the purpose of
exchanging a ceramic commemorative bottle between private collectors and shall
not be for the purpose of selling the spirituous liquor for personal
consumption. The sale or exchange authorized by this division shall not occur
on the premises of any permit holder, shall not be made in connection with the
business of any permit holder, and shall not be made in connection with any
mercantile business.
   (N)   The sale of beer or intoxicating liquor without a liquor permit at a
private residence, not more than five times per calendar year at a residence
address, at an event that has the following characteristics:
      (1)   The event is for a charitable, benevolent, or political purpose,
but shall not include any event the proceeds of which are for the profit or
gain of any individual;
      (2)   The event has in attendance not more than 50 people;
      (3)   The event shall be for a period not to exceed 12 hours;
      (4)   The sale of beer and intoxicating liquor at the event shall not
take place between 2:30 a.m. and 5:30 a.m.;
      (5)   No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or consume beer or
intoxicating liquor at the event and no beer or intoxicating liquor shall be
sold to any person under 21 years of age at the event; and
      (6)   No person at the event shall sell or furnish beer or intoxicating
liquor to an intoxicated person.
   (O)   The possession or consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor by a
person who is under 21 years of age and who is a student at an accredited
college or university, provided that both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person is required to taste and expectorate the beer or
intoxicating liquor for a culinary, food service, or hospitality course.
      (2)   The person is under the direct supervision of the instructor of the
culinary, food service, or hospitality course.
(R.C. § 4301.20)
§ 92.03 RESTRICTIONS APPLICABLE TO SALE OF BEER AND INTOXICATING LIQUOR FOR
CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES.
   (A)   The sale of beer or intoxicating liquor for consumption on the
premises is subject to the following restrictions, in addition to those imposed
by the rules and orders of the Division of Liquor Control:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter
4301, beer or intoxicating liquor may be served to a person not seated at a
table unless there is reason to believe that the beer or intoxicating liquor so
served will be consumed by a person under 21 years of age.
      (2)   Beer or intoxicating liquor may be served by a hotel in the room of
a bona fide guest, and may be sold by a hotel holding a D-5a permit, or a hotel
holding a D-3 or D-5 permit that otherwise meets all of the requirements for
holding a D-5a permit, by means of a controlled access alcohol and beverage
cabinet that shall be located only in the hotel room of a registered guest. A
hotel may sell beer or intoxicating liquor as authorized by its permit to a
registered guest by means of a controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet
in accordance with the following requirements:
         (a)   Only a person 21 years of age or older who is a guest registered
to stay in a guestroom shall be provided a key, magnetic card, or other similar
device necessary to obtain access to the contents of a controlled access
alcohol and beverage cabinet in that guestroom.
         (b)   The hotel shall comply with R.C. § 4301.22, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, in connection with the handling, restocking,
and replenishing of the beer and intoxicating liquor in the controlled access
alcohol and beverage cabinet.
         (c)   The hotel shall replenish or restock beer and intoxicating
liquor in any controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet only during the
hours during which the hotel may serve or sell beer and intoxicating liquor.
         (d)   The registered guest shall verify in writing that the guest has
read and understands the language that shall be posted on the controlled access
alcohol and beverage cabinet as required by division (A)(2)(e) of this section.
         (e)   A hotel authorized to sell beer and intoxicating liquor pursuant
to division (A)(2) of this section shall post on the controlled access alcohol
and beverage cabinet, in conspicuous language, the following notice:
   The alcoholic beverages contained in this cabinet shall not be removed from
the premises.
         (f)   The hotel shall maintain a record of each sale of beer or
intoxicating liquor made by the hotel by means of a controlled access alcohol
and beverage cabinet for any period in which the permit holder is authorized to
hold the permit pursuant to R.C. §§ 4303.26 and 4303.27 and any additional
period during which an applicant exercises its right to appeal a rejection by
the Division of Liquor Control to renew a permit pursuant to R.C. § 4303.271.
The records maintained by the hotel shall comply with both of the following:
            1.   Include the name, address, age, and signature of each hotel
guest who is provided access by the hotel to a controlled access alcohol and
beverage cabinet pursuant to division (A)(2)(a) of this section;
            2.   Be made available during business hours to authorized agents
of the Division of Liquor Control pursuant to R.C. § 4301.10(A)(6) or to
enforcement agents of the Department of Public Safety pursuant to R.C. §§
5502.13 through 5502.19.
         (g)   The hotel shall observe all other applicable rules adopted by
the Division of Liquor Control and the Liquor Control Commission.
      (3)   The seller shall not require the purchase of food with the purchase
of beer or intoxicating liquor; nor shall the seller of beer or intoxicating
liquor give away food of any kind in connection with the sale of beer or
intoxicating liquor, except as authorized by rule of the state Liquor Control
Commission.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4301.62(C)(8), the seller
shall not permit the purchaser to remove beer or intoxicating liquor so sold
from the premises.
      (5)   A hotel authorized to sell beer and intoxicating liquor pursuant to
division (A)(2) of this section shall provide a registered guest with the
opportunity to refuse to accept a key, magnetic card, or other similar device
necessary to obtain access to the contents of a controlled access alcohol and
beverage cabinet in that guest room. If a registered guest refuses to accept
such key, magnetic card, or other similar device, the hotel shall not assess
any charges on the registered guest for use of the controlled access alcohol
and beverage cabinet in that guest room.
(R.C. § 4301.21)
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(C))
§ 92.04 RESTRICTIONS ON SALE OF BEER AND LIQUOR.
   (A)   Restrictions on sales. Sales of beer and intoxicating liquor under all
classes of permits and from liquor stores are subject to the following
restrictions, in addition to those imposed by the rules or orders of the state
Division of Liquor Control.
      (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C.
Chapter 4301, no beer or intoxicating liquor shall be sold to any person under
21 years of age.
         (b)   No low-alcohol beverage shall be sold to any person under 18
years of age. No permit issued by the Division shall be suspended, revoked, or
cancelled because of a violation of this division (A)(1)(b).
         (c)   Except as provided in division (A)(1)(d) of this section, all of
the following apply to the handling, serving, and selling of beer and
intoxicating liquor by a person employed by a permit holder:
            1.   No person under 19 years of age shall sell beer across a bar.
            2.   No person under 21 years of age shall sell wine, mixed
beverages, or spirituous liquor across a bar.
            3.   No person under 18 years of age shall otherwise handle, serve,
or sell beer or intoxicating liquor.
         (d)   Any person employed by a permit holder may handle beer or
intoxicating liquor in sealed containers in connection with manufacturing,
storage, warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading, and
may handle beer or intoxicating liquor in open containers in connection with
cleaning tables or handling empty bottles or glasses.
      (2)   No permit holder and no agent or employee of a permit holder shall
sell or furnish beer or intoxicating liquor to an intoxicated person.
      (3)   (a)   No sales of intoxicating liquor shall be made after 2:30 a.m.
on Sunday, except under either of the following circumstances:
            1.   Intoxicating liquor may be sold on Sunday under authority of a
permit that authorizes Sunday sale.
            2.   Spiritous liquor may be sold on Sunday by any person awarded
an agency contract under R.C. § 4301.17 if the sale of spiritous liquor is
authorized in the applicable precinct as the result of an election on question
(B)(1) or (B)(2) of R.C. § 4301.351 and if the agency contract authorizes the
sale of spiritous liquor on Sunday.
         (b)   This section does not prevent the municipality from adopting a
closing hour for the sale of intoxicating liquor earlier than 2:30 a.m. on
Sunday or to provide that no intoxicating liquor may be sold prior to that hour
on Sunday.
      (4)   (a)   No holder of a permit shall give away any beer or
intoxicating liquor of any kind at any time in connection with the permit
holder’s business. However, with the exception of an A-1-A permit holder that
also has been issued an A-2 or A-2f permit, an A-1-A, A-1c, or D permit holder
may provide to a paying customer not more than a total of four tasting samples
of beer, wine, or spirituous liquor, as authorized by the applicable permit, in
any twenty-four-hour period. The permit holder shall provide the tasting
samples free of charge, at the permit holder’s expense, only to a person who is
21 years of age or older. The person shall consume the tasting samples on the
premises of the permit holder. A distributor is not responsible for the costs
of providing tasting samples authorized under division (A)(4) of this section.
         (b)   As used in division (A)(4) of this section:
            TASTING SAMPLE. Means one of the following, as applicable:
               a.   An amount not to exceed two ounces of beer;
               b.   An amount not to exceed two ounces of wine;
               c.   An amount not to exceed a quarter ounce of spirituous
liquor.
            D PERMIT HOLDER. Means a person that has been issued a D-1, D-2, D-
2x, D-3, D-3a, D-3 x, D-4, D-5, D-5a, D-5c, D-5d, D-5e, D-5f, D-5g, D-5h, D-5i,
D-5j, D-5k, D-5l, D-5m, D-5n, D-5o, D-6, or D-7 permit.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, no retail permit
holder shall display or permit the display on the outside of any licensed
retail premises, on any lot of ground on which the licensed premises are
situated, or on the exterior of any building of which the licensed premises are
a part, any sign, illustration, or advertisement bearing the name, brand name,
trade name, trademark, designation, or other emblem of, or indicating the
manufacturer, producer, distributor, place of manufacture, production, or
distribution of, any beer or intoxicating liquor. Signs, illustrations, or
advertisements bearing the name, brand name, trade name, trademark,
designation, or other emblem of or indicating the manufacturer, producer,
distributor, place of manufacture, production, or distribution of beer or
intoxicating liquor may be displayed and permitted to be displayed on the
interior or in the show windows of any licensed premises, if the particular
brand or type of product so advertised is actually available for sale on the
premises at the time of that display. The Liquor Control Commission shall
determine by rule the size and character of those signs, illustrations, or
advertisements.
      (6)   No retail permit holder shall possess on the licensed premises any
barrel or other container from which beer is drawn, unless there is attached to
the spigot or other dispensing apparatus the name of the manufacturer of the
product contained in the barrel or other container, provided that, if the beer
is served at a bar, the manufacturer’s name or brand shall appear in full view
of the purchaser. The Commission shall regulate the size and character of the
devices provided for in this section.
      (7)   The sale of gift certificates for the purchase of beer, wine, or
mixed beverages shall be permitted for the purchase of beer, wine, or mixed
beverages for on- or off-premises consumption. Limitations on the use of a gift
certificate for the purchase of beer, wine, or mixed beverages for on- or off-
premises consumption may be expressed by clearly stamping or typing on the face
of the certificate that the certificate may not be used for the purchase of
beer, wine, or mixed beverages for on-premises consumption.
(R.C. § 4301.22)
   (B)   Division (A)(1) not modified or affected. The provisions of R.C. §§
4301.633 through 4301.637, or substantially equivalent municipal ordinances,
shall not be deemed to modify or affect division (A)(1) of this section or R.C.
§ 4301.22(A).
(R.C. § 4301.638)
   (C)   Penalties.
      (1)   Whoever violates divisions (A)(1)(b) or (A)(3) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(B))
      (2)   Whoever violates divisions (A)(1)(a), (A)(1)(c) or (A)(2) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(D), (H))
Statutory reference:
   Suspension of beer and liquor sales during emergency, see R.C. § 4301.251
 
§ 92.05 PERMIT REQUIRED; ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED WITHOUT PERMIT.
   (A)   Permit required.
      (1)   No person personally or by the person’s clerk, agent, or employee,
shall manufacture, manufacture for sale, offer, keep, or possess for sale,
furnish or sell, or solicit the purchase or sale of any beer or intoxicating
liquor in this state, or transport, import, or cause to be transported or
imported any beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol in or into this municipality
for delivery, use or sale, unless the person has fully complied with R.C.
Chapters 4301 and 4303 or is the holder of a permit issued by the Division of
Liquor Control and in force at the time.
      (2)   No manufacturer, supplier, wholesale distributor, broker, or
retailer of beer or intoxicating liquor, or other person shall employ, retain,
or otherwise utilize any person in this state to act as an employee, agent,
solicitor, or salesperson, or act in any other representative capacity to sell,
solicit, take orders, or receive offers to purchase or expressions of interest
to purchase beer or intoxicating liquor from any person, at any location other
than a liquor permit premises, except as specifically authorized by R.C.
Chapter 4301 or R.C. Chapter 4303 or rules adopted thereunder. No function,
event, or party shall take place at any location other than a liquor permit
premises where any person acts in any manner to sell, solicit, take orders, or
receive offers to purchase or expressions of intent to purchase beer or
intoxicating liquor to or from any person, except as specifically authorized by
R.C. Chapter 4301 or R.C. Chapter 4303 or rules adopted thereunder.
(R.C. § 4303.25)
   (B)   Activities prohibited without permit.
      (1)   As used in this division (B):
         CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION. An organization described under section 501
(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and exempt from federal income taxation
under section 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         FUNDRAISER. Means a raffle, silent auction, or event where a door
prize is awarded.
         POLITICAL ORGANIZATION. Means a political organization defined under
section 527 of the Internal Revenue Code.
         RAFFLE. Means a raffle conducted in accordance with R.C. Chapter 2915.
         SILENT AUCTION. Means a method of submitting bids in writing by one or
more persons and, after a review of all the bids received, personal property is
awarded to the highest and most responsive bidder.
      (2)   No person, personally or by the person’s clerk, agent, or employee,
who is not the holder of an A permit issued by the Ohio Division of Liquor
Control, in force at the time, and authorizing the manufacture of beer or
intoxicating liquor, or who is not an agent or employee of the Division
authorized to manufacture such beer or intoxicating liquor, shall manufacture
any beer or intoxicating liquor for sale, or shall manufacture spirituous
liquor.
      (3)   No person, personally or by the person’s clerk, agent, or employee,
who is not the holder of an A, B, C, D, E, F, G, I, or S permit issued by the
Division, in force at the time, and authorizing the sale of beer, intoxicating
liquor, or alcohol, or who is not an agent or employee of the Division or the
Tax Commissioner authorized to sell such beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol,
shall sell, keep, or possess beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol for sale to
any persons other than those authorized by R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303 to
purchase any beer or intoxicating liquor, or sell any alcohol at retail.
      (4)   No person, personally or by the person’s clerk, agent, or employee,
who is the holder of a permit issued by the Division, shall sell, keep, or
possess for sale any intoxicating liquor not purchased from the Division or
from the holder of a permit issued by the Division authorizing the sale of such
intoxicating liquor unless the same has been purchased with the special consent
of the Division. The Division shall revoke the permit of any person convicted
of a violation of division (B)(3) of this section.
      (5)   Division (B)(3) of this section does not apply to either of the
following:
         (a)   The sale or possession for sale of any low-alcohol beverage;
         (b)   Beer and intoxicating liquor that is given away if all of the
following apply:
            1.   The beer or intoxicating liquor is given away by a charitable
or political organization to a participant in a fundraiser.
            2.   Any beer, wine, or mixed beverages given away via the
fundraiser is purchased from a person issued a permit under R.C. Chapter 4303.
            3.   Any spirituous liquor given away via the fundraiser is
purchased from an agency store located in this state.
            4.   Regarding any spirituous liquor donated to the charitable or
political organization for purposes of the fundraiser, the donor is not an
agency store located in this state and submits to the charitable or political
organization receipts showing that the donor purchased the spirituous liquor
from an agency store located in this state.
            5.   The charitable or political organization submits purchase
receipts for the spirituous liquor given away via a fundraiser to the Division
of Liquor Control as proof that the spirituous liquor was purchased from an
agency store located in this state. The charitable or political organization
shall submit the receipts in accordance with procedures that the Division shall
establish.
(R.C. § 4301.58)
   (C)   Penalty. Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(C))
§ 92.06 ILLEGAL TRANSPORTATION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person, who is not the holder of an H permit shall transport beer,
intoxicating liquor, or alcohol in this municipality. This section does not
apply to the transportation and delivery of beer, alcohol, or intoxicating
liquor purchased or to be purchased from the holder of a permit issued by the
Division of Liquor Control, in force at the time, and authorizing the sale and
delivery of the beer, alcohol, or intoxicating liquor so transported, or to the
transportation and delivery of beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol purchased
from the Department or the Tax Commissioner, or purchased by the holder of an A
or B permit outside this state, and transported within this municipality by
them in their own trucks for the purpose of sale under their permits.
(R.C. § 4301.60)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(C))
§ 92.07 OPEN CONTAINER PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   As used in this section, STREET, HIGHWAY AND MOTOR VEHICLE have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   (B)   No person shall have in his or her possession an opened container of
beer or intoxicating liquor in any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   In a state liquor store;
      (2)   On the premises of the holder of any permit issued by the
Department of Liquor Control;
      (3)   In any other public place;
      (4)   While operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on
any street, highway or other public or private property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking; and/or
      (5)   While being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on any street,
highway or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking.
   (C)   This section does not apply to beer or intoxicating liquor which has
been lawfully purchased for consumption on the premises where bought of a
holder of an A-1-A, A-2, D-1, D-2, D-3, D-3a, D-4, D-4a, D-5, D-5a, D-5b, D-5c,
D-5d, D-5e, D-5f, D-5g, D-5h, D-5i, D-7, E, F, or F-2 permit or to beer or
intoxicating liquor consumed on the premises of a convention facility as
provided in R.C. § 4303.201. (Prior Code, § 72.18) (Ord. 1990-30, passed 8-14-
1990) Penalty, see §
92.99
 § 92.08 UNDERAGE PERSON SHALL NOT PURCHASE INTOXICATING LIQUOR OR BEER.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301,
no person under the age of 21 years shall purchase beer or intoxicating liquor.
(R.C. § 4301.63)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $25 nor
more than $100. The court imposing a fine for a violation of this section may
order that the fine be paid by the performance of public work at a reasonable
hour rate established by the court. The court shall designate the time within
which the public work shall be completed.
(R.C. § 4301.99(E))
§ 92.09 PROHIBITIONS; MINORS UNDER 18 YEARS; LOW-ALCOHOL BEVERAGES.
   (A)   As used in this section, UNDERAGE PERSON means a person under 18 years
of age.
   (B)   No underage person shall purchase any low-alcohol beverage.
   (C)   No underage person shall order, pay for, share the cost of, or attempt
to purchase any low-alcohol beverage.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the
name, age, or other identification of any underage person for the purpose of
obtaining or with the intent to obtain any low-alcohol beverage for an underage
person, by purchase or as a gift.
   (E)   No underage person shall knowingly show or give false information
concerning his or her name, age, or other identification for the purpose of
purchasing or otherwise obtaining any low-alcohol beverage in any place in this
municipality.
   (F)   No person shall sell or furnish any low-alcohol beverage to, or buy
any low-alcohol beverage for, an underage person, unless given by a physician
in the regular line of his or her practice or given for established religious
purposes, or unless the underage person is accompanied by a parent, spouse who
is not an underage person, or legal guardian.
   (G)   (1)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private
place shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the place
while possessing or consuming any low-alcohol beverage, unless the low-alcohol
beverage is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that person’s
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, and the
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian is present when
the person possesses or consumes the low-alcohol beverage.
      (2)   An owner of a public or private place is not liable for acts or
omissions in violation of division (G)(1) that are committed by a lessee of
that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee’s acts or
omissions.
   (H)   No permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control shall be suspended,
revoked, or cancelled because of a violation of either division (F) or (G).
   (I)   No underage person shall knowingly possess or consume any low-alcohol
beverage in any public or private place, unless he or she is accompanied by a
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, or unless the
low-alcohol beverage is given by a physician in the regular line of his or her
practice or given for established religious purposes.
   (J)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian of
an underage person shall knowingly permit the underage person to violate this
section.
(R.C. § 4301.631)
   (K)   (1)   Whoever violates any provision of this section for which no
other penalty is provided is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(B))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section shall be fined not
less than $25 nor more than $100. The court imposing a fine for a violation of
division (B) of this section may order that the fine be paid by the performance
of public work at a reasonable hour rate established by the court. The court
shall designate the time within which the public work shall be completed.
(R.C. § 4301.99(E))
§ 92.10 ALCOHOL VAPORIZING DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   As used in this section, ALCOHOL VAPORIZING DEVICE means a machine or
other device that mixes beer or intoxicating liquor with pure oxygen or any
other gas to produce a vaporized product for the purpose of consumption by
inhalation.
   (B)   No person shall sell or offer for sale an alcohol vaporizing device.
   (C)   No person shall purchase or use an alcohol vaporizing device.
(R.C. § 4301.65)
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
misdemeanor of the third degree. For a second or subsequent violation occurring
within a period of five consecutive years after the first violation, a person
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(J))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4301.99(A))
§ 92.11 MISREPRESENTATION TO OBTAIN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE FOR A MINOR PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301,
no person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the name, age, or
other identification of any person under 21 years of age, for the purpose of
obtaining, or with the intent to obtain, beer or intoxicating liquor for a
person under 21 years of age, by purchase, or as a gift.
(R.C. § 4301.633)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(C))
§ 92.12 MISREPRESENTATION BY A MINOR UNDER 21 YEARS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301,
no person under the age of 21 years shall knowingly show or give false
information concerning his or her name, age, or other identification for the
purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining beer or intoxicating liquor in any
place in this municipality where beer or intoxicating liquor is sold under a
permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control, or sold by the Division of
Liquor Control.
(R.C. § 4301.634)
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If, in committing a first violation of
division (A), the offender presented to the permit holder or his or her
employee or agent a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $250 and not
more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more
than six months.
      (2)   On a second violation in which, for the second time, the offender
presented to the permit holder or his or her employee or agent a false,
fictitious, or altered identification card, a false or fictitious driver’s
license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s license issued by any
state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree and shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, and
may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months. The
court also may impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operation privilege from
the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
      (3)   On a third or subsequent violation in which, for the third or
subsequent time, the offender presented to the permit holder or his or her
employee or agent a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $500 nor more
than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than
six months. Except as provided in this division, the court also may impose a
class six suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. §
4510.02(A)(6), and the court may order that the suspension or denial remain in
effect until the offender attains the age of 21 years. The court, in lieu of
suspending the offender’s temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s
license, or driver’s license, instead may order the offender to perform a
determinate number of hours of community service, with the court determining
the actual number of hours and the nature of the community service the offender
shall perform.
(R.C. § 4301.99(F))
§ 92.13 SALE TO UNDERAGE PERSONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301,
no person shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor to an underage person, shall
buy beer or intoxicating liquor for an underage person, or shall furnish it to
an underage person unless given by a physician in the regular line of the
physician’s practice or given for established religious purposes or unless the
underage person is supervised by a parent, spouse who is not an underage
person, or legal guardian. In proceedings before the Liquor Control Commission,
no permit holder, or no employee or agent of a permit holder, charged with a
violation of this division shall be charged, for the same offense, with a
violation of R.C. § 4301.22(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (B)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private place
shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the place while
possessing or consuming beer or intoxicating liquor, unless the intoxicating
liquor or beer is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that
person’s parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian and
the parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian is present
at the time of the person’s possession or consumption of the beer or
intoxicating liquor. An owner of a public or private place is not liable for
acts or omissions in violation of this division that are committed by a lessee
of that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee’s acts
or omissions.
   (C)   No person shall engage or use accommodations at a hotel, inn, cabin,
campground, or restaurant when the person knows or has reason to know either of
the following:
      (1)   That beer or intoxicating liquor will be consumed by an underage
person on the premises of the accommodations that the person engages or uses,
unless the person engaging or using the accommodations is the spouse of the
underage person and who is not an underage person, or is the parent or legal
guardian of all of the underage persons, who consume beer or intoxicating
liquor on the premises and that person is on the premises at all times when
beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by an underage person.
      (2)   That a drug of abuse will be consumed on the premises of the
accommodations by any person, except a person who obtained the drug of abuse
pursuant to a prescription issued by a licensed health professionals authorized
to prescribe drugs and has the drug of abuse in the original container in which
it was dispensed to the person.
   (D)   (1)   No person is required to permit the engagement of accommodations
at any hotel, inn, cabin, or campground by an underage person or for an
underage person, if the person engaging the accommodations knows or has reason
to know that the underage person is intoxicated, or that the underage person
possesses any beer or intoxicating liquor and is not supervised by a parent,
spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian who is or will be
present at all times when the beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by
the underage person.
      (2)   No underage person shall knowingly engage or attempt to engage
accommodations at any hotel, inn, cabin, or campground by presenting
identification that falsely indicates that the underage person is 21 years of
age or older for the purpose of violating this section.
   (E)   (1)   No underage person shall knowingly order, pay for, share the
cost of, attempt to purchase, possess, or consume any beer or intoxicating
liquor in any public or private place. No underage person shall knowingly be
under the influence of any beer or intoxicating liquor in any public place. The
prohibitions set forth in this division against an underage person knowingly
possessing, consuming, or being under the influence of any beer or intoxicating
liquor shall not apply if the underage person is supervised by a parent, spouse
who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, or the beer or intoxicating
liquor is given by a physician in the regular line of the physician’s practice
or given for established religious purposes.
      (2)   (a)   If a person is charged with violating division (E)(1) of this
section in a complaint filed under R.C. § 2151.27, the court may order the
child into a diversion program specified by the court and hold the complaint in
abeyance pending successful completion of the diversion program. A child is
ineligible to enter into a diversion program under this division if the child
previously has been diverted pursuant to this division. If the child completes
the diversion program to the satisfaction of the court, the court shall dismiss
the complaint and order the child’s record in the case sealed under R.C. §§
2151.356 through 2151.358. If the child fails to satisfactorily complete the
diversion program, the court shall proceed with the complaint.
         (b)   If a person is charged in a criminal complaint with violating
division (E)(1) of this section, R.C. § 2935.36 shall apply to the offense,
except that a person is ineligible for diversion under that section if the
person previously has been diverted pursuant to divisions (E)(2)(a) or (E)(2)
(b) of this section. If the person completes the diversion program to the
satisfaction of the court, the court shall dismiss the complaint and order the
record in the case sealed under R.C.§ 2953.33. If the person fails to
satisfactorily complete the diversion program, the court shall proceed with the
complaint.
   (F)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian of
a minor shall knowingly permit the minor to violate this section or R.C. §
4301.63, 4301.633, or 4301.634, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (G)   The operator of any hotel, inn, cabin, or campground shall make the
provisions of this section available in writing to any person engaging or using
accommodations at the hotel, inn, cabin, or campground.
   (H)   As used in this section:
      DRUG OF ABUSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.
      HOTEL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3731.01.
      LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS. Has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
      MINOR. Means a person under the age of 18 years.
      PRESCRIPTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
      UNDERAGE PERSON. Means a person under the age of 21 years.
(R.C. § 4301.69)
   (I)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 4301.633 through 4301.637, or substantially
equivalent municipal ordinances, shall not be deemed to modify or affect
divisions (A) through (H) of this section or R.C. § 4301.69.
(R.C. § 4301.638)
   (J)   (1)   Whoever violates divisions (B), (C), (D), or (F) of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(C))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (E)(1) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If an offender who violates division (E)(1) of
this section was under the age of 18 years at the time of the offense and the
offense occurred while the offender was the operator of or a passenger in a
motor vehicle, the court, in addition to any other penalties it imposes upon
the offender, shall suspend the offender’s temporary instruction permit or
probationary driver’s license for a period of not less than six months and not
more than one year. If the offender is 15 years and six months of age or older
and has not been issued a temporary instruction permit or probationary driver’s
license, the offender shall not be eligible to be issued such a license or
permit for a period of six months. If the offender has not attained the age of
15 years and six months, the offender shall not be eligible to be issued a
temporary instruction permit until the offender attains the age of 16 years.
(R.C. § 4301.99(D))
      (3)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor, shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, and in
addition to the fine, may be imprisoned for a definite term of not more than
six months.
(R.C. § 4301.99(I))
Statutory reference:
   Changes to law if federal uniform drinking age repealed or declared
unconstitutional, see R.C. § 4301.691
§ 92.14 POSTING OF CARD.
   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4301.691, every place in
this municipality where beer, intoxicating liquor, or any low-alcohol beverage
is sold for beverage purposes shall display at all times, in a prominent place
on the premises thereof, a printed card, which shall be furnished by the
Division of Liquor Control and which shall read substantially as follows:
         WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER AGE
         If you are under the age of 21
         Under the statutes of the state of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share
the cost of, or attempt to purchase, or possess or consume beer or intoxicating
liquor in any public place, or furnish false information as to name, age, or
other identification, you are subject to a fine of up to $1,000, or
imprisonment up to 6 months, or both.
         If you are under the age of 18
         Under the statutes of the state of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share
the cost of, or attempt to purchase, or posses or consume, any type of beer or
wine that contains either no alcohol or less than one-half of one per cent of
alcohol by volume in any public place, or furnish false information as to the
name, age, or other identification, you are subject to a fine of up to $250 or
to imprisonment up to 30 days, or both.
      (2)   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution or any
proceedings before the Department or the Liquor Control Commission for failing
to display this card. No permit issued by the Department shall be suspended,
revoked, or canceled because of the failure of the permit holder to display
this card.
   (B)   (1)   Every place in this municipality for which a D permit has been
issued under R.C. Chapter 4303 shall be issued a printed card by the Division
of Liquor Control that shall read substantially as follows:
         WARNING
         If you are carrying a firearm
         Under the statutes of Ohio, if you possess a firearm in any room in
which liquor is being dispensed in premises for which a D permit has been
issued under Chapter 4303 of the Revised Code, you may be guilty of a felony
and may be subjected to a prison term of up to one year.
      (2)   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution or any
proceedings before the Division of Liquor Control or the Liquor Control
Commission for failing to display this card. No permit issued by the Department
shall be suspended, revoked, or canceled because of the failure of the permit
holder to display this card.
(R.C. § 4301.637) Penalty, see §
92.99
Statutory reference:
   Carrying concealed weapon, felony, see R.C. § 2923.12
   Possessing firearm in liquor permit premises, exceptions, defenses, see R.C.
§ 2923.121
§ 92.15 GOOD FAITH ACCEPTANCES OF SPURIOUS IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   No permit holder, agent or employee of a permit holder, or any other
person may be found guilty of a violation of any section of this chapter in
which age is any element of the offense, if any court of record finds all of
the following:
      (1)   That the person buying, at the time of so doing, exhibited to the
permit holder, the agent or employee of the permit holder, or the other person
a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card as defined
in R.C. § 4301.61, a military identification card issued by the United States
Department of Defense, or a United States or foreign passport, that displays a
picture of the individual for whom the license, card, or passport was issued
and shows that the person buying was then at least 21 years of age if the
person was buying beer as defined in R.C. § 4301.01 or intoxicating liquor, or
that the person was then at least 18 years of age if the person was buying any
low-alcohol beverage;
      (2)   That the permit holder, the agent or employee of the permit holder,
or the other person made a bona fide effort to ascertain the true age of the
person buying by checking the identification presented at the time of the
purchase to ascertain that the description on the identification compared with
the appearance of the buyer and that the identification presented had not been
altered in any way.
      (3)   That the permit holder, the agent or employee of the permit holder,
or the other person had reason to believe that the person buying was of legal
age.
   (B)   The defense provided by division (A) of this section is in addition to
the affirmative defense provided by §
92.29.
(R.C. § 4301.639(A), (C))
§ 92.16 CONSUMPTION IN MOTOR VEHICLE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall consume any beer or intoxicating liquor in a motor
vehicle. This section does not apply to persons described in R.C. § 4301.62(D)
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 4301.64)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If an offender who violates this section was under the age of 18 years
at the time of the offense, the court, in addition to any other penalties it
imposes upon the offender, may suspend the offender’s temporary instruction
permit, probationary driver’s license or driver’s license for a period of not
less than six months and not more than one year. In lieu of suspending the
offender’s temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license, or
driver’s license, the court instead may require the offender to perform
community service for a number of hours determined by the court. If the
offender is 15 years and six months of age or older and has not been issued a
temporary instruction permit or probationary driver’s license, the offender
shall not be eligible to be issued such a license or permit for a period of six
months. If the offender has not attained the age of 15 years and six months,
the offender shall not be eligible to be issued a temporary instruction permit
until the offender attains the age of 16 years.
(R.C. § 4301.99(B))
§ 92.17 HOURS OF SALE OR CONSUMPTION.
   (A)   This section shall apply to the retail sale of beer, wine, mixed
beverages, or spirituous liquor.
   (B)   (1)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor shall be
sold or delivered by an A-1, A-1C, A-2, B-1, B-2, B-4, B-5, C-1, C-2, C-2X, D-
1, D-2, D-2X, D-3 when issued without a D-3A, D-3X, D-4, D-5H, D-5K, D-8, F, F-
1, F-2, F-3, F-4, F-5, F-6, F-7, F-8, F-9, G, or I permit holder from Monday to
Saturday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. and on Sunday between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and Sunday midnight, unless statutorily authorized
otherwise.
      (2)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor is
also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises of the above permit
holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages,
or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.
   (C)   (1)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor shall be
sold or delivered by an A-1A, D-3 when issued with a D-3A, D-4A, D-5, D-5A, D-
5B, D-5C, D-5D, D-5E, D-5F, D-5G, D-5I, D-5J, D-5L, D-5M, D-5N, D-5O, or D-
7 permit holder from Monday to Saturday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 5:30
a.m. and on Sunday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and Sunday midnight, unless
statutorily authorized otherwise.
      (2)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor is
also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises of the above permit
holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages,
or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.
   (D)   Permit holders authorized to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages, or
spirituous liquor at retail who are not specifically identified in divisions
(B) or (C) above shall be subject to the provisions of division (B), unless
statutorily authorized otherwise.
   (E)   The hours on Sunday during which sales, delivery, or consumption of
alcoholic beverages may take place are established by statute, but in no event
shall they begin prior to 5:30 a.m.
(O.A.C. § 4301:1-1-49)
   (F)   No association, corporation, local unit of an association or
corporation, or D permit holder who holds an F-2 permit shall sell beer or
intoxicating liquor beyond the hours of sale allowed by the permit. This
division imposes strict liability on the holder of such permit and on any
officer, agent or employee of such permit holder.
(R.C. § 4303.202(D)(2))
   (G)   No F-8 permit holder shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor beyond the
hours of sale allowed by the permit. This division imposes strict liability on
the holder of an F-8 permit and on any officer, agent or employee of that
permit holder.
(R.C. § 4303.208(C))
   (H)   Whoever violates divisions (F) or (G) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4303.99(D)) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.18 OBSTRUCTING SEARCH OF PREMISES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall hinder or obstruct any agent or employee of the
Division of Liquor Control, any enforcement agent of the Department of Public
Safety or any officer of the law from making an inspection or search of any
place, other than a bona fide private residence, where beer or intoxicating
liquor is possessed, kept, sold, or given away.
(R.C. § 4301.66)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(C))
   (C)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the hindrance,
obstruction, resistance, or interference alleged consisted of constitutionally
protected speech only.
§ 92.19 ILLEGAL POSSESSION OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall have possession of any spirituous liquor, in excess of
one liter, in one or more containers, which was not purchased at wholesale or
retail from the Division of Liquor Control or otherwise lawfully acquired
pursuant to this chapter, R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303, or any other
intoxicating liquor or beer, in one or more containers, which was not lawfully
acquired pursuant to those chapters.
(R.C. § 4301.67)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(B))
§ 92.20 SALE OR POSSESSION OF DILUTED LIQUOR AND REFILLED CONTAINERS
PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, or possess with the intent to
sell intoxicating liquor in any original container which has been diluted,
refilled, or partly refilled.
(R.C. § 4301.68)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(C))
§ 92.21 KEEPING PLACE WHERE BEER OR INTOXICATING LIQUORS ARE SOLD IN VIOLATION
OF LAW.
   (A)   No person shall keep a place where beer or intoxicating liquors are
sold, furnished, or given away in violation of law. The court, on conviction
for a subsequent violation of this section, shall order the place where the
beer or intoxicating liquor is sold, furnished, or given away to be abated as a
nuisance or shall order the person so convicted to give bond payable to the
state in the sum of $1,000, with sureties to the acceptance of the court, that
the person will not sell, furnish, or give away beer or intoxicating liquor in
violation of law and will pay all fines, costs, and damages assessed against
the person for that subsequent violation of this section. The giving away of
beer or intoxicating liquors, or any other device to evade this section,
constitutes unlawful selling.
   (B)   As used in this section, BEER has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4301.01.
   (C)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any premises for which
a permit has been issued under R.C. Chapter 4303 while that permit is in
effect.
(R.C. § 4399.09)
   (D)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $100 nor
more than $500 on a first offense and shall be fined not less than $200 nor
more than $500 on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4399.99(B))
§ 92.22 INTOXICATING LIQUORS SHALL NOT BE SOLD IN BROTHELS.
   (A)   No person shall sell, exchange, or give away intoxicating liquor in a
brothel.
(R.C. § 4399.10)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $100 nor
more than $500 and imprisoned not less than one nor more than six months.
(R.C. § 4399.99(C))
§ 92.23 USE OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR IN A PUBLIC DANCE HALL PROHIBITED;
EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(2) of this section,
no person who is the proprietor of, or who conducts, manages, or is in charge
of any public dance hall shall allow the use of any intoxicating liquor or the
presence of intoxicated persons in the public dance hall or on the premises on
which it is located.
      (2)   The prohibition against the use of any intoxicating liquor
contained in division (A)(1) of this section does not apply to establishments
that are holders of a D-1, D-2, D-3, D-4, or D-5 permit whose principal
business consists of conducting a hotel, a restaurant, a club, or a nightclub,
all as defined in R.C. § 4301.01.
(R.C. § 4399.14)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $25 nor
more than $500, imprisoned not more than six months, or both.
(R.C. § 4399.99(D))
§ 92.24 POISONOUSLY ADULTERATED LIQUORS.
   (A)   No person, for the purpose of sale, shall adulterate spirituous
liquor, alcoholic liquor, or beer used or intended for drink or medicinal or
mechanical purposes, with cocculus indicus, vitriol, opium, alum, capsicum,
copperas, laurel water, logwood, brazilwood, cochineal, sugar of lead, aloes,
glucose, tannic acid, or any other substance that is poisonous or injurious to
health, or with a substance not a necessary ingredient in the manufacture of
the spiritous liquor, alcoholic liquor, or beer, or sell, offer, or keep for
sale spiritous liquor, alcoholic liquor, or beer that is so adulterated.
   (B)   In addition to the penalties provided in division (C) of this section,
a person convicted of violating this section shall pay all necessary costs and
expenses incurred in inspecting and analyzing spiritous liquor, alcoholic
liquor, or beer that is so adulterated, sold, kept, or offered for sale.
(R.C. § 4399.15)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $20 nor
more than $100, imprisoned not less than 20 nor more than 60 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4399.99(E))
§ 92.25 TAVERN KEEPER PERMITTING RIOTING OR DRUNKENNESS.
   (A)   No tavern keeper shall permit rioting, intoxication, or drunkenness in
or on his or her premises.
(R.C. § 4399.16)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $5 nor more
than $100.
(R.C. § 4399.99(A))
§ 92.26 NOTICE OF ACTION TO PROHIBIT LIQUOR BUSINESS.
   Any party bringing an action to prohibit the operation of a business under a
liquor permit issued pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4303 shall, upon filing the
complaint in the action, notify the Division of Liquor Control of the filing of
the complaint.
(R.C. § 4303.40)
§ 92.27 PROCEDURE WHEN INJUNCTION VIOLATED.
   (A)   Any person subject to an injunction, temporary or permanent, granted
pursuant to R.C. § 3767.05(D) or (E) involving a condition described in
division (3) of the definition of “nuisance” in R.C. § 3767.01, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, shall obey the injunction. If the
person violates the injunction, the court, or in vacation a judge thereof, may
summarily try and punish the violator. The proceedings for punishment for
contempt shall be commenced by filing with the Clerk of the Court from which
the injunction issued, information under oath setting out the alleged facts
constituting the violation, whereupon the court shall cause a warrant to issue
under which the defendant shall be arrested. The trial may be had upon
affidavits, or either party may demand the production and oral examination of
the witnesses.
(R.C. § 4301.74)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(C))
§ 92.28 LIQUOR TRANSACTION SCANS.
   (A)   As used in this section and §
92.29:
      CARD HOLDER. Means any person who presents a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card to a permit holder, or an agent or
employee of a permit holder, for either of the purposes listed in under
divisions (a) or (b) of the definition for “transaction scan” in this section.
      IDENTIFICATION CARD. Means an identification card issued under R.C. §§
4507.50 through 4507.52 or an equivalent identification card issued by another
state.
      PERMIT HOLDER. Means the holder of a permit issued under R.C. Chapter
4303.
      TRANSACTION SCAN. Means the process by which a permit holder or an agent
or employee of a permit holder checks, by means of a transaction scan device,
the validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification
card that is presented as a condition for doing either of the following:
         (a)   Purchasing any beer, intoxicating liquor, or low-alcohol
beverage;
         (b)   Gaining admission to a premises that has been issued a liquor
permit authorizing the sale of beer or intoxicating liquor for consumption on
the premises where sold, and where admission is restricted to persons 21 years
of age or older.
      TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE. Means any commercial device or combination of
devices used at a point of sale that is capable of deciphering in an
electronically readable format the information encoded on the magnetic strip or
bar code of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification
card.
   (B)   (1)   A permit holder or an agent or employee of a permit holder may
perform a transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check the
validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card
presented by a card holder for either of the purposes listed in divisions (a)
or (b) of the definition for “transaction scan” in this section.
      (2)   If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed
under division (B)(1) of this section fails to match the information printed on
the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by
the card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the information so
printed is false or fraudulent, neither the permit holder nor any agent or
employee of the permit holder shall sell any beer, intoxicating liquor, or low-
alcohol beverage to the card holder.
      (3)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not preclude a permit holder
or an agent or employee of a permit holder from using a transaction scan device
to check the validity of a document other than a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or identification card, if the document includes a bar code or
magnetic strip that may be scanned by the device, as a condition of a sale
beer, intoxicating liquor, or a low-alcohol beverage or of granting admission
to a premises described in the definition for “transaction scan” in this
section.
   (C)   The Registrar of Motor Vehicles, with the approval of the Liquor
Control Commission, shall adopt, and may amend or rescind, rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 that do both of the following:
      (1)   Govern the recording and maintenance of information described in
R.C. § 4301.61(D)(1)(a) and (D)(1)(b), R.C. § 2925.57(D)(1)(a) and (D)(1)(b),
and R.C. § 2927.021(D)(1)(a) and (D)(1)(b);
      (2)   Ensure quality control in the use of transaction scan devices under
R.C. §§ 2925.57, 2925.58, 2927.021, 2927.022, 4301.61, and 4301.611.
   (D)   (1)   No permit holder or agent or employee of a permit holder shall
electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information derived from
a transaction scan, except for the following:
         (a)   The name and date of birth of the person listed on the driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the card
holder;
         (b)   The expiration date and identification number of the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the card
holder.
      (2)   No permit holder or agent or employee of a permit holder shall use
the information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is permitted to
be recorded and maintained under division (D)(1) of this section, except for
purposes of R.C. § 4301.611, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (3)   No permit holder or agent or employee of a permit holder shall use
a transaction scan device for a purpose other than a purpose listed in
divisions (a) or (b) of the definition for “transaction scan” in this section.
      (4)   No permit holder or agent or employee of a permit holder shall sell
or otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan to any
third party, including but not limited to selling or otherwise disseminating
that information for any marketing, advertising, or promotional activities, but
a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant
to a court order or as specifically authorized by R.C. § 4301.611, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or another section of this code
or the Ohio Revised Code.
   (E)   Nothing in this section or R.C. § 4301.611, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, relieves a permit holder or an agent or
employee of a permit holder of any responsibility to comply with any other
applicable local, state or federal laws or rules governing the sale of beer,
intoxicating liquor, or low-alcohol beverages.
   (F)   Whoever violates division (B)(2) or (D) of this section is guilty of
an illegal liquor transaction scan, and the court may impose upon the offender
a civil penalty of up to $1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of the Court
shall pay each collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for deposit into
the County Treasury.
(R.C. § 4301.61)
§ 92.29 AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES.
   (A)   A permit holder or an agent or employee of a permit holder may not be
found guilty of a charge of a violation of this chapter or any rule of the
Liquor Control Commission in which the age of the purchaser of any beer,
intoxicating liquor, or low-alcohol beverage is an element of the alleged
violation, if the permit holder, agent, or employee raises and proves as an
affirmative defense that all of the following occurred:
      (1)   A card holder attempting to purchase any beer, intoxicating liquor,
or low-alcohol beverage presented a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
an identification card.
      (2)   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or identification card that the card holder presented indicated that the
license or card was valid.
      (3)   The beer, intoxicating liquor, or low-alcohol beverage was sold to
the card holder in reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and
the completed transaction scan.
   (B)   In determining whether a permit holder or an agent or employee of a
permit holder has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (A) of
this section, the Liquor Control Commission or the trier of fact in a court of
record shall consider any written policy that the permit holder has adopted and
implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of R.C. §§ 4301.22(A)(1)
or (A)(2), 4301.63 through 4301.636, 4301.69, and 4301.691, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances. For purposes of division (A)(3)
of this section, the Commission or trier of fact shall consider that reasonable
reliance upon the identification presented and the completed transaction scan
may require a permit holder or an agent or employee of a permit holder to
exercise reasonable diligence to determine, and that the use of a transaction
scan device does not excuse a permit holder or an agent or employee of a permit
holder from exercising reasonable diligence to determine, the following:
      (1)   Whether a person to whom the permit holder or agent or employee of
a permit holder sells any beer or intoxicating liquor is 21 years of age or
older or sells low-alcohol beverage is 18 years of age or older;
      (2)   Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a card holder
is that of the card holder.
   (C)   The affirmative defense provided by division (A) of this section is in
addition to the defense provided by R.C. § 4301.639, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (D)   In any hearing before the Liquor Control Commission and in any
criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by division (A) of
this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a deputy registrar
who issued an identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50 through 4507.52 shall
be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of that issuance in lieu
of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with the Bureau of Motor
Vehicles in the hearing or action.
(R.C. § 4301.611)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no other
penalty has been provided is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates §
92.12 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree, if, in committing a first
violation of that section, the offender presented to the permit holder or his
or her employee or agent a false, fictitious or altered identification card, a
false or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a
driver’s license issued by any state which has been altered, the offender is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than
$250 and not more than $1,000 and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of
not more than six months.
      (2)   On a second violation in which, for the second time, the offender
presented to the permit holder or his or her employee or agent a false,
fictitious or altered identification card, a false or fictitious driver’s
license purportedly issued by any state or a driver’s license issued by any
state which has been altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree and shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, and
may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months, the
court also may suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or permit or nonresident operating privilege or deny the offender the
opportunity to be issued a driver’s or commercial driver’s license for a period
not exceeding 60 days.
      (3)   On a third or subsequent violation in which for the third or
subsequent time, the offender presented to the permit holder or his or her
employee or agent a false, fictitious or altered identification card, a false
of fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s
license issued by any state which has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $500 nor more
than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than
six months. The court also shall suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege or deny the
offender the opportunity to be issued a driver’s license or commercial driver’s
license for a period of 90 days, and the court may order that the suspension or
denial remain in effect until the offender attains the age of 21 years. The
court also may order the offender to perform a determinate number of hours of
community service, with the court determining, the actual number of hours and
the nature of the community service the offender shall perform.
(Prior Code, § 92.99) (Ord. 1990-30, passed 8-14-1990)
Statutory reference:
   Liquor Director to be notified of court decision regarding permit holder,
employee or agent, see R.C. § 4301.991
   Similar provisions, see R.C. §§ 4301.70 and 4301.99(A)
CHAPTER 93: NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
93.001   Application of the chapter
   
93.002   Definitions
   
93.003   Nuisances generally; injunctions; violation; contempt
   
93.004   Maintaining certain nuisances
   
93.005   Collection of cost of abating dangerous property condition;
injunction; rehabilitation
   
93.006   Trimming of trees and shrubbery to prevent obstruction
   
93.007   Abatement of nuisances
Septic Tanks, Cesspools, and Refuse
   
93.020   Location of privy vaults, cesspools, and septic tanks
   
93.021   Unsanitary vaults
   
93.022   Removal of contents of vault
   
93.023   Deposit of dead animals, offal upon land or water
   
93.024   Defiling spring or well prohibited
   
93.025   Dumping of refuse in municipality prohibited
   
93.026   Abandoned refrigerators
   
93.027   Discarding litter prohibited
   
93.028   Power of municipality to fill or drain land
Weeds; Litter
   
93.040   Cutting required
   
93.041   Notice to cut within five days
   
93.042   Failure to comply
   
93.043   Procedure when owner fails to comply with notice to cut
   
93.044   Responsibility of adjacent owner
   
93.045   Application of subchapter
   
93.046   Litter
   
93.047   Procedure when owner fails to comply with notice to remove litter
   
93.048   Written return to County Auditor amount as lien upon property
Unclean Habitations
   
93.060   Permitting unclean habitations
   
93.061   When habitations are deemed unsanitary
   
93.062   Order for abatement or vacation of premises
   
93.063   Enforcement of vacation order by Fire Chief or Police Chief
   
93.064   Enforcement through court proceedings
Noise Control
   
93.075   Short title
   
93.076   Definitions
   
93.077   Noise disturbances prohibited
   
93.078   Specific prohibitions
   
93.079   Maximum permissible sound levels by receiving land use
   
93.080   Exemptions
   
93.081   Motor vehicles and motorcycles on public rights-of-way
   
93.082   Immediate threats to health and welfare
   
93.083   Inspections by Building Inspector or law enforcement officers
   
93.084   Stopping and testing motor vehicles by law enforcement officers
   
93.085   Emergency exceptions
   
93.086   Special variances
   
93.087   Abatement orders
   
93.088   Notice of violation
   
93.089   Other remedies
   
93.090   Engine breaking
Chronic Nuisances
   
93.105   Definitions
   
93.106   Notification that premises may be a chronic nuisance
   
93.107   Determination that premises is a chronic nuisance
   
93.108   Citations for chronic nuisance activities
   
93.109   Appeals
   
93.999   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Issuance of adjudication orders and stop work orders, see R.C. § 3781.031
   Noise, certain nuisance immunity regarding noise at shooting ranges, see
R.C. § 1533.85
   Ohio Building Code, see O.A.C. Chapter 4101:1
   Power to abate and prevent nuisances, see R.C. § 715.44
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.001 APPLICATION OF THE CHAPTER.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be enforceable within this municipality
concurrently with the state and federal laws relative to sanitation and health
and the ordinances or orders of the local health district relative thereto, and
shall not be construed as modifying, repealing, limiting, or affecting in any
manner such laws, ordinances, or orders.
§ 93.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NUISANCE. Any of the following:
      (1)   That which is defined and declared by statutes or ordinances to be
a nuisance;
      (2)   Any place in or upon which lewdness, assignation, or prostitution
is conducted, permitted, continued, or exists, or any place in or upon which
lewd, indecent, lascivious or obscene films or plate negatives, film or plate
positives, films designed to be projected on a screen for exhibition films, or
glass slides either in negative or positive form designed for exhibition by
projection on a screen, are photographed, manufactured, developed, screened,
exhibited, or otherwise prepared or shown, and the personal property and
contents used in conducting and maintaining any such place for any such
purpose. This chapter shall not affect any newspaper, magazine, or other
publication entered as second class matter by the post office department;
      (3)   Any room, house, building, boat, vehicle, structure, or place where
beer or intoxicating liquor is manufactured, sold, bartered, possessed, or kept
in violation of law and all property kept and used in maintaining the same, and
all property designed for the unlawful manufacture or beer, or intoxicating
liquor and beer, or intoxicating liquor contained in the room, house, building,
boat, structure, or place described in this division (3) where the operation of
that place substantially interferes with public decency, sobriety, peace, and
good order. “Violation of Law” includes but is not limited to sales to any
person under the legal drinking age prohibited in R.C. § 4301.22(A) or R.C. §
4301.69(A), and any violation of R.C. § 2913.46 or R.C. § 2925.03.
   PERSON. Includes any individual, corporation, association, partnership,
trustee, lessee, agent or assignee.
   PLACE. Includes any building, erection, or place or any separate part or
portion thereof or the ground itself.
(R.C. § 3767.01)
§ 93.003 NUISANCES GENERALLY; INJUNCTIONS; VIOLATION; CONTEMPT.
   (A)   (1)   Any person who uses, occupies, establishes, or conducts a
nuisance, or aids and abets in the use, occupancy, establishment, or conduct of
a nuisance; the owner, agent, or lessee of an interest in any such nuisance;
any person who is employed in that nuisance by that owner, agent, or lessee;
and any person who is in control of that nuisance is guilty of maintaining a
nuisance and shall be enjoined as provided in R.C. §§ 3767.03 through 3767.11.
      (2)   A criminal gang that uses or occupies any building, premises, or
real estate, including vacant land, on more than two occasions within a one-
year period to engage in a pattern of criminal gang activity is guilty of
maintaining a nuisance and shall be enjoined as provided in R.C. §§ 3767.03
through 3767.11. As used in this division (A)(2), CRIMINAL GANG and PATTERN OF
CRIMINAL GANG ACTIVITY have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2923.41.
(R.C. § 3767.02)
      (3)   Any building, premises, or real estate, including vacant land, that
is used or occupied by a criminal gang on more than two occasions within a one-
year period to engage in a pattern of criminal gang activity constitutes a
nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to R.C. §§ 3767.01 through 3767.11
(R.C. § 2923.43)
   (B)   In case of the violation of any injunction or closing order granted
under R.C. §§ 3767.01 through 3767.11, or of a restraining order or the
commission of any contempt of court in proceedings under such sections, the
court or, in vacation, a judge thereof, may summarily try and punish the
offender. The trial may be had upon affidavits or either party may demand the
production and oral examination or witnesses.
(R.C. § 3767.07)
   (C)   Whoever is guilty of contempt under this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 3767.99(A))
Statutory reference:
   Abatement of nuisance, bond and notice, see R.C. § 3767.03
   Content of judgment and order, disposition of property seized, see R.C. §
3767.06
   Criminal gang activity, see R.C. §§ 2923.41 et seq.
   Priority of actions, evidence, costs; nuisances relating to liquor permit
premises, see R.C. § 3767.05
   Procedure in injunction action, see R.C. § 3767.04
§ 93.004 MAINTAINING CERTAIN NUISANCES.
   (A)   No person shall erect, continue to use, or maintain a building,
structure, or place for the exercise of a trade, employment, or business or for
keeping or feeding an animal which, by occasioning noxious exhalations or
noisome or offensive smells, becomes injurious to the health, comfort, or
property of individuals or of the public.
   (B)   No person shall cause or allow offal, filth, or noisome substances to
be collected or remain in any place to the damage or prejudice of others or of
the public.
   (C)   No person shall unlawfully obstruct or impede the passage of a
navigable river, harbor, or collection of water, or corrupt or render
unwholesome or impure a watercourse, stream of water, or unlawfully divert such
watercourse from its natural course or state to the injury or prejudice of
others.
   (D)   Persons who are engaged in agriculture-related activities, as
“agriculture” is defined in R.C. § 519.01, and who are conducting those
activities outside the municipality, in accordance with generally accepted
agricultural practices, and in such a manner so as not to have a substantial,
adverse effect on the public health, safety, or welfare, are exempt from
divisions (A) and (B) above and from any ordinances, resolutions, rules, or
other enactments of the municipality that prohibit excessive noise.
(R.C. § 3767.13)
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 3767.99(C))
§ 93.005 COLLECTION OF COST OF ABATING DANGEROUS PROPERTY CONDITION;
INJUNCTION; REHABILITATION.
   (A)   Collection of costs of abating dangerous property conditions.
      (1)   As used in this division (A):
         ABATEMENT ACTIVITY. Means each instance of any of the following:
            1.   Removing, repairing, or securing insecure, unsafe,
structurally defective, abandoned, deserted, or open and vacant buildings or
other structures;
            2.   Making emergency corrections of hazardous conditions;
            3.   Abatement of any nuisance by the municipality or its agent
pursuant to division (A)(5) of this section.
         TOTAL COST. Means any costs incurred due to the use of employees,
materials, or equipment of the municipality or its agent pursuant to division
(A)(5) of this section, any costs arising out of contracts for labor,
materials, or equipment, and costs of service of notice or publication required
under this section.
      (2)   The municipality or its agent pursuant to division (A)(5) of this
section may collect the total cost of abatement activities by any of the
methods prescribed in division (A)(2)(a), (A)(2)(b), or (A)(2)(c) of this
section.
         (a)   For each abatement activity in which costs are incurred, the
Clerk of the Legislative Authority of the municipality or its agent pursuant to
division (A)(5) of this section may certify the total costs of each abatement
activity, together with the parcel number or another proper description of the
lands on which the abatement activity occurred, the date the costs were
incurred for each abatement activity, and the name of the owner of record at
the time the costs were incurred for each abatement activity, to the County
Auditor who shall place the costs as a charge upon the tax list and duplicate.
The costs are a lien upon such lands from and after the date the costs were
incurred. The costs shall be collected as other taxes and returned to the
municipality or its agent pursuant to division (A)(5) of this section, as
directed by the Clerk of the Legislative Authority in the certification of the
total costs or in an affidavit from the agent delivered to the County Auditor
or County Treasurer. The placement of the costs on the tax list and duplicate
relates back to, and is effective in priority, as of the date the costs were
incurred, provided that the municipality or its agent pursuant to division (A)
(5) of this section certifies the total costs within one year from the date the
costs were incurred. If a lien placed on a parcel of land pursuant to this
division is extinguished as provided in division (A)(8) of this section, the
municipality may pursue the remedy available under division (A)(2)(b) of this
section to recoup the costs incurred with respect to that parcel from any
person that held title to the parcel at the time the costs were incurred.
         (b)   The municipality or its agent pursuant to division (A)(5) of
this section may commence a civil action to recover the total costs from the
person that held title to the parcel at the time the costs were incurred.
         (c)   The municipality or its agent pursuant to division (A)(5) of
this section may file a lien on a parcel of land for the total costs incurred
under this section with respect to the parcel by filing a written affidavit
with the County Recorder of the county in which the parcel is located that
states the parcel number, the total costs incurred with respect to the parcel,
and the date such costs were incurred. The municipality or its agent may pursue
a foreclosure action to enforce the lien in a court of competent jurisdiction
or, pursuant to R.C. §§ 323.65 to 323.79, with the Board of Revision. The
municipality or its agent may elect to acquire the parcel by indicating such an
election in the complaint for foreclosure or in an amended complaint. Upon the
entry of a decree of foreclosure, the County Sheriff shall advertise and offer
the property for sale on at least one occasion. The minimum bid with regard to
the sale of the foreclosed property shall equal the sum of the taxes,
penalties, interest, costs, and assessments due and payable on the property,
the total costs incurred by the municipality or its agent with respect to the
property, and any associated court costs and interest as authorized by law. An
owner of the property may redeem the property by paying the minimum bid within
ten days after the entry of the decree of foreclosure. If an owner fails to so
redeem the property, and if the parcel is not sold for want of a minimum bid,
the property shall be disposed of as follows:
            1.   If the municipality or its agent elects to acquire the
property, the parcel shall be transferred to the municipality or its agent as
if the property were transferred by all owners in title to the municipality or
its agent in lieu of foreclosure as provided in R.C. § 5722.10;
            2.   If the municipality or its agent does not elect to acquire the
property, the parcel shall be forfeited to the state or to a political
subdivision or school district as provided in R.C. Chapter 5723.
            3.   When the municipality or its agent acquires property as
provided in this division (A)(2)(c), the property shall not be subject to
foreclosure or forfeiture under R.C. § 323.25 or R.C. Chapter 5721 or 5723, and
any lien on the property for costs incurred under this division (A) or for any
unpaid taxes, penalties, interest, charges, or assessments shall be
extinguished.
      (3)   This division (A) applies to any action taken by the municipality
or its agent pursuant to division (A)(5) of this section pursuant to R.C. §
715.26 or pursuant to Section 3 of Article XVIII, Ohio Constitution.
      (4)   (a)   The municipality or its agent pursuant to division (A)(5) of
this section shall not certify to the County Auditor for placement upon the tax
list and duplicate and the County Auditor shall not place upon the tax list and
duplicate as a charge against the land the costs of any abatement activity
undertaken under division (A)(2) of this section if any of the following apply:
            1.   The abatement activity occurred on land that has been
transferred or sold to an electing subdivision as defined in R.C. § 5722.01,
regardless of whether the electing subdivision is still the owner of the land,
and the abatement activity occurred on a date prior to the transfer or
confirmation of sale to the electing subdivision.
            2.   The abatement activity occurred on land that has been sold to
a purchaser at sheriff’s sale or auditor’s sale, the abatement activity
occurred on a date prior to the confirmation of sale, and the purchaser is not
the owner of record of the land immediately prior to the judgment of
foreclosure nor any of the following:
               a.   A member of that owner’s immediate family;
               b.   A person with a power of attorney appointed by that owner
who subsequently transfers the land to the owner;
               c.   A sole proprietorship owned by that owner or a member of
that owner’s immediate family;
               d.   A partnership, trust, business trust, corporation, or
association of which the owner or a member of the owner’s immediate family owns
or controls directly or indirectly more than 50%.
            3.   The abatement activity is taken on land that has been
forfeited to this state for delinquent taxes, unless the owner of record
redeems the land.
         (b)   Upon valid written notice to the County Auditor by any owner
possessing an ownership interest of record of the land or by an electing
subdivision previously in the chain of title of the land that the costs of an
abatement activity undertaken under division (A)(2) of this section was
certified for placement or placed upon the tax list and duplicate as a charge
against the land in violation of this division, the County Auditor shall
promptly remove such charge from the tax duplicate. This written notice to the
County Auditor shall include all of the following:
            1.   The parcel number of the land;
            2.   The common address of the land;
            3.   The date of the recording of the transfer of the land to the
owner or electing subdivision;
            4.   The charge allegedly placed in violation of this division.
      (5)   The municipality may enter into an agreement with a County Land
Reutilization Corporation organized under R.C. Chapter 1724 wherein the County
Land Reutilization Corporation agrees to act as the agent of the municipality
in connection with removing, repairing, or securing insecure, unsafe,
structurally defective, abandoned, deserted, or open and vacant buildings or
other structures, making emergency corrections of hazardous conditions, or
abating any nuisance, including high weeds, overgrown brush, and trash and
debris from vacant lots. The total costs of such actions may be collected by
the corporation pursuant to division (A)(2) of this section, and shall be paid
to the corporation if it paid or incurred such costs and has not been
reimbursed by the owner of record at the time of the action or any other party
with a recorded interest in the land.
      (6)   In the case of the lien of a County Land Reutilization Corporation
that is the agent of the municipality, a notation shall be placed on the tax
list and duplicate showing the amount of the lien ascribed specifically to the
agent’s total costs. The agent has standing to pursue a separate cause of
action for money damages to satisfy the lien or pursue a foreclosure action in
a court of competent jurisdiction or with the Board of Revision to enforce the
lien without regard to occupancy. For purposes of a foreclosure proceeding by
the County Treasurer for delinquent taxes, this division does not affect the
lien priority as between a County Land Reutilization Corporation and the County
Treasurer, but the corporation’s lien is superior to the lien of any other
lienholder of the property. As to a direct action by a County Land
Reutilization Corporation, the lien for the taxes, assessment, charges, costs,
penalties, and interest on the tax list and duplicate is in all cases superior
to the lien of a County Land Reutilization Corporation, whose lien for total
costs shall be next in priority as against all other interests, except as
provided in division (A)(7) of this section.
      (7)   A County Land Reutilization Corporation acting as an agent of the
municipality under an agreement under this division (A) may, with the County
Treasurer’s consent, petition the court or Board of Revision with jurisdiction
over an action undertaken under division (A)(6) of this section pleading that
the lien of the corporation, as agent, for the total costs shall be superior to
the lien for the taxes, assessments, charges, costs, penalties, and interest.
If the court or Board of Revision determines that the lien is for total costs
paid or incurred by the corporation as such an agent, and that subordinating
the lien for such taxes and other impositions to the lien of the corporation
promotes the expeditious abatement of public nuisances, the court or board may
order the lien for the taxes and other impositions to be subordinate to the
corporation’s lien. The court or board may not subordinate the lien for taxes
and other such impositions to any other liens.
      (8)   (a)   When a parcel of land upon which a lien has been placed under
division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(c) of this section is transferred to a County Land
Reutilization Corporation, the lien on the parcel shall be extinguished if the
lien is for costs or charges that were incurred before the date of the transfer
to the corporation and if the corporation did not incur the costs or charges,
regardless of whether the lien was attached or the costs or charges were
certified before the date of transfer. In such a case, the County Land
Reutilization Corporation and its successors in title shall take title to the
property free and clear of any such lien and shall be immune from liability in
any action to collect such costs or charges.
         (b)   If a County Land Reutilization Corporation takes title to
property before any costs or charges have been certified or any lien has been
placed with respect to the property under division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(c) of
this section, the corporation shall be deemed a bona fide purchaser for value
without knowledge of such costs or lien, regardless of whether the corporation
had actual or constructive knowledge of the costs or lien, and any such lien
shall be void and unenforceable against the corporation and its successors in
title.
      (9)   The municipality or County Land Reutilization Corporation may file
an affidavit with the County Recorder under R.C. § 5301.252 stating the nature
and extent of any proceedings undertaken under this division (A). Such an
affidavit may include a legal description of a parcel or, in lieu thereof, the
common address of the parcel and the permanent parcel number to which such
address applies.
(R.C. § 715.261)
   (B)   Injunction may be granted for failure to comply. No person shall
erect, alter, repair or maintain any residential building, office, mercantile
building, workshop or factory, including a public or private garage, or other
structure, within the municipality unless all ordinances or resolutions enacted
pursuant to R.C. §§ 715.26 through 715.30 are fully complied with. In the event
any building or structure is being erected, constructed, altered, repaired or
maintained in violation of such ordinances or resolutions, or there is imminent
threat of violation, the municipality or the owner of any contiguous or
neighboring property who would be especially damaged by such violation, in
addition to any other remedies provided by law, may institute a suit for
injunction to prevent or terminate such violation.
(R.C. § 715.30)
   (C)   Appropriation of property to rehabilitate; demolition or sale.
      (1)   In order to rehabilitate a building or structure that the
municipality has determined to be a blighted property as defined in R.C. §
1.08, the municipality may appropriate, in the manner provided by R.C. §§
163.01 through 163.22, any such building or structure and the real property of
which it is a part. The municipality shall rehabilitate the building or
structure or cause it to be rehabilitated within two years after the
appropriation so that the building or structure is no longer a public nuisance,
insecure, unsafe, structurally defective, unhealthful or unsanitary, or a
threat to the public health, safety, or welfare, in violation of a building
code or ordinance adopted under R.C. § 731.231. Any building or structure
appropriated pursuant to this division which is not rehabilitated within two
years shall be demolished.
      (2)   If, during the rehabilitation process, the municipality retains
title to the building or structure and the real property of which it is a part,
then within 180 days after the rehabilitation is complete, the municipality
shall appraise the rehabilitated building or structure and the real property of
which it is a part, and shall sell the building or structure and property at
public auction. The municipality shall advertise the public auction in a
newspaper of general circulation in the municipality once a week for three
consecutive weeks, or as provided in R.C. § 7.16, prior to the date of sale.
The municipality shall sell the building or structure and real property to the
highest and best bidder. No property that the municipality acquires pursuant to
this division shall be leased.
(R.C. § 719.012)
Statutory reference:
   Adoption of technical ordinances and codes by reference, see R.C. § 731.231
§ 93.006 TRIMMING OF TREES AND SHRUBBERY TO PREVENT OBSTRUCTION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, grow, or maintain any
shade tree or trees or shrubbery which will obstruct the proper distribution of
light from street lamps or which will obstruct the view of traffic approaching
an intersection by operators of vehicles approaching such intersection from
another direction.
   (B)   All trees shall be trimmed so as to have a clear height of ten feet
above the surface of sidewalks and 12 feet above the surface of the street or
roadway, and the branches of all trees in front of and along lots or lands near
which street lights are placed shall be trimmed so as not to obstruct the free
passage of light from such street lights to the street and sidewalk.
   (C)   The Legislative Authority shall cause a written notice to be given to
property owners ordering them to trim or remove trees and shrubbery so that the
trees and shrubbery conform to divisions (A) and (B).
   (D)   If the property owner fails to trim or remove the trees and shrubbery
as ordered, the Legislative Authority may cause the trees and shrubbery to be
trimmed or removed as ordered, and the cost thereof shall be a lien upon such
real estate.
Penalty, see §
93.999
Statutory reference:
   Power to regulate shade trees, see R.C. § 715.20
§ 93.007 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      OWNER or OWNERS. The owner of record of the premises in fee or lesser
estate therein, a mortgage or vendee in possession, land contract purchaser,
assignee of the rents, receiver, executor, administrator, trustee, lessee or
other person, firm or corporation in control of a building, or his, her or
their duly authorized agents. Any such person thus representing the owner shall
be bound to comply with the provisions of this section to the same extent as if
he or she were the OWNER.
      PUBLIC NUISANCE. As used in this section, any fence, wall, garage, shed,
house, building, structure, tree, pole, smoke stack or any excavation,
basement, cellar, well, cistern or sidewalk subspace or part thereof, shall be
deemed a PUBLIC NUISANCE if, by reason of the condition in which the same is
permitted to be or remain, shall or may endanger the health, life, limb or
property, or cause any hurt, harm, inconvenience, discomfort, damage or injury
to any one or more persons in the village in any one or more of the following
particulars:
         (a)   By reason of being detrimental to the general health of the
community;
         (b)   By reason of being a fire hazard;
         (c)   By reason of being unsafe for occupancy, or use on, in, upon,
about or around the above said premises; and/or
         (d)   By reason of continued vacancy thereby resulting in lack of
reasonable or adequate maintenance of structures and grounds and causing
deterioration and blighting influence on nearby properties and thereby
depreciating the enjoyment and use of the property in the immediate vicinity to
such an extent that it is harmful to the community in which such structure is
situated.
   (B)   Procedures for abatement of a public nuisance.
      (1)   Whenever the Housing Inspector suspects the existence of a public
nuisance, as defined in division (A) above, in the village, he or she shall
promptly cause to be inspected the premises on which he or she suspects such
public nuisance exists. Should the aforesaid Housing Inspector find that a
public nuisance does exist, he or she shall promptly notify the Chief of Police
and the Fire Chief, or their duly authorized agents. The Fire Chief and the
Chief of Police shall cause to be inspected the premises on which it is
suspected such public nuisance exists. Written reports of the inspection and of
the findings of the Fire Chief and the Chief of Police, with respect to the
existence of the public nuisance, as defined in division (A) above, shall be
filed with the Housing Inspector.
      (2)   Should all of the aforesaid officers or their duly authorized
agents concur that a public nuisance exists, it shall be the duty of the
Housing Inspector to cause photographs of such nuisance to be made and to file
and keep in his or her office the written reports of the findings of the
aforesaid officials or their agents. The Housing Inspector shall cause a
written notice to be served on said owner stating the findings with respect to
the existence of a public nuisance and stating that unless the owner or owners
thereof shall cause the abatement of the public nuisance by rehabilitation or
by removal of the building or structures the same will be abated by the village
at the expense of the said owner or owners. Such abatement shall start within
15 days after service of said notice and shall be complete within 45 days or
such additional time as the Housing Inspector may deem necessary to complete
the abatement.
   (C)   Service of notice. The notice shall be served either personally or by
leaving a copy at the usual place of residence of the said owner as defined in
division (A) above, or by mailing a copy to such owner at his or her usual
place of residence by United States certified mail with return receipt
requested. If service of the said written notice is not perfected by any of the
hereinbefore described methods, then the Housing Inspector shall cause such
notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the village,
once each week for two consecutive weeks, and shall further cause a copy of the
aforesaid notice to be left with the person, if any, in possession of the said
premises on which it is alleged such public nuisance exists or if there be no
person in possession thereof, he or she shall cause a copy of the notice to be
posted on the said premises. The Housing Inspector shall cause a return of
service in the form of an affidavit to be made by the person who served it,
which affidavit shall set forth the name and address of the person served, the
manner of service, and the date thereof.
   (D)   Right to make immediate repairs. Upon being served notice, the said
owner or owners may make immediate application in writing or in person to the
Housing Inspector for a special building permit to undertake the repairs or
replacement of items found to constitute a public nuisance. Adequate plans and
specifications as required by the Housing Inspector, covering the said repairs
or replacements shall be furnished by said owner or owners to the Housing
Inspector within 15 days after receipt of notice or such additional time as the
Housing Inspection may deem necessary to complete plans and specifications not
to exceed 90 days. The Housing Inspector shall, upon approval of said plans and
specifications, cause a special building permit to be issued to the said owner
or owners. Said special permit shall be in compliance with all existing
regulations pertaining to construction within the village notwithstanding the
village floodplain regulations. The special building permit to be issued by the
Housing Inspector shall be for a period of 30 days, and within said 30 days,
the owner or owners will effect and complete said repairs and/or replacements,
or the Housing Inspector may grant an extension to the special building permit
if the owner or owners show reason or cause for the requested extension and
which extension will more readily effect the said respect to the existence of a
public nuisance and stating that unless the owner or owners thereof shall cause
the abatement of the public nuisance by rehabilitation or by removal of the
building or structure, the same will be abated by the village at the expense of
said owner or owners. Such abatement shall start within 15 days after service
of said notice and shall be complete within 45 days or such additional time as
the Housing Inspector may deem necessary to complete the abatement.
   (E)   Appeal. The said owner or owners may, within ten days after completion
of service of said notice, make a demand in writing to the Housing Inspector
for a hearing on the question of whether in fact a public nuisance, as defined
in division (A) above, exists. The hearing shall be held within ten days
following receipt of said written demand, and at least two days notice in
writing of the said hearing shall be given to the said owner or owners. A
Hearing Board, composed of the Village Board of Appeals, shall conduct the said
hearing. All members of the said Hearing Board must concur that a public
nuisance, as defined in division (A) above, exists before enforcement of the
abatement is carried out. A copy of the decision of said hearing officers shall
be promptly served upon the owner or owners in the manner provided for in
division (B) above.
   (F)   Abatement of a nuisance (demolition of structures) by Housing
Inspector. Should said nuisance not be abated at the expiration time stated in
said notice or expiration of the time stated in the special building permit
issued by the Housing Inspector or such additional time as the Hearing Board
may grant, the Housing Inspector shall be authorized, at any time thereafter,
to enter upon said premises and the owner shall permit him or her entry to
abate the nuisance by demolition and removal of the structure or by taking any
other such action as may be required. In abating such nuisance, the Housing
Inspector may call upon any department, division or bureau of the village for
whatever assistance may be necessary; or may, by private contract, obtain the
abatement thereof and the cost of such private contract shall be paid from
village funds specifically authorized by the Village Council in order to abate
such public nuisance. In abating such nuisance, he or she may go to whatever
extent necessary to complete the abatement of the same and the cost of the
abatement action shall be recovered from the owner in the following procedure.
      (1)   The owner or owners shall be billed directly by certified mail for
the cost of the abatement. The bill for the cost of the abatement shall be paid
within 60 days after receipt of the bill.
      (2)   If costs are not so recovered, then the village shall cause the
cost of the abatement to be levied as an assessment and recovered in accordance
with R.C. § 715.261.
(Prior Code, § 93.15) (Ord. 2000-29, passed 6-13-2000)
SEPTIC TANKS, CESSPOOLS, AND REFUSE
§ 93.020 LOCATION OF PRIVY VAULTS, CESSPOOLS, AND SEPTIC TANKS.
   No owner, occupant, or person in charge of any premises situated as to
permit connection with any sanitary sewer shall maintain or permit to be
maintained on or in connection with such premises any privy vault, cesspool,
septic tank, or other repository for human excreta.
Penalty, see §
93.999
Statutory reference:
   Power to regulate privies, see R.C. § 715.40
   Power to regulate refuse disposal, see R.C. § 715.43
§ 93.021 UNSANITARY VAULTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person being the owner, lessor, occupant, or
person in charge of any premises upon which a privy vault, cesspool, or septic
tank is located to permit such vault, pool, or tank, or any building, fixture,
or device appurtenant thereto, to become foul, noisome, filthy, or offensive to
neighboring property owners.
Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.022 REMOVAL OF CONTENTS OF VAULT.
   Whenever any part of the waste in any privy vault or cesspool extends to a
point less than three feet below the surface of the ground adjacent thereto, or
whenever use of any such vault or cesspool is abandoned or where such use or
maintenance is prohibited by ordinance or health order, the owner, lessor,
occupant or person in charge of such premises shall cause the vault or cesspool
to be emptied of its contents, thoroughly cleaned, and disinfected, and if
abandoned, to be filled with clean earth or mineral matter to the level of the
adjacent ground.
Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.023 DEPOSIT OF DEAD ANIMALS, OFFAL UPON LAND OR WATER.
   (A)   No person shall put the carcass of a dead animal or the offal from a
slaughter house, butcher’s establishment, packing house or fish house, or
spoiled meat, spoiled fish, or other putrid substance or the contents of a
privy vault, upon or into a lake, river, bay, creek, pond, canal, road, street,
alley, lot, meadow, public ground, market place, or common. No owner or
occupant of such place shall knowingly permit such thing to remain therein to
the annoyance of any citizen or neglect to remove or abate the nuisance
occasioned thereby within 24 hours after knowledge of the existence thereof, or
after notice thereof in writing from the designated municipal official.
(R.C. § 3767.16)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3767.99(D))
§ 93.024 DEFILING SPRING OR WELL PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall maliciously put a dead animal, carcass, or part
thereof, or other putrid, nauseous, or offensive substance into, or befoul, a
well, spring, brook, or branch of running water, or a reservoir of a
waterworks, of which use is or may be made for domestic purposes.
(R.C. § 3767.18)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3767.99(D))
§ 93.025 DUMPING OF REFUSE IN MUNICIPALITY PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, cause to be dumped or permit to
be dumped on any publicly or privately owned land or water in the municipality
any paper, brush, rubbish, tin cans, vegetation, garbage, or refuse of any
kind, without first having obtained a written license from the Mayor or other
designated municipal officer to do so. The Mayor or other designated municipal
officer shall issue a license permitting dumping of designated materials when
it appears that filling of the land is necessary and that the material
deposited will be immediately covered with earth or will not be objectionable
to the citizens of the neighborhood, or injurious to health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens.
Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.026 ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS.
   (A)   No person shall abandon, discard, or knowingly permit to remain on
premises under the person’s control, in a place accessible to children, any
abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator, or other airtight or semi-airtight
container which has a capacity of 1.5 cubic feet or more and an opening of 50
square inches or more and which has a door or lid equipped with a hinge, latch,
or other fastening device capable of securing such door or lid, without
rendering the equipment harmless to human life by removing such hinges, latches
or other hardware which may cause a person to be confined therein. This section
shall not apply to an icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semi-airtight
container located in that part of a building occupied by a dealer, warehouse or
repairer.
(R.C. § 3767.29)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(R.C. § 3767.99(B))
§ 93.027 DISCARDING LITTER PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person, regardless of intent, shall deposit litter or cause litter
to be deposited on any public property, on private property not owned by the
person, or in or on waters of the state, unless one of the following applies:
      (1)   The person is directed to do so by a public official as part of a
litter collection drive.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, the person
deposits the litter in a litter receptacle in a manner that prevents its being
carried away by the elements.
      (3)   The person is issued a permit or license covering the litter
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3734 or 6111.
   (B)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly deposit litter,
or cause it to be deposited, in a litter receptacle located on any public
property or on any private property not owned by the person, unless one of the
following applies:
      (1)   The litter was generated or located on the property on which the
litter receptacle is located.
      (2)   The person is directed to do so by a public official as part of a
litter collection drive.
      (3)   The person is directed to do so by a person whom the person
reasonably believes to have the privilege to use the litter receptacle.
      (4)   The litter consists of any of the following:
         (a)   The contents of a litter bag or container of a type and size
customarily carried and used in a motor vehicle.
         (b)   The contents of an ash tray of a type customarily installed or
carried and used in a motor vehicle.
         (c)   Beverage containers and food sacks, wrappings, and containers of
a type and in an amount that reasonably may be expected to be generated during
routine commuting or business or recreational travel by a motor vehicle.
         (d)   Beverage containers, food sacks, wrappings, containers, and
other materials of a type and in an amount that reasonably may be expected to
be generated
during a routine day by a person and deposited in a litter receptacle by a
casual passerby.
   (C)   (1)   As used in division (B)(1) of this section, PUBLIC PROPERTY
includes any private property open to the public for the conduct of business,
the provision of a service, or upon the payment of a fee but does not include
any private property to which the public otherwise does not have a right of
access.
      (2)   As used in division (B)(4) of this section, CASUAL PASSERBY means a
person who does not have depositing litter in a litter receptacle as the
person’s primary reason for traveling to or by the property on which the litter
receptacle is located.
   (D)   As used in this section:
      AUXILIARY CONTAINER. Means a bag, can, cup, food or beverage service
item, container, keg, bottle, or other packaging to which all of the following
apply:
         (a)   It is designed to be either single use or reusable.
         (b)   It is made of cloth, paper, plastic, foamed or expanded plastic,
cardboard, corrugated material, aluminum, metal, glass, postconsumer recycled
material, or similar materials or substances, including coated, laminated, or
multilayered substrates.
         (c)   It is designed for consuming, transporting, or protecting
merchandise, food, or beverages from or at a food service operation, retail
food establishment, grocery, or any other type of retail, manufacturing, or
distribution establishment.
      DEPOSIT. Means to throw, drop, discard, or place.
      LITTER. Includes garbage, trash, waste, rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles,
wire, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts, furniture, glass, auxiliary
containers, or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.
      LITTER RECEPTACLE. Means a dumpster, trash can, trash bin, garbage can,
or similar container in which litter is deposited for removal.
   (E)   This section may be enforced by any sheriff, deputy sheriff, police
officer of a municipal corporation, police constable or officer of a township,
or township or joint police district, wildlife officer designated under R.C. §
1531.13, natural resources officer appointed under R.C. § 1501.24, forest-fire
investigator appointed under R.C. § 1503.09, conservancy district police
officer, inspector of nuisances of a county, or any other law enforcement
officer within the law enforcement officer’s jurisdiction.
(R.C. § 3767.32)
   (F)   Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. The sentencing court may, in addition to or in
lieu of the penalty provided in this division, require a person who violates
this section to remove litter from any public or private property or in or on
waters of the state.
(R.C. § 3767.99(C))
§ 93.028 POWER OF THE MUNICIPALITY TO FILL OR DRAIN LAND.
   (A)   The municipality may fill or drain any lot or land within its limits
on which water at any time becomes stagnant, remove all putrid substances from
any lot, and remove all obstructions from culverts, covered drains, or private
property, laid in any natural watercourse, creek, brook, or branch, which
obstruct the water naturally flowing therein, causing it to flow back or become
stagnant, in a way prejudicial to the health, comfort, or convenience of any of
the citizens of the neighborhood. If such culverts or drains are of
insufficient capacity, the municipality may make them of such capacity as
reasonable to accommodate the flow of such water at all times.
   (B)   The Legislative Authority may, by resolution, direct the owner to fill
or drain such lot, remove such putrid substance or other obstructions, and if
necessary, enlarge such culverts or covered drains to meet the requirements
thereof.
   (C)   After service of a copy of such resolution, or after a publication
thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality or as
provided in R.C. § 7.16, for two consecutive weeks, the owner, or the owner’s
agent or attorney, shall comply with the directions of the resolution within
the time therein specified.
   (D)   In case of the failure or refusal of such owner to comply with the
resolution, the work required thereby may be done at the expense of the
municipality, and the amount of money so expended shall be recovered from the
owner before any court of competent jurisdiction. This expense from the time of
the adoption of the resolution shall be a lien on such lot, which may be
enforced by suit in the Court of Common Pleas, and like proceedings may be had
as directed in relation to the improvement of streets.
   (E)   The officers connected with the Health Department of the municipality
shall see that this section is strictly and promptly enforced.
(R.C. § 715.47)
WEEDS; LITTER
§ 93.040 CUTTING REQUIRED.
   (A)   The owner or occupant, or any other person, firm or corporation,
having the care of any lot or land within the village, shall cut down and
remove therefrom all offensive and noxious weeds, vines and grass of a height
of eight inches or more and any and all weeds, vines and grass constituting a
threat to the public health, safety, comfort or welfare.
   (B)   It is a prima facie violation of this subchapter if weeds or grass
eight inches or more in height exist on any lot on any of the following dates:
April 15, May 1, May 15, June 1, June 15, July 1, July 15, August 1, August 15,
September 1, September 15, October 1 or October 15.
   (C)   The Village Administrator shall cause an annual notice to be published
in a newspaper of general circulation in the village notifying the residents of
the requirement of this subchapter.
   (D)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply under the following
circumstances:
      (1)   To vegetation such as trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental
plants maintained as a part of a landscaping plan notwithstanding that such
trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental plants may exceed a height of eight
inches; provided, however, that the words “maintained as a part of a
landscaping plan” is intended to permit the cultivation of such vegetation in
designated planting beds and areas for decorative purposes. It shall not be
construed to permit the unregulated or unrestrained growth of such vegetation
upon a property so as to create a nuisance to neighboring properties;
      (2)   To that portion of any lots or land within the village which are
naturally wooded and tree covered such that the existing trees, bushes and
similar vegetation intended to be curtailed by the operation of this
subchapter; and/or
      (3)   To the portion of any lots or land within the village which are
maintained and cultivated for agricultural purposes.
(Ord. 2019-09, passed 6-11-2019) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.041 NOTICE TO CUT WITHIN FIVE DAYS.
   (A)   When the Village Administrator, or his or her designated agent,
determines that such weeds, as described in §
93.040(A), exist on one of the days set forth in §
93.040(B), he or she shall forthwith serve notice upon the owner or occupant,
or any other person, firm or corporation, having the care of such lot or land,
ordering the cutting and removal of such weeds and noxious grasses within five
days.
   (B)   If the address of the owner or other person having charge of the land
is unknown, it is sufficient to publish the notice once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the village.
   (C)   Only one notice per calendar year under division (A) or (B) above is
required for a lot or parcel. If, after a notice has been served in accordance
with this section, the Village Administrator, or his or her designated agent,
determines that a subsequent violation has occurred, the village may proceed
with the remedy set forth in §
93.043 without further notice.
(Ord. 2019-09, passed 6-11-2019)
§ 93.042 FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   No owner, occupant or any other person, firm or corporation, having the care
of a lot or land, shall fail to comply with the notice provided for in §
93.041 within five days from the receipt thereof.
(Ord. 2019-09, passed 6-11-2019) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.043 PROCEDURE WHEN OWNER FAILS TO COMPLY WITH NOTICE TO CUT.
   (A)   If the owner, occupant or any other person, firm or corporation,
having the care of the lands mentioned in §
93.040(A), fails to comply with the notice provided for in §
93.041, the village shall cause such noxious weeds and grass to be cut and
removed. Such cutting and removing shall be at the owner’s expense and the cost
together with an administrative fee of 20% shall be assessed against the lot or
land. Such administrative fee shall not exceed $200.
   (B)   Notice of such assessment shall be given to the owner of the lot or
land charged therewith, or his or her agent, either in person or left at the
usual place of residence or sent by mail, and all assessments not paid within
ten days after the giving of such notice shall, after approval by the Council,
be certified by the Clerk of Council to the County Auditor to be placed on the
tax duplicate and collected as other taxes are collected.
(Ord. 2019-09, passed 6-11-2019)
§ 93.044 RESPONSIBILITY OF ADJACENT OWNER.
   The owner, occupant or custodian of each lot adjacent to a street or alley
shall be responsible for the area between the curb and sidewalk, or between the
edge of the street and the property line where there is no curb or sidewalk,
and the area between the centerline of the alley and the property line or the
center line of an unimproved street and the property line.
(Ord. 2019-09, passed 6-11-2019)
§ 93.045 APPLICATION OF SUBCHAPTER.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to those areas which are
within 75 feet of any property line which includes a residence or place of
business, or within 25 feet of the edge of the pavement along any road frontage
of any lot or parcel of land which does not include a residence or place of
business.
(Ord. 2019-09, passed 6-11-2019)
§ 93.046 LITTER.
   (A)   Upon a finding by the Village Administrator that litter has been
placed on lands in the municipality, and has not been removed, and constitutes
a detriment to public health, the Village Administrator shall cause notice to
be served upon the owner and, if different, upon the lessee, agent or tenant
having charge of the littered land, notifying him or her that litter is on the
land, and that it must be collected and removed within five days after the
service of the notice.
   (B)   As used in this section, LITTER includes any garbage, waste, peelings
of vegetables or fruits, rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons,
boxes, parts of automobiles, wagons, furniture, glass, oil of an unsightly or
unsanitary nature or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.
   (C)   If the owner or other person having charge of the land is a
nonresident of the municipality whose address is known, the notice shall be
sent to his or her address by certified mail. If the address of the owner or
other person having charge of the land is unknown, it is sufficient to publish
the notice once in a newspaper of general circulation in the county.
   (D)   This section does not apply to land being used under a municipal
building or construction permit or license, a municipal permit or license or a
conditional zoning permit or variance to operate a junk yard, scrap metal
processing facility or similar business, or a permit or license issued pursuant
to R.C. Chapters 3734 or 6111 and §§ 4737.05 to 4737.12.
(Ord. 2019-09, passed 6-11-2019)
§ 93.047 PROCEDURE WHEN OWNER FAILS TO COMPLY WITH NOTICE TO REMOVE LITTER.
   (A)   If the owner, occupant or any other person, firm or corporation,
having the care of the lands mentioned in §
93.046, fails to comply with the notice provided for in §
93.041, the village shall cause such litter to be removed. Such removal shall
be at the owner’s expense and the cost together with an administrative fee of
20% shall be assessed against the lot or land. Such administrative fee shall
not exceed $200.
   (B)   All expenses incurred shall, when approved by the Village
Administrator, be paid out the money in the Village Treasury not otherwise
appropriated.
(Ord. 2019-09, passed 6-11-2019)
§ 93.048 WRITTEN RETURN TO COUNTY AUDITOR AMOUNT AS LIEN UPON PROPERTY.
   The Village Administrator shall make a written return to the County Auditor
of his or her action under §§
93.046 and
93.047, with a statement of the charges for his or her services and costs,
amount paid for labor and/or machinery, the fees of the officers serving the
notices, and a proper description of the premises. These amounts, when allowed,
shall be entered upon the tax duplicate and be a lien upon such lands from and
after the date of entry and be collected as other taxes and returned to the
municipality with the General Fund.
(Ord. 2019-09, passed 6-11-2019)
UNCLEAN HABITATIONS
§ 93.060 PERMITTING UNCLEAN HABITATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to lease, let, permit the occupancy of,
permit the continuation of the occupancy of, or continue the occupancy of a
structure or building or any portion thereof used for human habitation, unless
such structure or building or portion thereof is free from unclean and
unsanitary conditions as defined in §
93.061 and unless the provisions of the subsequent sections are complied with.
Penalty, see §
93.999
Statutory reference:
   Duties of the landlord, see R.C. § 5321.04
   Duties of the tenant, see R.C. § 5321.05
   Injunction for failure to comply, see R.C. § 715.30
   Regulating occupied buildings, see R.C. § 715.29
§ 93.061 WHEN HABITATIONS ARE DEEMED UNSANITARY.
   A structure, building, or any portion thereof used for human habitation
shall be deemed to be in an unclean and unsanitary condition when any of the
following conditions exist:
   (A)   Infection with communicable disease;
   (B)   Absence of the toilet facilities required by law or ordinance;
   (C)   Presence of sewer gas;
   (D)   Dampness or wetness due to lack of repair;
   (E)   Accumulation of dirt, filth, litter, refuse, or other offensive or
dangerous substances likely to cause sickness among the occupants;
   (F)   Defective or improperly used drainage, plumbing, or ventilation
facilities likely to cause sickness.
§ 93.062 ORDER FOR ABATEMENT OR VACATION OF PREMISES.
   If the local Board of Health ascertains from examination or reports of its
inspectors or sanitary officers or otherwise determines that a public nuisance,
as defined in § 93.61, exists in or upon any structure or building, or portion
thereof, and has notified the owner, occupant, or person in charge of the
premises to abate the nuisance or vacate the premises, it shall be unlawful to
occupy or permit the occupancy of the premises or portion thereof until the
nuisance has been completely abated and the building or portion thereof has
been rendered clean and sanitary in accordance with the terms of the notices of
the Board of Health.
§ 93.063 ENFORCEMENT OF VACATION ORDER BY FIRE CHIEF OR POLICE CHIEF.
   When the notice or order of vacation has not been complied with, and the
Board of Health certifies such fact to the Fire Chief or Police Chief, together
with a copy of the order of notice, it shall be the duty of the Fire Chief or
Police Chief to enforce such notice or order of vacation and to cause the
premises to be vacated in accordance with the terms of the notice or order.
§ 93.064 ENFORCEMENT THROUGH COURT PROCEEDINGS.
   Whenever the Board of Health certifies to the municipal legal officer any
failure to comply with any order or notice of vacation, with the request that
civil proceedings for the enforcement thereof be instituted, the municipal
legal officer shall institute any and all proceedings, either legal or
equitable, that may be appropriate or necessary for the enforcement of the
order or notice and the abatement of the nuisance against which the order or
notice was directed. These suits or proceedings shall be brought in the name of
the municipality. Proceedings under this section shall not relieve any party
defendant from criminal prosecution or punishment under this code or any other
criminal law or ordinance in force within the municipality.
NOISE CONTROL
§ 93.075 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter may be cited as the “Noise Control Ordinance of the Village
of New Richmond”. (Prior Code, § 93.70) (Ord. 2005-39, passed 10-11-2005)
§ 93.076 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. All
terminology used in this subchapter, not defined below, shall be in conformance
with applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) or its successor body.
   A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL. The sound pressure level in decibels as measured on
a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read is
designated dB(a) or dBA.
   CONSTRUCTION. Any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair,
alteration or similar action, but excluding demolition, for or on public or
private rights of way, structures, utilities or similar property.
   DECIBEL (db). A unit for measuring the volume of a sound, equal to 20 times
the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the sound
measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20 micronewtons
per square meter).
   DEMOLITION. Any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of
structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces or similar
property.
   EMERGENCY. Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or
imminent physical trauma or property damage or loss which demands immediate
action.
   EMERGENCY WORK. Any work performed for the purpose of preventing or
alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an
emergency.
   GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING. The value specified by the manufacturer as the
recommended maximum loaded weight of a single motor vehicle. In cases where
trailers and tractors are separable, the GROSS COMBINATION WEIGHT RATING
(GCWR), which is the value specified by the manufacturer as the recommended
maximum loaded weight of the combination vehicle, shall be used.
   IMPULSIVE SOUND. Sound of short duration, usually less than one second, with
an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources of IMPULSIVE SOUND include
explosions, drop forge impacts and the discharge of firearms.
   INDUSTRIAL AREA. Those areas specified in Chapter 1131 of the Zoning Code.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle specified in §
70.01.
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle specified in §
70.01.
   MUFFLER or SOUND DISSIPATIVE DEVICE. A device for abating the sound of
escaping gases of an internal combustion engine.
   NOISE. Any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or tends to
cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans.
   NOISE DISTURBANCE. Any sound which:
      (1)   Endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals;
      (2)   Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; or
      (3)   Endangers or injures personal or real property.
   PERSON. Any individual, association, partnership or corporation and includes
any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality of a state or any
political subdivision of a state.
   PLACE OF PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT. Any commercial facility open to the general
public for purposes of entertainment.
   POWERED MODEL VEHICLE. Any self-propelled airborne, waterborne or landborne
plane, vessel or vehicle, which is not designated to carry persons, including
but not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car or rocket.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk or
alley or similar place which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity.
   PUBLIC SPACE. Any real property or structures thereon which are owned or
controlled by a governmental entity.
   REAL PROPERTY BOUNDARY. An imaginary line along the ground surface, and its
vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from
that owned by another person, but not including intra-building real property
divisions.
   RESIDENTIAL AREA. Those areas specified in Chapters 1121, 1123, 1125 and
1127 of the Zoning Code.
   RETAIL AREA. Those areas specified in Chapter 1129 of the Zoning Code.
   RMS SOUND PRESSURE. The square root of the time averaged square of the sound
pressure, denoted Prms.
   SOUND. An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity
or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that causes
compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of SOUND may
include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity and
frequency.
   SOUND LEVEL. The weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of a
sound level meter and frequency weighting network, such as A, B or C as
specified in American National Standards Institute specifications for sound
level meters (ANSI SI.4-1971), or the latest approved revision thereof. If the
frequency weighting employed is not indicated, the A-weighting shall apply.
   SOUND LEVEL METER. An instrument which includes a microphone, amplifier, RMS
detector, integrator or time averager, output meter and weighting networks used
to measure sound pressure levels.
   SOUND PRESSURE. The instantaneous difference between the actual pressure and
the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space, as produced by
sound energy.
   SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL. Twenty times the logarithm to the base ten of the
ratio of the RMS sound pressure to the reference pressure of 20 micropascals
(20 x 10-6 N/m2). The SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL is denoted Lp or SPL and is
expressed in decibels.
   VIBRATION. An oscillatory motion of solid bodies of deterministic or random
nature described by displacement, velocity or acceleration with respect to a
given reference point.
   WEEKDAY. Any day Monday through Saturday.
(Prior Code, § 93.71) (Ord. 2005-39, passed 10-11-2005)
§ 93.077 NOISE DISTURBANCES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall unreasonably make, continue or cause to be made or
continued, or permit, any noise disturbance.
   (B)   Noncommercial public speaking and public assembly activities conducted
on any public space or public right-of-way shall be exempt from the operation
of this section.
(Prior Code, § 93.72) (Ord. 2005-39, passed 10-11-2005) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.078 SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS.
   The following acts, and the causing or permitting thereof, are declared to
be in violation of this subchapter:
   (A)   Animals and birds. Owning, possessing or harboring any animal or bird
which frequently or for continued duration, howls, barks, meows, squawks or
makes other sounds which create a noise disturbance across a residential real
property boundary;
   (B)   Places of public entertainment. Operating, playing or permitting the
operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical
instrument, sound amplifier or similar device which produces, reproduces, or
amplifies sound in any place of public entertainment at a sound level greater
than 95 dBA as read by the slow response on a sound level meter at any point
that is normally occupied by a customer, unless a conspicuous and legible sign
is located outside such place, near each public entrance, stating “WARNING:
SOUND LEVELS WITHIN MAY CAUSE PERMANENT HEARING IMPAIRMENT”;
   (C)   Explosives, firearms and similar devices. The using or firing of
explosives, firearms or similar devices which create impulsive sound so as to
cause a noise disturbance across a real property boundary or on a public space
or right-of-way, without first obtaining a special variance;
   (D)   Vehicle or motorboat repairs and testing. Repairing, rebuilding,
modifying or testing any motor vehicle, motorcycle or motorboat in such a
manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property
boundary;
   (E)   Adequate mufflers or sound dissipative devices.
      (1)   Operating or causing to be operated any motor vehicle or motorcycle
not equipped with a muffler or other sound dissipative device in good working
order and in constant operation;
      (2)   Removing or rendering inoperative, or causing to be removed or
rendered inoperative, other than for purposes of maintenance, repair or
replacement, any muffler or sound dissipative device on a motor vehicle or
motorcycle; and/or
      (3)   The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine,
stationary internal combustion engine or motor boat, except through a muffler
or other device in good working order and in constant operation.
   (F)   Motor vehicles.
      (1)   Operating or permitting the operation of any motor vehicle with a
gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) in excess of 10,000 pounds, or any auxiliary
equipment attached to such a vehicle, for a period longer than five minutes in
any hour while the vehicle is stationary, for reasons other than traffic
congestion, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following day.
      (2)   Racing the motor of any vehicle unnecessarily or operating any
motor vehicle, except in an emergency in such a manner that the vehicle is so
rapidly accelerated or started from a stopped position that the exhaust system
emits a loud, cracking or chattering noise unusual to its normal operation, or
whereby the tires of such vehicle squeal or leave tire marks on the pavement or
other surface, commonly called PEELING.
   (G)   Loading and unloading. Loading, unloading, opening, closing or other
handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans or
similar objects between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following day
in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real
property boundary;
   (H)   Construction. Operating or permitting the operation of any tools or
equipment used in construction, drilling or demolition work:
      (1)   Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m, the following day on
weekdays or at any time on Sundays, such that the sound therefrom creates a
noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary, except for
emergency work of public service utilities or by special variance; and
      (2)   This division (H) shall not apply to the use of domestic power
tools subject to division (L) below.
   (I)   Emergency signaling devices.
      (1)   The intentional sounding or permitting the sounding outdoors of any
fire, burglar or civil defense alarm, siren, whistle or similar stationary
emergency signaling device, except for emergency purposes or for testing, as
provided in divisions (I)(2) and (I)(3) below.
      (2)   Testing of a stationary emergency signaling device shall occur at
the same time of day each time such a test is performed, but not before 8:00
a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. or the closing time of a commercial establishment,
whichever shall occur later. Any such testing shall use only the minimum cycle
test time. In no case shall such test time exceed 60 seconds.
      (3)   Testing of the complete emergency signaling system, including the
functioning of the signaling device and the personnel response to the signaling
device, shall not occur before 8:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. In no case shall
such test time exceed ten minutes.
      (4)   Sounding or permitting the sounding of any exterior burglar or fire
alarm or any motor vehicle burglar alarm unless such alarm is automatically
terminated within two minutes of activation, or within a reasonable time after
notification of activation.
      (5)   The sounding of any horn or other auditory signaling device on or
in any motor vehicle on any public right-of-way or public space, except as a
warning of danger.
   (J)   Radios, television sets, musical instruments and similar devices.
Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any radio,
television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, sound amplifier or similar
device which produces, reproduces or amplifies sound:
      (1)   Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following day in
such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real
property boundary; or
      (2)   In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance at 50 feet (15
meters) from such device, when operated in or on a motor vehicle on a public
right-of-way or public space.
   (K)   Loudspeakers and public address systems. Using, operating or
permitting the operation of any loudspeaker, public address system, mobile
sound vehicle or similar device amplifying sound therefrom on a public right-
of-way or public space for any purpose whatever;
   (L)   Domestic power tools. Operating or permitting the operation of any
mechanically powered saw, drill, sander, grinder, lawn or garden tool,
lawnmower or other similar device used outdoors, other than powered snow
removal equipment, in residential areas between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m. the following day on weekdays and before 10:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. on
Sundays so as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property
boundary;
   (M)   Powered model vehicles.
      (1)   Operating or permitting the operation of powered model vehicles so
as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary or
in a public space between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following
day.
      (2)   During the permitted period of operation, maximum sound levels in a
public space shall not exceed 75 dBA measured at a distance of 50 feet from any
point on the path of the vehicle.
      (3)   During the permitted period of operation, maximum sound levels in a
residential area shall not exceed 60 dBA measured at a distance of 50 feet from
any point on the path of the vehicle.
   (N)   Vibration.
      (1)   Operating or permitting the operation of any device that creates a
vibration which is above the vibration perception threshold of an individual at
or beyond the property boundary of the source.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, VIBRATION PERCEPTION THRESHOLD
means the minimum ground or structure-borne vibrational motion necessary to
cause a normal person to be aware of the vibration by such direct means as, but
not limited to, sensation by touch or visual observation of moving objects.
(Prior Code, § 93.73) (Ord. 2005-39, passed 10-11-2005) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.079 MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE SOUND LEVELS BY RECEIVING LAND USE.
   No person shall operate, cause to be operated or permit on private property
any source of sound in such a manner as to create a sound level which exceeds
the limits set forth for the receiving land use category in Table 1 when
measured at or within the property boundary of the receiving land use.
 
Table 1. Sound Levels by Receiving Land Use
Receiving Land Use Category        Time                   Sound Level Limit Dba
Districts R1, R2, R3, R4, R5, R-5M 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 60
and R5C                            9:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. 50
Districts B1 and B2                At all times           65
(commercial or business)
District I-1 (industrial)          At all times           70
 
(Prior Code, § 93.74) (Ord. 2005-39, passed 10-11-2005)
§ 93.080 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of §§
93.078 and
93.079 shall not apply to organized school-related programs, activities or
events, or to municipal-authorized parades, or to municipal-sanctioned concerts
in public parks.
   (B)   The provisions of §
93.079 shall not apply to:
      (1)   Activities covered by division §
93.078(C), (H), (I) and (L);
      (2)   Refuse collection vehicles; or
      (3)   Railway locomotives and cars.
(Prior Code, § 93.75) (Ord. 2005-39, passed 10-11-2005)
§ 93.081 MOTOR VEHICLES AND MOTORCYCLES ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   No person shall operate, cause to be operated or permit a public or private
motor vehicle or motorcycle on a public right-of-way at any time in such a
manner that the sound level emitted by the motor vehicle or motorcycle exceeds
the level set forth in Table 2.
 
Table 2. Motor Vehicles and Motorcycles on Public Rights-of-way
Vehicle Class Sound Level in Dba                      Stationary Run-Up
              Speed Limit  Speed Limit
              35 Mph or    over 35 Mph  Stationary    Microphone    Noise Limit
              less         (Measured at Engine Speed  Distance from Dba
              (Measured at 50 ft.)                    Vehicle
              50 ft.)
                                        For vehicles
                                        with
                                        governors,
                                        test at
                                        maximum
Motor carried                           governor
vehicle of                              speed. For    50 feet from
GVWR or GCWR  86           90           vehicles      center line   88
of 10,000                               without       of vehicle
lbs. or more                            governors,
                                        test at 75%
                                        of motor
                                        speed at
                                        maximum
                                        developed
                                        horsepower
                                        Test at 75%
                                        of motor      20 inches
Any           80           85           speed of      from rear of  101
motorcycle                              maximum       vehicle
                                        developed
                                        horsepower
Any other
motor vehicle
or any                                  Test at 3,000 20 inches
combination   75           80           RMP           from end of   90
of vehicles                                           tailpipe
towed by any
motor vehicle
 
(Prior Code, § 93.76) (Ord. 2005-39, passed 10-11-2005)
§ 93.082 IMMEDIATE THREATS TO HEALTH AND WELFARE.
    No person shall operate, cause to be operated or permit on public or
private property any source of continuous and/or impulsive sound in such a
manner as to create a sound level which exceeds the limits set forth in Tables
3 or 4 when measured at a distance of 50 feet or 15 meters from such source.
Table 3. Continuous Sound Levels Which Pose an Immediate Threat to Health and
Welfare
(Measured at 50 Feet or 15 Meters)*
Sound Level Limit (Dba) Duration
Table 3. Continuous Sound Levels Which Pose an Immediate Threat to Health and
Welfare
(Measured at 50 Feet or 15 Meters)*
Sound Level Limit (Dba) Duration
90                      24 hours
93                      12 hours
96                      6 hours
99                      3 hours
102                     1.5 hours
105                     45 minutes
108                     22 minutes
Note to table: Use equal energy time-intensity trade-off if level varies; find
energy equivalent over 24 hours
   
 
Table 4. Impulsive Sound Levels Which Pose an Immediate Threat to Health and
Welfare
(Measured at 50 Feet or 15 Meters)
Sound Level Limit (Db) Number of Repetitions per 24-hour Period
145                    1
135                    10
125                    100
 
(Prior Code, § 93.77) (Ord. 2005-39, passed 10-11-2005) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.083 INSPECTIONS BY BUILDING INSPECTOR OR LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.
   The Building Inspector and/or law enforcement officers shall, in addition to
any other authority vested in them, have the power, upon presentation of proper
credentials, to enter and inspect any private property or place, and inspect
any report or records at any reasonable time when granted permission by the
owner, or by some other person with apparent authority to act for the owner.
When permission is refused or cannot be obtained, a search warrant may be
obtained from a court of competent jurisdiction upon showing of probable cause
to believe that a violation of this subchapter may exist. Such inspection may
include administration of any necessary tests.
(Prior Code, § 93.78) (Ord. 2005-39, passed 10-11-2005) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.084 STOPPING AND TESTING MOTOR VEHICLES BY LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.
   The law enforcement officer shall, in addition to any other authority vested
in him or her, have the power to stop and test any motor vehicle or motorcycle
operated on a public right-of-way or public space, reasonably suspected of
violating any provision of this subchapter, and issue a notice of violation or
abatement order.
(Prior Code, § 93.79) (Ord. 2005-39, passed 10-11-2005)
§ 93.085 EMERGENCY EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to the emission of sound
for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency, or the
emission of sound in the performance of emergency work.
(Prior Code, § 93.80) (Ord. 2005-39, passed 10-11-2005)
§ 93.086 SPECIAL VARIANCES.
   (A)   The Building Inspector shall have the authority, consistent with this
section, to grant special variances.
   (B)   Any person seeking a special variance pursuant to this section shall
file an application with the Building Inspector. The application shall contain
information which demonstrates that bringing the source of sound or activity
for which the special variance is sought into compliance with this subchapter
would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the community or
on other persons. Notice of an application for a special variance shall be
given by the Inspector to persons who frequent the area of the sound or
activity and who may be adversely affected by the granting of the variance. Any
individual who claims to be adversely affected by allowance of the special
variance may file a statement with the Inspector containing any information to
support his or her claim.
   (C)   In determining whether to grant or deny the application, the Inspector
shall balance the hardship to the applicant, the community and other persons of
not granting the special variance against the adverse impact on the health,
safety and welfare of persons affected, the adverse impact on property
affected, and any other adverse impacts of granting the special variance.
Applicants for special variances and persons contesting special variances may
be required to submit any information the Building Inspector may reasonably
require. In granting or denying an application, the Inspector shall place on
public file a copy of the decision and the reasons for denying or granting the
special variance.
   (D)   Special variances shall be granted by notice to the applicant
containing all necessary conditions, including a time limit on the permitted
activity. The special variance shall not become effective until all conditions
are agreed to by the applicant. Noncompliance with any conditions of the
special variance shall terminate it and subject the person holding it to those
provisions of this subchapter regulating the source of sound or activity for
which the special variance was granted.
   (E)   Application for extension of time limits specified in special
variances or for modifications of other substantial conditions shall be treated
like applications for initial special variances.
   (F)   The Inspector may issue guidelines approved by resolution of Council
defining the procedures to be followed in applying for a special variance and
the criteria to be considered in deciding whether to grant a special variance.
   (G)   The decision of the Inspector may be appealed by the person denied the
special variance or by any person claiming to be adversely affected by
allowance of the special variance. Such appeal shall be made to the Zoning
Board of Appeals, and review by the Board shall be de novo.
(Prior Code, § 93.81) (Ord. 2005-39, passed 10-11-2005)
§ 93.087 ABATEMENT ORDERS.
   In lieu of issuing a notice of violation as provided for in §
93.088, the Building Inspector or law enforcement officer may issue an order
requiring the immediate abatement of any source of sound alleged to be in
violation of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 93.82) (Ord. 2005-39, passed 10-11-2005)
§ 93.088 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Except where a person is acting in good faith to comply with an abatement
order issued pursuant to §
93.087, violation of any provision of this subchapter shall be cause for a
notice of violation to be issued by the Building Inspector or law enforcement
officer.
(Prior Code, § 93.83) (Ord. 2005-39, passed 10-11-2005) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.089 OTHER REMEDIES.
   No provision of this subchapter shall be construed to impair any common law
or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom, of any person for
injury or damage arising from any violation of this subchapter or from other
law.
(Prior Code, § 93.84) (Ord. 2005-39, passed 10-11-2005)
§ 93.090 ENGINE BREAKING.
   No person shall apply an engine brake and/or use an exhaust brake system (a
practice commonly known as JAKE BRAKING) when operating a motor vehicle upon
U.S. 52 within the municipal corporation boundaries of the village in such a
manner that the use of said brakes results in excessive or unreasonable noise
likely to cause inconvenience or annoyance to persons of ordinary
sensibilities. These provisions shall be in effect during evening hours, 9:00
p.m. to 6:00 a.m., and shall not apply to emergency vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 93.85) (Ord. 2005-39, passed 10-11-2005) Penalty, see §
93.999
CHRONIC NUISANCES
§ 93.105 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHRONIC NUISANCE. A premises or property that is in consistently and
habitually in violation of this subchapter.
   NUISANCE or NUISANCE ACTIVITY. Includes, but is not limited to, any of the
following or similar activities, conduct or behavior engaged in by a premises
owner(s), occupant(s), operator(s) or person(s) associated with a premises:
      (1)   Assault, aggravated assault or felonious assault, as defined in
R.C. §§ 2903.11, 2903.12 or 2903.13;
      (2)   Menacing, aggravated menacing or menacing by stalking, as defined
in R.C. 2903.21, 2903.22 or 2903.211;
      (3)   Inducing panic, making a false alarm or manufacturing, possessing,
selling, delivering, displaying, using, threatening to use, attempting to use,
conspiring to use or making readily accessible to others a hoax weapon of mass
destruction as defined by R.C. §§ 2917.31, 2917.32 and 2917.33;
      (4)   Disrupting public services such as, but not limited to, fire and
police services, as defined by R.C. § 2909.04;
      (5)   The parent of a child of compulsory school age consistently
allowing that child not to attend school in violation of R.C. § 3321.03;
      (6)   Disorderly conduct, as defined in R.C. § 2917.11;
      (7)   Improper discharging of firearms;
      (8)   Drug sale or use, as defined by R.C. Chapter 2925 and/or permitting
a premises or real estate to be used for the commission of a felony drug abuse
offense by another person;
      (9)   Compelling, engaging in or promoting prostitution and/or procuring,
soliciting or loitering to engage in solicitation of prostitution, as defined
by R.C. §§ 2907.21 through 2907.25, inclusive;
      (10)   Participating, promoting or permitting gambling and/or public
gaming, as defined in R.C. §§ 2915.02 through 2915.04, inclusive;
      (11)   Unauthorized possession, sale or discharge of fireworks, as
defined in R.C. § 3743.65;
      (12)   Causing or creating consistent and disruptful loud noises over 150
decibels;
      (13)   Keeping or permitting a dangerous, vicious, unconfined, and/or
unsanitary dog or animal which causes serious annoyance to the neighborhood or
to persons passing along the public streets in this municipality by loud
frequent or habitual howling, yelping, barking or the making of any other
noises by such animal within the corporate limits;
      (14)   Kidnapping, as defined in R.C. § 2905.01.
      (15)   Obstructing official business, as defined in R.C. 2921.31.
   OCCUPANT. The person residing in or having use of a premises. The same
person or persons can be owner and OCCUPANT.
   OPERATOR. Any person, firm, company, corporation, association, including
his, her or their employees, agents or contractors, that controls, operates or
manages a premises.
   OWNER. Any person, partnership, corporation, who alone or jointly with
others, shall be in possession of or control of any premises or is listed as
the owner of a premises on the records of the County Auditor.
   PERSON ASSOCIATED WITH. A person who, whenever engaged in a nuisance or
nuisance activity, enters, patronizes, visits; attempts to enter, patronize or
visit; or waits to enter, patronize or visit a premises or person present on a
premises, including any officer, director, customer, agent, employee or
independent contractor of a premises owner.
   PROPERTY or PREMISES. A platted lot or part thereof, or unplatted lot or
parcel of land, or plot of land either occupied or unoccupied by any building
or structure, equipment or property of any kind.
(Ord. 2019-05, passed 4-9-2019)
§ 93.106 NOTIFICATION THAT PREMISES MAY BE A CHRONIC NUISANCE.
   The Police Chief, or his or her designee, may notify a premises owner in
writing that the premises is in danger of becoming a chronic nuisance and/or
has a general reputation as a place where a nuisance is alleged to exist when
either of the following circumstances has occurred at the premises:
   (A)   When three or more nuisance activities have occurred at a single-
family residence on separate days during a 90-day period;
   (B)   When, within a 90-day period, the following number of nuisance
activities has occurred at the premises:
      (1)   Premises with two, three or four residential units: six nuisance
activities;
      (2)   Premises with five to 19 residential units: 14 nuisance activities;
      (3)   Premises with 20 to 39 residential units: 18 nuisance activities;
and
      (4)   Premises with over 40 residential units: 25 nuisance activities.
   (C)   The notice provided for in this section shall be deemed properly
delivered in any one of the following methods:
      (1)   Sent by first class mail to the address for the owner listed on the
records of the County Auditor and not returned;
      (2)   Posted on the front door or other conspicuous location of the
premises that is subject to the notice and order; or
      (3)   Delivered in person to the owner.
   (D)   The notice provided for in this section shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   The street address or legal description sufficient for
identification of premises;
      (2)   A description of the nuisance activities that have occurred at the
premises, including the dates of the nuisance activities;
      (3)   A statement that the premises owner shall respond to the Police
Chief, or his or her designee, within ten days of the date of the owner’s
receipt of the notice with a written plan to abate the nuisance activities that
is acceptable to the Police Chief, or his or her designee; and
      (4)   A statement that the cost of future enforcement at the premises as
a result of nuisance activities will be billed to the premises owner and will
become a lien against the property if not paid.
(Ord. 2019-05, passed 4-9-2019)
§ 93.107 DETERMINATION THAT PREMISES IS A CHRONIC NUISANCE.
   (A)   Whenever the Police Chief, or his or her designee, determines that an
additional nuisance activity has occurred at a premises for which a notice has
already been issued pursuant to §
93.106, the Police Chief, or his or her designee, shall determine that the
premises is a chronic nuisance and order that the owner abate the nuisance
within 30 days of the owner’s receipt of the notice. The Police Chief, or his
or her designee, also may calculate the cost of enforcement for this and any
subsequent nuisance activities, notify the owner that the owner will be billed
for the cost of this abatement and any subsequent abatements necessary to
address nuisance activities and that the owner will be billed in full for the
cost of such enforcement and/or abatement(s).
   (B)   The notice and order provided for above shall be deemed properly
delivered if:
      (1)   The notice and order are sent by first class mail to the address
for the owner listed on the records of the County Auditor;
      (2)   The notice and order are posted on the front door or other
conspicuous location of the premises that is the subject of the notice and
order;
      (3)   The notice and order are delivered in person to owner; and
      (4)   The notice shall contain the following information:
         (a)   The street address or legal description sufficient for
identification of the premises;
         (b)   A description of the nuisance activity or activities for which
the premises owner is being billed, including the dates of the nuisance
activity or activities;
         (c)   An order that the nuisance activity be abated; and
         (d)   A statement the premises owner may appeal the determination that
the owner’s premises is a chronic nuisance or may appeal the amount of the
bill, as provided in this subchapter.
   (C)   The determination that a premises is a chronic nuisance subject to
bills for the cost of enforcement and/or abatement(s) pursuant to this section
and subject to fines or criminal prosecution pursuant to this subchapter shall
be effective for a two-year period beginning with the date of the first
nuisance activity that is the subject of the first bill for enforcement sent to
the premises owner for that specific premises.
(Ord. 2019-05, passed 4-9-2019)
§ 93.108 CITATIONS FOR CHRONIC NUISANCE ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Whoever violates this subchapter or fails to obey any lawful order
issued by the Police Chief, or his or her designee, to abate a chronic
nuisance, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on the first offense
and guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree on the second and subsequent
offense. Each day’s continuation of a violation or failure to comply is a
separate offense.
   (B)   As an alternative to criminal prosecution, the Police Chief, or his or
her designee, may cite a person who violates any provision of this subchapter
or fails to obey any order to abate a chronic nuisance.
      (1)   Citations for nuisance activities shall be imposed based on the
number of bills for enforcement sent to a premises owner for specific premises
within a two-year period beginning with the date of the nuisance activity that
is the subject of the first bill for enforcement sent to the premises owner for
that specific premises.
      (2)   Whenever a premises owner has been billed on three more separate
dates within a two-year period, beginning with the nuisance activity that is
the subject of the first bill for enforcement sent to the premises owner of the
specific premises, the Police Chief, or his or her designee, shall issue a
citation to the premises owner as follows:
         (a)   For the fourth bill within a two-year period, an assessment
against the premises of $250 shall be imposed in addition to whatever costs
have been incurred to enforce and/or abate the nuisance(s);
         (b)   For the fifth bill within a two-year period, an assessment
against the premises of $500 shall be imposed in addition to whatever costs
have been incurred to enforce and/or abate the nuisance(s);
         (c)   For the sixth bill within a two-year period, an assessment
against the premises of $750 shall be imposed in addition to whatever costs
have been incurred to enforce and/or abate the nuisance(s); and
         (d)   For each bill after the sixth bill within a two-year period, an
assessment against the premises of $1,000 shall be imposed in addition to
whatever costs have been incurred to enforce and/or abate the nuisance(s).
(Ord. 2019-05, passed 4-9-2019) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.109 APPEALS.
   (A)   A premises owner may appeal the determination of the Police Chief, or
his or her designee, pursuant to §
93.107, that a premises is a chronic nuisance, and may appeal the amount of the
bill for enforcement related to nuisance activities and/or the abatement(s) of
such nuisance activities at the premises pursuant to this subchapter within 30
days from the date of the notification from the Police Chief, or his or her
designee, that the premises is a chronic nuisance or within 30 days from the
date the bill is issued.
   (B)   An appeal of the determination that a premises is a chronic nuisance
or the amount of the bill for enforcement related to nuisance activities and/or
the abatement(s) of such nuisance activities at the premises must be made in
writing and directed to the Village Mayor. A written notification of the
Mayor’s determination will be sent within 30 days of receipt of appeal by the
same three methods as described in §
93.107(B)(1) to (B)(3). No change in the chronic nuisance status of the
premises may be made without going through the written appeal process.
   (C)   A premises owner may appeal the Village Mayor’s determination that the
premises is a chronic nuisance or the determination regarding an amount of the
bill for enforcement within 30 days from the date that the Mayor’s
determination letter is postmarked by requesting an administrative hearing be
conducted by the magistrate for the Village Mayor’s Court. Said determination
letter shall state how many days the premises owner has to appeal the
assessment. The Magistrate for the Village Mayor’s Court will issue a written
determination on any appeal brought before the Court within 14 days of the
hearing.
(Ord. 2019-05, passed 4-9-2019)
§ 93.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided for, any person who violates any
provision of §§
93.075 through
93.088 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on each subsequent
offense committed within six months of a prior offense, such person is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   Any person who willfully or knowingly violates any provision of §§
93.075 through
93.088 or violates §
93.082 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (3)   Each day of violation of any provision of §§
93.075 through
93.088 constitutes a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 93.99) (Ord. 2005-39, passed 10-11-2005)
CHAPTER 94: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
94.01   Conditions precedent to improving streets
   
94.02   Opening permit required
   
94.03   Application and cash deposit
   
94.04   Restoration of pavement
   
94.05   Barriers around excavations
   
94.06   Warning lights
   
94.07   Sidewalk construction by the municipality
   
94.08   Unloading on street or sidewalk
   
94.09   Street or sidewalk obstruction
   
94.10   Materials on street or sidewalk
   
94.11   Duty to keep sidewalks in repair and clean of ice and snow
   
94.12   Ramped curbing for persons with disabilities
   
94.13   Flagpole along right-of-way
   
94.14   Altering or injuring marker or monument
   
94.15   Use of skateboards and skates
   
94.16   Posting of house or business numbers
   
94.17   Regulation of public rights-of-way
Construction and Repair
   
94.30   Construction and repair may be required
   
94.31   Resolution of necessity
   
94.32   Notice to construct or repair
   
94.33   Assessments of costs against owner
   
94.34   Proceedings may include different owners
   
94.35   Making and levying assessments
Changes in Streets
   
94.50   Change of name, vacating or narrowing streets by petition
   
94.51   Change of name, vacating or narrowing streets without petition
   
94.52   Notice; exception
   
94.53   Publication of notice
   
94.54   Effect of order of vacation
   
94.55   Effect on public utility easements
 
   
94.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Assessments generally, see R.C. Chapter 727
   Vacation or establishment of streets by court, notice and hearings, see R.C.
§§ 723.09 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 94.01 CONDITIONS PRECEDENT TO IMPROVING STREETS.
   No department of this municipality shall accept, lay out, open, improve,
grade, pave, curb or light any street or other way, unless the street or way
has been accepted or opened or otherwise has received the legal status of a
public street or way prior to the effective date of this code; or unless the
street or way corresponds in location and extent with a street or way shown on
a recorded plat which has been legally accepted by the Legislative Authority.
Statutory reference:
   Power over streets and sidewalks, see R.C. §§ 715.19, 717.01(P), 723.01,
723.011, 723.02, and 729.01
§ 94.02 OPENING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an authorized municipal
official or the authorized employees or agents of such municipal official, to
make any opening in any street, alley, sidewalk, or public way of the
municipality unless a permit to make the opening has been obtained prior to
commencement of the work.
Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.03 APPLICATION AND CASH DEPOSIT.
   Each permit for making an opening shall be confined to a single project and
shall be issued by the Mayor or other proper municipal officer. Application
shall be made on a form prescribed by the Legislative Authority, giving the
exact location of the proposed opening, the kind of paving, the area and depth
to be excavated, and such other facts as may be provided for. The permit shall
be issued only after a cash deposit sufficient to cover the cost of restoration
has been posted with the Mayor or other proper municipal officer, conditioned
upon prompt and satisfactory refilling of excavations and restoration of all
surfaces disturbed.
§ 94.04 RESTORATION OF PAVEMENT.
   (A)   The opening and restoration of pavement or other surface shall be
performed under the direction and to the satisfaction of an authorized
municipal official, and in accordance with rules, regulations, and
specifications approved by the Legislative Authority.
   (B)   Upon failure or refusal of the permittee satisfactorily to fill the
excavation, restore the surface, and remove all excess materials within the
time specified in the permit or where not specified therein, within a
reasonable time after commencement of the work, the municipality may proceed
without notice to make such fill and restoration, and the deposit referred to
in §
94.03 shall be deemed forfeited. Thereupon, the deposit shall be paid into the
Street Repair Fund of the municipality, except such part demanded and paid to
the permittee as the difference between the deposit and the charges of the
municipality for restoration services performed by it. If the amount of such
services performed by the municipality should exceed the amount of the deposit,
the Clerk or other proper municipal officer shall proceed to collect the
remainder due from such permittee.
§ 94.05 BARRIERS AROUND EXCAVATIONS.
   Any person engaged in or employing others in excavating, or opening any
street, sidewalk, alley, or other public way shall have the excavation or
opening fully barricaded at all times to prevent injury to persons or animals.
Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.06 WARNING LIGHTS.
   Any person engaged in or employing others in excavating or otherwise in any
manner obstructing a portion or all of any street, sidewalk, alley, or other
public way, at all times during the night shall install and maintain at least
two illuminated warning lamps which shall be securely and conspicuously posted
on, at, or near each end of such obstruction or excavation, and if the space
involved shall exceed 50 feet in extent, then at least one additional lamp for
each added 50 feet or portion thereof excavated or obstructed.
Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.07 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION BY THE MUNICIPALITY.
   It shall be the duty of the engineer of the municipality or, if none exist,
another authorized municipal official, to supervise construction or repair of
sidewalks within the municipality. He or she shall cause specifications to be
prepared for the construction of the various kinds of pavements and transmit
the same to the Legislative Authority for approval. When the specifications are
approved, the Legislative Authority shall advertise for proposals to do all the
work which may be ordered by the municipality in construction and repair of
sidewalks, and shall contract therefor, for a period not exceeding one year,
with the lowest responsible bidder, who shall furnish good and sufficient
sureties for the faithful performance of the work. The Legislative Authority,
if it deems advisable, may make separate contracts for the different kinds of
work with different parties.
§ 94.08 UNLOADING ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.
   No person shall unload any heavy material in the streets of the
municipality, by throwing or letting the same fall upon the pavement of any
street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way, without first placing some
sufficient protection over the pavement.
Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.09 STREET OR SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTION.
   (A)   No person shall obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk, public ground,
or other public way within the municipality by erecting thereon any fence,
structure or building, or permitting any fence, structure or building to remain
thereon unless authorized by the Legislative Authority or other proper
municipal official. Each day that any such fence or building is permitted to
remain upon such public way shall be deemed a separate offense.
(R.C. § 5589.01)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 5589.99(A))
§ 94.10 MATERIALS ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.
   No person shall encumber any street or sidewalk. No owner, occupant, or
person having the care of any building or lot of land bordering on any street
or sidewalk shall permit the same to be encumbered with barrels, boxes, cans,
articles, or substances of any kind so as to interfere with the free and
unobstructed use thereof.
Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.11 DUTY TO KEEP SIDEWALKS IN REPAIR AND CLEAN OF ICE AND SNOW.
   No owner or occupant of lots or lands abutting any sidewalk, curb or gutter
shall fail to keep the sidewalks, curbs and gutters in repair and free from
snow, ice or any nuisance, and to remove from such sidewalks, curbs or gutters
all snow and ice accumulated thereon within a reasonable time, which will
ordinarily not exceed 12 hours after any storm during which the snow and ice
has accumulated.
(R.C. § 723.011) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.12 RAMPED CURBING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.
   All new curbs that are authorized by the municipality, and all existing
curbs which are part of any reconstruction, shall have a ramp with nonslip
surface built into the curb at each pedestrian crosswalk so that the sidewalk
and street blend to a common level. These ramps shall be not less than 40
inches wide and shall, insofar as feasible, be constructed in accordance with
the standard drawings and specifications for curb ramps of the state Department
of Transportation.
(R.C. § 729.12) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.13 FLAGPOLE ALONG RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   A property owner in the municipality may install a flagpole between
the sidewalk and curb along the right-of-way of any public street or highway
adjacent to his or her property. A property owner may also install underground
lighting for the display of the flag. Installation of the flagpole and holder
shall meet the following specifications:
      (1)   The flagpole holder shall be embedded in concrete, flush with the
sidewalk or sodded area, and possess a cap or cover which shall be used when
the holder is not used for the purpose of displaying the American flag;
      (2)   The holder shall not exceed two inches in diameter and shall be
installed not less than one foot from the curb;
      (3)   Underground lighting for the flagpole shall be situated within a
reasonable distance to the holder and meet all underwriters’ requirements
governing installation. The highest part of the lighting fixture shall at all
times be flush with the sidewalk or sodded area in which it is embedded;
      (4)   At no time shall the flag, flagpole, or holder limit or restrict
the view of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, nor shall a flag, flagpole, or
holder be installed that comes in physical contact, or is likely to come in
physical contact, with overhead wiring.
   (B)   The municipality may require the issuance of a permit for installation
of flagpoles but shall not charge the property owner a permit fee or an
inspection fee in excess of $1 per installation.
(R.C. § 723.012) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.14 ALTERING OR INJURING MARKER OR MONUMENT.
   (A)   No person shall alter, deface, injure or destroy any marker or
monument placed along, upon, or near a public highway by the proper authorities
to mark the boundary thereof, or for any other purpose.
(R.C. § 5589.02)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 5589.99(B))
§ 94.15 USE OF SKATEBOARDS AND SKATES.
   (A)   No person shall ride or operate a skateboard or skates outside of the
village’s skate park.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      SKATEBOARD. Any vehicle or device capable of being operated or ridden by
a person and consisting of a board, plank or platform mounted on wheels or
rollers, whether propelled by gravity, muscle power or mechanical means, which
is not equipped with a positive, mechanical means of steering such vehicle or
device.
      SKATES. Skates, roller blades or in-line skates.
   (C)   (1)   Any person riding or operating a skateboard or skates in
violation of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   In addition, the police officer who observes the person riding or
operating the skateboard or skates shall immediately impound the skateboard or
skates for use as evidence and as possible contraband.
      (3)   The court may order the forfeiture of the skateboard or skates as
contraband at the conclusion of the trial or other disposition of the case
should the court find that the person has previously violated this section or
any predecessor section regulating the use of skateboards or skates within the
village. Otherwise, the skateboards or skates shall be returned to the person
from whom the skateboard or skates were seized after the conclusion of the
trial or other disposition of the case and any subsequent appeal.
(Prior Code, § 93.60) (Ord. 2007-48, passed 11-13-2007) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.16 POSTING OF HOUSE OR BUSINESS NUMBERS.
   (A)   Each residence or business building within the village shall be
required to prominently display its assigned street number so that it may be
reasonably seen from an emergency vehicle traveling on the public right-of-way.
   (B)   Every owner or manager of a residence or business structure within the
village shall be required to prominently post the street identification number
so that it may be reasonably seen from an emergency vehicle traveling on the
public right-of-way.
   (C)   Any owner or manager of a building, residential or commercial, who
shall be found in violation of division (B) above shall be guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and fined not more than $100. In the event an owner or manager or a
residence or business structure has been previously convicted of a violation of
this section within one year, then violation of this section shall be deemed a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree, punishable by a fine not to exceed $250 and
incarceration not to exceed 30 days, or both.
(Prior Code, § 94.15) (Ord. 1991-03, passed 2-12-1991; Ord. 1991-08, passed 2-
12-1991) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.17 REGULATION OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   The Public Rights-of-Way Ordinance, copies of which are on file in the
office of the Village Clerk, is adopted and incorporated as part of this code
of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.
(Prior Code, § 119.01) (Ord. 2002-22, passed 12-10-2002)
CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR
§ 94.30 CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR MAY BE REQUIRED.
   In addition to the power conferred upon the municipality under R.C. § 727.01
to construct sidewalks, curbs or gutters and levy an assessment therefor, the
Legislative Authority may require the construction or repair of sidewalks,
curbs or gutters within the municipality by the owners of lots or lands
abutting thereon, and upon the failure of such owners to construct or repair
such sidewalks, curbs or gutters within the time prescribed in the resolution
adopted under § 94.26, may cause such sidewalks, curbs or gutters to be
constructed or repaired and assess the total cost thereof against the lots or
land abutting thereon, notwithstanding the provisions of R.C. §§ 727.03 and
727.05.
(R.C. § 729.01)
§ 94.31 RESOLUTION OF NECESSITY.
   (A)   When it is deemed necessary by the municipality to require the
construction or repair of sidewalks, curbs, or gutters within the municipality
by the owners of the lots or lands abutting thereon, the Legislative Authority
shall cause plans, specifications, and an estimate of the cost of such
construction or repair to be prepared, showing the location and dimensions of
such sidewalks, curbs or gutters and the specifications for the construction or
repair thereof, and to be filed in the office of the Clerk of the Legislative
Authority.
   (B)   After such plans, specifications and estimate of cost have been filed,
as provided in this section, the Legislative Authority may declare the
necessity for the construction or repair of such sidewalks, curbs or gutters by
the adoption of a resolution which shall:
      (1)   Approve the plans, specifications and estimate of cost of the
proposed construction or repair on file as provided by this section;
      (2)   Describe the lots and lands abutting upon the sidewalks, curbs or
gutters to be constructed or repaired by the termini of the improvement or by
the street address;
      (3)   Set forth that such sidewalks, curbs or gutters shall be
constructed or repaired by the owners of the lots or lands abutting thereon in
accordance with the specifications on file in the office of the Clerk of the
Legislative Authority;
      (4)   Set forth the time within which such sidewalks, curbs or gutters
shall be constructed or repaired by the owners of the lots and lands abutting
thereon, which shall not be less than 30 days from the date of service of
notice under §
94.32 on the owner of the lots or lands;
      (5)   State than in the event such sidewalks, curbs or gutters are not
constructed or repaired by the owners of the lots and lands abutting thereon in
accordance with such plans and specifications and within the time prescribed in
this resolution, the municipality will so construct or repair such sidewalks,
curbs or gutters and assess the costs thereof against the lots and lands
abutting thereon.
(R.C. § 729.02)
§ 94.32 NOTICE TO CONSTRUCT OR REPAIR.
   Notice of the passage of a resolution of necessity under §
94.31 shall be served by the Clerk of the Legislative Authority, or a person
designated by such Clerk, upon the owners of the lots or lands abutting upon
the sidewalks, curbs or gutters to be constructed or repaired in the same
manner as service of summons in civil cases, or by certified mail addressed to
such owner at his or her last known address or to the address to which tax
bills are sent, or by a combination of the foregoing methods. If it appears by
the return of service or the return of the certified mail notice that one or
more of the owners cannot be found, such owners shall be served by publication
of the notice once in a newspaper of general circulation within the
municipality. The return of the person serving the notice or a certified copy
thereof or a returned receipt for notice forwarded by certified mail accepted
by the addressee or anyone purporting to act for him or her shall be prima
facie evidence of the service of notice under this section. The notice shall
also set forth the place where the specifications governing the construction or
repair of such sidewalks, curbs or gutters are on file, the time within which
the owner of such lot or parcel of land may construct or repair the sidewalks,
curbs or gutters, and that in the event the owner does not construct or repair
the sidewalks, curbs or gutters in accordance with the specifications and
within such time, the municipality will construct or repair such sidewalks,
curbs or gutters and assess the costs thereof against the lot or land of the
owner.
(R.C. § 729.03)
§ 94.33 ASSESSMENTS OF COSTS AGAINST OWNER.
   (A)   Upon the expiration of the time within which sidewalks, curbs or
gutters shall be constructed or repaired by the owner of the lots or lands
abutting thereon as set forth in the resolution adopted under §
94.31, the sidewalks, curbs or gutters not constructed or repaired by the
owners of the lots and lands abutting thereon shall be constructed or repaired
by the municipality in accordance with the resolution adopted under §
94.31, and the Legislative Authority shall, upon the completion of such
construction or repair, assess the costs thereof against the lots or lands
abutting thereon.
   (B)   In anticipation of the collection of the costs of construction or
repair of such sidewalks, curbs or gutters from the owners of the lots or lands
abutting thereon, the Legislative Authority may provide for the issuance of
bonds or notes and the proceeds thereof shall be used to pay for the
construction or repair of such sidewalks, curbs or gutters.
(R.C. § 729.04)
§ 94.34 PROCEEDINGS MAY INCLUDE DIFFERENT OWNERS.
   In all proceedings pertaining to the construction or repair of sidewalks,
curbs or gutters under this subchapter or R.C. §§ 729.01 through 729.08,
sidewalks, curbs or gutters upon different streets abutting upon lots or lands
owned by different owners may be included in the same resolution, notice,
contract, ordinance, or other proceedings.
(R.C. § 729.05)
§ 94.35 MAKING AND LEVYING ASSESSMENTS.
   (A)   Estimated assessments. Upon completion of the construction or repair
of sidewalks, curbs or gutters under this subchapter, the total cost of such
construction, repair, or installation as defined in division (B) shall be
ascertained and reported to the Legislative Authority by its Clerk, and the
Legislative Authority shall cause a list of estimated assessments to be
prepared. Such list shall include the total cost of such construction, repair,
or installation to each lot or land abutting upon such construction, repair, or
installation and shall be filed in the office of the Clerk of the Legislative
Authority and be available for public inspection.
(R.C. § 729.07)
   (B)   Notice of assessment; objection.
      (1)   The Legislative Authority shall cause a notice to be published for
three consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipal
corporation or as provided in R.C. § 7.16, stating that such list of estimated
assessments has been made and is on file in the office of the Clerk of the
Legislative Authority for the inspection and examination of persons interested
therein.
      (2)   If any person objects to an assessment on such list, the person
shall file the objection in writing with the Clerk of the Legislative Authority
within two weeks after the expiration of the notice provided for in division
(B)(1) of this section.
(R.C. § 729.08)
   (C)   Assessment ordinance. The Clerk of the Legislative Authority shall
deliver the objections received under division (B) of this section to the
Legislative Authority. The Legislative Authority shall review the written
objections and shall adopt an ordinance levying upon the lots and lands
enumerated in the list of estimated assessments the amount set forth on such
list with such changes or corrections as the Legislative Authority shall
determine to be proper after consideration of the written objections filed
under division (B) of this section. Such ordinance shall state the number of
annual installments, not exceeding ten, over which the assessments shall be
payable and shall establish a period of time during which the assessments shall
be payable in cash.
(R.C. § 729.09)
   (D)   Assessment proceedings. The provisions of R.C. §§ 727.26 through
727.43, inclusive, shall apply to and govern the proceedings taken under and
the assessments levied under this subchapter. The proceedings taken under this
subchapter shall be construed in accordance with the provisions of R.C. §
727.40.
(R.C. § 729.10)
Statutory reference:
   Assessments generally, see R.C. Chapter 727
CHANGES IN STREETS
§ 94.50 CHANGE OF NAME, VACATING OR NARROWING STREETS BY PETITION.
   The Legislative Authority, on petition by a person owning a lot in the
municipality requesting that a street or alley in the immediate vicinity of
such lot be vacated or narrowed, or the name thereof changed, upon hearing, and
upon being satisfied that there is good cause for such change of name,
vacation, or narrowing, that it will not be detrimental to the general
interest, and that it should be made, may, by ordinance, declare such street or
alley vacated, narrowed or the name thereof changed. The Legislative Authority
may include in one ordinance the change of name, vacation, or narrowing of more
than one street, avenue or alley. The original ordinance or a certified copy
thereof shall be recorded in the official records of the County Recorder.
(R.C. § 723.04)
§ 94.51 CHANGE OF NAME, VACATING OR NARROWING STREETS WITHOUT PETITION.
   (A)   The Legislative Authority may, when there are two or more streets,
avenues or alley of the same name in the municipality, by ordinance and without
petition therefor, change the name of any such street, avenue or alley so as to
leave only one to be designated by the original name.
   (B)   When, in the opinion of the Legislative Authority, there is good cause
for vacating or narrowing a street or alley, or any part thereof, and that such
vacation or narrowing will not be detrimental to the general interest, it may,
by ordinance and without petition therefor, vacate or narrow such street or
alley or any part thereof. The original ordinance or a certified copy thereof
shall be recorded in the official records of the County Recorder.
(R.C. § 723.05)
§ 94.52 NOTICE; EXCEPTION.
   Notice of the intention of the Legislative Authority to vacate any street,
alley, avenue, or part thereof shall be given as provided in § 94.43, except
when written consent to such vacation is filed with the Legislative Authority
by the owners of the property abutting the part of the street or alley proposed
to be vacated, in which case such notice shall not be required.
(R.C. § 723.06)
§ 94.53 PUBLICATION OF NOTICE.
   No street or alley shall be vacated or narrowed unless notice of the
pendency and prayer of the petition under R.C. § 723.04 is given by publishing,
in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality, for six consecutive
weeks preceding action on such petition, or as provided in R.C. § 7.16
preceding action on the petition. Where no newspaper is of general circulation
in the municipality, notice shall be given by posting the notice in three
public places therein six weeks preceding such action. Action thereon shall
take place within three months after the completion of the notice.
(R.C. § 723.07)
§ 94.54 EFFECT OF ORDER OF VACATION.
   The order of the Legislative Authority vacating or narrowing a street or
alley which has been dedicated to public use by the proprietor thereof shall,
to the extent to which it is vacated or narrowed, operate as a revocation of
the acceptance thereof by the Legislative Authority, but the right-of-way and
easement therein of any lot owner shall not be impaired by such order.
(R.C. § 723.08)
§ 94.55 EFFECT ON PUBLIC UTILITY EASEMENTS.
   When any street, alley or public highway, or a portion thereof, is vacated
or narrowed by the municipality pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter
or the provisions of R.C. Chapter 723, and the relocation of any conduits,
cables, wires, towers, poles, sewer lines, steam lines, pipelines, gas and
water lines, tracks, or other equipment or appliances of any railroad or public
utility, whether owned privately or by any governmental authority, located on,
over or under the portion of the street, alley, or highway affected by such
vacation or narrowing, is not required for purposes of the municipality,
including urban renewal, any affected railroad or public utility shall be
deemed to have a permanent easement in such vacated portion or excess portion
of such street, alley or highway for the purpose of maintaining, operating,
renewing, reconstructing, and removing such utility facilities and for purposes
of access to such facilities.
(R.C. § 723.041)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provisions of this chapter for which another penalty is
not already provided shall be subject to the penalty as prescribed in §
10.99.
 
CHAPTER 95: UNCLAIMED AND ABANDONED VEHICLES
Section
   
95.01   Impounding motor vehicle on private property; requirements
   
95.02   Impounding abandoned motor vehicle on public property; notice;
disposition
   
95.03   Disposition of vehicle ordered into storage
   
95.04   Disposition of abandoned junk motor vehicles
   
95.05   Abandonment of junk motor vehicle prohibited
   
95.06   Junk motor vehicle; order to cover or remove; notice; exceptions
   
95.07   Tow operator; service fee
   
95.08   Police Department wrecker and towing rules and regulations
§ 95.01 IMPOUNDING MOTOR VEHICLE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   The Police Chief of the municipality, upon complaint of any
person adversely affected, may order into storage any motor vehicle, other than
an abandoned junk motor vehicle as defined in §
95.04, that has been left on private residential or private agricultural
property for at least four hours without the permission of the of person having
the right to the possession of the property. The Police Chief, upon complaint
of the owner of a repair garage or place of storage, may order into storage any
motor vehicle, other than an abandoned junk motor vehicle, that has been left
at the garage or place of storage for a longer period than that agreed upon.
The place of storage shall be designated by the Police Chief. When ordering a
motor vehicle into storage pursuant to this division (A), the Police Chief,
whenever possible, shall arrange for the removal of the motor vehicle by a
private tow truck operator or towing company. Subject to division (C) below,
the owner of a motor vehicle that has been removed pursuant to this division
(A) may recover the vehicle only in accordance with division (E) below.
      (2)   This division (A) does not apply to any private residential or
private agricultural property that is established as a private tow-away zone in
accordance with division (B) below.
      (3)   As used in divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) above, PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL
PROPERTY means private property on which is located one or more structures that
are used as a home, residence or sleeping place by one or more persons, if no
more than three separate households are maintained in the structure or
structures. PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY does not include any private property
on which is located one or more structures that are used as a home, residence
or sleeping place by two or more persons, if more than three separate
households are maintained in the structure or structures.
   (B)   (1)   The owner of a private property may establish a private tow-away
zone only if all of the following conditions are satisfied:
         (a)   The owner posts on the owner’s property a sign that is at least
18 inches by 24 inches in size, that is visible from all entrances to the
property and that contains at least all of the following information:
            1.   A notice that the property is a private tow-away zone and that
vehicles not authorized to park on the property will be towed away;
            2.   The telephone number of the person from whom a towed-away
vehicle can be recovered, and the address of the place to which the vehicle
will be taken and the place from which it may be recovered; and
            3.   A statement that the vehicle may be recovered at any time
during the day or night upon the submission of proof of ownership and the
payment of a towing charge, in an amount not to exceed $90, and a storage
charge, in an amount not to exceed $12 per 24-hour period; except that the
charge for towing shall not exceed $150, and the storage charge shall not
exceed $20 per 24-hour period, if the vehicle has a manufacturer’s gross
vehicle weight rating in excess of 10,000 pounds and is a truck, bus or a
combination of a commercial tractor and trailer or semi trailer.
         (b)   The place to which the towed vehicle is taken and from which it
may be recovered is conveniently located, is well lighted, and is on or within
a reasonable distance of a regularly scheduled route of one or more modes of
public transportation, if any public transportation is available in the
municipality in which the private tow-away zone is located.
      (2)   If a vehicle is parked on private property that is established as a
private tow-away zone in accordance with division (B)(1) above without the
consent of the owner of the property or in violation of any posted parking
condition or regulation, the owner or the owner’s agent may remove, or cause
the removal of, the vehicle, the owner and the operator of the vehicle shall be
deemed to have consented to the removal and storage of the vehicle and to the
payment of the towing and storage charges specified in division (B)(l)(a)3.
above, and the owner, subject to division (C) below, may recover a vehicle that
has been so removed only in accordance with division (E) below.
      (3)   If the municipality requires tow trucks and tow truck operators to
be licensed, no owner of private property located within the municipality shall
remove or shall cause the removal and storage of any vehicle pursuant to
division (B)(2) above by an unlicensed tow truck or unlicensed tow truck
operator.
      (4)   Divisions (B)(1) through (B)(3) above do not affect or limit the
operation of division (A) above, §§
95.02 through
95.06 or R.C. §§ 4513.61 through 4513.65 as they relate to property other than
private property that is established as a private tow-away zone under division
(B)(1) above.
   (C)   If the owner or operator of a vehicle that has been ordered into
storage, pursuant to division (A)(1) above, or of a vehicle that is being
removed under authority of division (B)(2) above arrives after the vehicle has
been prepared for removal but prior to its actual removal from the property,
the owner or operator shall be given the opportunity to pay a fee of not more
than one-half of the charge for the removal of vehicles under division (A)(1)
above or of vehicles under division (B)(2) above, whichever is applicable, that
normally is assessed by the person who has prepared the vehicle for removal, in
order to obtain release of the vehicle. Upon payment of that fee, the vehicle
shall be released to the owner or operator, and upon its release, the owner or
operator immediately shall move it so that:
      (1)   If the motor vehicle was ordered into storage pursuant to division
(A)(1) above, it is not on the private residential or private agricultural
property without the permission of the person having the right to possession of
the property, or is not at the garage or place of storage without the
permission of the owner, whichever is applicable; and
      (2)   If the vehicle was being removed under authority of division (B)(2)
above, it is not parked on the private property established as a private tow-
away zone without the consent of the owner or in violation of any posted
parking condition or regulation.
   (D)   (1)   If an owner of private property that is established as a private
tow-away zone in accordance with division (B)(1) above, or the authorized agent
of such an owner, removes or causes the removal of a vehicle from that property
under authority of division (B)(2) above, the owner or agent promptly shall
notify the Police Department the vehicle’s license number, make, model and
color, the location from which it was removed, the date and time of its
removal, the telephone number of the person from whom it may be recovered, and
the address of the place to which it has been taken and from which it may be
recovered.
      (2)   The Police Chief shall maintain a record of vehicles that the
Police Chief orders into storage pursuant to division (A)(1) above and of
vehicles removed from private property in the Police Chiefs jurisdiction that
is established as a private tow-away zone of which the Police Chief has
received notice under division (D)(1) above. The record shall include an entry
for each such vehicle that identifies the vehicle’s license number, make, model
and color, the location from which it was removed, the date and time of its
removal, the telephone number of the person from whom it may be recovered, and
the address of the place to which it has been taken and from which it may be
recovered. Any information in the record that pertains to a particular vehicle
shall be provided to any person who, either in person or pursuant to a
telephone call, identifies self as the owner or operator of the vehicle and
requests information pertaining to its location.
      (3)   Any person who registers a complaint that is the basis of the
Police Chief’s order for the removal and storage of a vehicle under division
(A)(1) above shall provide the identity of the law enforcement agency with
which the complaint was registered to any person who identifies himself or
herself as the owner or operator of the motor vehicle and requests information
pertaining to its location.
   (E)   The owner of a vehicle that is ordered into storage pursuant to
division (A)(1) above or of a vehicle that is removed under authority of
division (B)(2) above may reclaim it upon payment of any expenses or charges
incurred in its removal, in an amount not to exceed $90, and storage, in an
amount not to exceed $12 per 24-hour period; except that the charge for towing
shall not exceed $150, and the storage charge shall not exceed $20 per 24-hour
period, if the vehicle has a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating in
excess of 10,000 pounds and is a truck, bus or a combination of a commercial
tractor and trailer or semitrailer. Presentation of proof of ownership, which
may be evidenced by a certificate of title to the vehicle also shall be
required for reclamation of the vehicle. If a vehicle that is ordered into
storage pursuant to division (A)(1) above, remains unclaimed by the owner for
30 days, the procedures established by §§
95.02 and
95.03 shall apply.
   (F)   No person shall remove, or cause the removal of, any vehicle from
private property that is established as a private tow-away zone under division
(B)(1) above other than in accordance with division (B)(2) above, and no person
shall remove, or cause the removal of, any motor vehicle from any other private
property other than in accordance with division (A)(1) above, §§
95.02 through
95.06 or R.C. §§ 4513.61 through 4513.65.
   (G)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B)(3) above is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (F) above is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (F) above or
R.C. § 4513.60(F), whoever violates division (F) above is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(Prior Code, § 95.01) (Ord. 2007-60, passed - - )
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see R.C. § 4513.60
§ 95.02 IMPOUNDING ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE ON PUBLIC PROPERTY; NOTICE;
DISPOSITION.
   (A)   The Police Chief of the municipality may order into storage any motor
vehicle, including an abandoned junk motor vehicle, as defined in §
95.04, that has come into the possession of the Police Chief as a result of the
Police Chief’s duties or that has been left on a public street or other
property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel, or upon or within
the right-of-way of any road or highway, for 48 hours or longer without
notification to the Police Chief of the reasons for leaving the motor vehicle
in such place, except that when such motor vehicle constitutes an obstruction
to traffic, it may be ordered into storage immediately. The Police Chief shall
designate the place of storage of any motor vehicle so ordered removed.
   (B)   The Police Chief immediately shall cause a search to be made of the
records of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles to ascertain the owner and any lien
holder of a motor vehicle ordered into storage by the Police Chief, and if
known, shall send or cause to be sent notice to the owner or lien holder at his
or her last known address by certified mail with return receipt requested, that
the motor vehicle will be declared a nuisance and disposed of if not claimed
within ten days of the date of mailing of the notice. The owner or lien holder
of the motor vehicle may reclaim it upon payment of any expenses or charges
incurred in its removal and storage, and presentation of proof of ownership,
which may be evidenced by a certificate of title or memorandum certificate of
title to the motor vehicle. If the owner or lien holder of the motor vehicle
reclaims it after a search of the records of the Bureau has been conducted and
after notice has been sent to the owner or lien holder as described in this
section, and the search was conducted by the owner of the place of storage or
the owner’s employee, and the notice was sent to the motor vehicle owner by the
owner of the place of storage or the owner’s employee, the owner or lien holder
shall pay to the place of storage a processing fee of $25, in addition to any
expenses or charged incurred in the removal and storage of the vehicle.
   (C)   If the owner or lien holder makes no claim to the motor vehicle within
ten days of the date of mailing the notice, and if the vehicle is to be
disposed of at public auction, as provided in §
95.03, the Police Chief shall file with the Clerk of Courts of the county in
which the place of storage is located an affidavit showing compliance with the
requirements of R.C. § 4513.61. Upon presentation of the affidavit, the Clerk,
without charge, shall issue a salvage certificate of title, free and clear of
all liens and encumbrances, to the Police Chief. If the vehicle is to be
disposed of to a motor vehicle salvage dealer or other facility as provided in
§
95.03, the Police Chief shall execute, in triplicate, an affidavit, as
prescribed by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, describing the motor vehicle and
the manner in which it was disposed, and that all requirements of R.C. §
4513.61 have been complied with. The Police Chief shall retain the original of
the affidavit for his or her records, and shall furnish two copies to the motor
vehicle salvage dealer or other facility. Upon presentation of a copy of the
affidavit by the motor vehicle salvage dealer, the Clerk of Courts, within 30
days of the presentation, will issue to such owner a salvage certificate of
title, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances.
   (D)   Whenever a motor vehicle salvage dealer or other facility receives
such an affidavit for the disposal of a motor vehicle as provided in this
section, the dealer or facility is not required to obtain a state certificate
of title to the motor vehicle in the dealer’s or facility’s own name if the
vehicle is dismantled or destroyed and both copies of the affidavit are
delivered to the Clerk of Courts.
(Prior Code, § 95.02) (Ord. 2007-60, passed --)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see R.C.§ 4513.61
§ 95.03 DISPOSITION OF VEHICLE ORDERED INTO STORAGE.
   Unclaimed motor vehicles ordered into storage pursuant to §§
95.01(A)(1) or
95.02 shall be disposed of at the order of the Police Chief to a motor vehicle
salvage dealer or scrap metal processing facility, as defined in R.C. §
4737.05, or to any other facility owned by or under contract with the
municipality for the disposal of such motor vehicles, or shall be sold by the
Police Chief or licensed auctioneer at public auction after giving public
notice by advertisement, published once a week for two successive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in the county. Any monies accruing from the
disposition of an unclaimed motor vehicle that are in excess of the expenses
resulting from the removal and storage of the vehicle shall be credited to the
General Fund of the municipality.
(Prior Code, § 95.03) (Ord. 2007-60, passed - -)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see R.C. § 4513.62
§ 95.04 DISPOSITION OF ABANDONED JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   ABANDONED JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE means any motor vehicle meeting any of
the following requirements.
      (1)   The vehicle is left on private property for 48 hours or longer
without the permission of the person having the right to the possession of the
property, on a public street or other property open to the public for purposes
of vehicular travel or parking, or upon or within the right-of-way of any road
or highway for 48 hours or longer.
      (2)   The vehicle is three years old or older.
      (3)   The vehicle is extensively damaged, such damage including, but not
limited to, any of the following: missing wheels, tires, motor or transmission.
      (4)   The vehicle is apparently inoperable.
      (5)   The vehicle has a fair market value of $1,500 or less.
      (6)   The vehicle is not currently and properly licensed.
   (B)   The Police Chief shall order any abandoned junk motor vehicle to be
photographed by a law enforcement officer. The officer shall record the make of
motor vehicle, the serial number when available, and shall also detail the
damage or missing equipment to substantiate the value of $1,500 or less. The
Police Chief may, thereupon, immediately dispose of the abandoned junk motor
vehicle to a motor vehicle salvage dealer as defined in R.C. § 4738.01, or a
scrap metal processing facility, as defined in R.C. § 4737.05, which is under
contract to the municipality, or to any other facility owned by or under
contract with the municipality for the destruction of such motor vehicles, or
order vehicle impounded and stored at the owner’s expense. The records and
photographs relating to the abandoned junk motor vehicle shall be retained by
the law enforcement agency ordering the disposition of such vehicle for a
period of at least two years. If the vehicle is not claimed by the owner, and,
at the request of the facility where the vehicle is stored, the law enforcement
agency shall execute, in quadruplicate, an affidavit, as prescribed by the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles, describing the motor vehicle and the manner in
which it was disposed of, and that all requirements of R.C. § 4513.63 have been
complied with, and, within 30 days of disposing of the vehicle, shall sign and
file the affidavit with the Clerk of Courts of the county in which the motor
vehicle was abandoned. The Clerk of Courts retains the original of the
affidavit for the Clerk’s files, furnishes one copy thereof to the Registrar,
one copy to the motor vehicle salvage dealer or other facility handling the
disposal of the vehicle, and one copy to the law enforcement agency ordering
the disposal, who shall file such copy with the records and photograph relating
to the disposal. Any monies arising from the disposal of an abandoned junk
motor vehicle shall be deposited in the General Fund of the municipality.
   (C)   Notwithstanding §
95.02, any motor vehicle meeting the requirements of divisions (A)(2), (A)(3)
and (A)(5) above which has remained unclaimed by the owner or lien holder for a
period of ten days or longer following notification, as provided in §
95.02, may be disposed of as provided in this section.
(Prior Code, § 95.04) (Ord. 2007-60, passed - -)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see R.C. § 4513.63
§ 95.05 ABANDONMENT OF JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall willfully leave an abandoned junk motor vehicle,
as defined in §
95.04, on private property for more than 72 hours without the permission of the
person having the right to the possession of the property, or on a public
street or other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking, or upon or within the right-of-way of any road or highway for 48 hours
or longer without notification to the Police Chief of the reason for leaving
the motor vehicle in such place.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, the fact that a motor vehicle has
been so left without permission or notification is prima facie evidence of
abandonment.
      (3)   Nothing contained in §§
95.01,
95.02 and
95.04 and R.C. §§ 4513.60, 4513.61 and 4513.63 shall invalidate or prevent the
enactment of further provisions of municipal ordinances regulating or
prohibiting the abandonment of motor vehicles on streets, highways, public
property or private property within the municipality.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and
shall also be assessed any costs incurred by the municipality in disposing of
the abandoned junk motor vehicle that is the basis of the violation, less any
money accruing to the municipality from the disposal of the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 95.05) (Ord. 2007-60, passed - - ) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.06 JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE; ORDER TO COVER OR REMOVE; NOTICE; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   For purposes of this section, JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE means any motor
vehicle meeting the requirements of §
95.04(A)(2), through (A)(5) that is left uncovered in the open on private
property for more than 72 hours with the permission of the person having the
right to possession of the property, except if the person is operating a junk
yard or scrap metal processing facility licensed under the authority of R.C. §§
4737.05 through 4737.12, or otherwise regulated under authority of a political
subdivision; or if the property on which the motor vehicle is left is not
subject to licensure or regulation by any governmental authority, unless the
person having the right to the possession of the property can establish that
the motor vehicle is part of a bona fide commercial operation; or if the motor
vehicle is a collector’s vehicle.
      (2)   The municipality shall not prevent a person from storing or
keeping, or restrict him or her in the method of storing or keeping, any
collector’s vehicle on private property with the permission of the person
having the right to the possession of the property, except that the
municipality may require a person having such permission to conceal, by means
of buildings, fences, vegetation, terrain or other suitable obstruction, an
unlicensed collector’s vehicle stored in the open.
      (3)   The Police Chief, the Legislative Authority or the Zoning Authority
may send notice, by certified mail with return receipt requested, to the person
having the right to the possession of the property on which a junk motor
vehicle is left, that within ten days of receipt of the notice, the junk motor
vehicle either shall be covered by being housed in a garage or other suitable
structure, or shall be removed from the property.
      (4)   No person shall willfully leave a junk motor vehicle uncovered in
the open for more than ten days after receipt of a notice as provided in this
section. The fact that a junk motor vehicle is so left is prima facie evidence
of willful failure to comply with the notice, and each subsequent period of 30
days that a junk motor vehicle continues to be so left constitutes a separate
offense.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense.
      (2)   If the offender previously has been convicted of, or pleaded guilty
to, one violation of this section, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (3)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to two or more violations of this section, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(Prior Code, § 95.06) (Ord. 2007-60, passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see R.C. § 4513.65
§ 95.07 TOW OPERATOR; SERVICE FEE.
   When a vehicle ordered for impoundment under the provisions of this chapter
remains in the possession of the selected tow operator for a period in excess
of 30 days, said tow operator may request payment of a service fee from the
village. Said request must be submitted in writing in a form approved by the
Police Chief and cannot exceed $50.
(Prior Code, § 95.07) (Ord. 2007-60, passed - -)
§ 95.08 POLICE DEPARTMENT WRECKER AND TOWING RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Every person, firm, corporation, limited liability company, limited
partnership, general partnership, sole proprietor registered with the Chief of
Police, as part of the village police wrecker rotation system will be governed
by the following rules and regulations. Such entities shall herein be referred
to as TOWING SERVICE throughout this section. Corporations, limited liability
companies, limited partnerships and general partnerships must identify itself
as one of these entity forms and identify a person who the village can contact
and provide that such person is authorized to act upon behalf of the
corporation, limited liability company, limited partnership or general
partnership.
   (B)   Every towing service that is a part of the village police tow rotation
will submit to the Chief of Police the following information within 30 days of
the receipt of this policy:
      (1)   Name of corporation or sole proprietorship owner;
      (2)   Name of insurance carrier (workers’ compensation, auto liability
and professional liability), including amounts of coverage and any limitations
of coverage. Towing service must provide proof of insurance coverage at least
annually;
      (3)   PUCO and USDOT license number; and
      (4)   Business address.
   (C)   Towing services that are a part of the village police tow rotation
will submit the following information:
      (1)   Copy of liability insurance declaration, workers’ compensation,
professional liability insurance, automobile liability insurance and insurance
covering lost or stole personal property; and
      (2)   Name, address and driver’s license number of all employees.
   (D)   A separate owner shall operate each towing service on the rotation
list. Owner(s) may possess more than one towing service, but only one service
per owner will be permitted on the rotation list.
   (E)   All registered towing services must provide services 24 hours a day,
seven days a week, including weekends and holidays. The towing service will
provide the Police Chief with one telephone number in which to notify the
company that a wrecker is needed. A knowledgeable and courteous employee that
has the authority and capability to notify a wrecker operator must answer the
telephone 24 hours a day. In the event a towing service will be unavailable for
any period of time, it is the towing service’s responsibility to notify the
County Communications Center at (513) 732-2231.
   (F)   All towing services shall maintain current, professional vehicles that
are properly registered in the state of their primary business location.
      (1)   Vehicles will be clearly marked with the company name, telephone
number, PUCO identification number and United States Department of
Transportation Identification Number.
      (2)   Vehicles will have all necessary safety equipment including mounted
overhead emergency lighting, amber in color, which contains an oscillating or
flashing light visible in all directions.
   (G)   Towing services will charge a reasonable rate to the owner/operator of
the vehicle being services or towed. Rates will be established by the
individual towing services but must be fair and comparable to other towing
services in the Clermont/Hamilton County area. Towing services will establish
their rate based solely on the services provided and will not adjust their rate
based on any factor not related to the work performed, such as reason for
arrest, and the like.
   (H)   All owners, operators, assignees and other employees of any rotation
towing service will treat the public, dispatchers and police officers with
respect and courtesy and act in a professional manner at all times.
      (1)   All employees called to the scene of a tow request will present a
professional appearance and will be dressed in a professional manner
appropriate for the occupation and industry standard.
      (2)   Because of the risk of fire or combustion, no employee of the
towing service while outside of the tow truck, shall use any tobacco products
or any form of matches or other combustible materials.
   (I)   When called by the County Communications Center to respond to a tow
request by the village police, the tow company will respond immediately or
notify the dispatcher that they are either unable to respond or the amount of
time required to respond.
      (1)   The police officer requesting the towing service has the option of
bypassing the towing service and request the next towing service on the
rotation list if the ETA is 30 minutes or longer.
      (2)   In the event a towing service establishes a record of taking longer
than promised on the telephone, the Police Chief will conduct an investigation.
For purposes of this section, a RECORD means four or more incidents.
      (3)   The towing service is responsible for determining from the
dispatcher exactly what service is needed and what equipment should be
dispatched.
      (4)   Only towing service vehicles that display the name of the company
requested can respond to wrecker requests. No subcontracting or co-assigning of
towing service calls shall be allowed.
      (5)   Towing service companies or operators will not respond to accident/
arrest scenes without first being contacted by the County Communications
Center.
      (6)   If the need for an additional wrecker arises for a single vehicle
(e.g., a truck), the towing service on the scene may request another wrecker
from their fleet to respond to the scene to assist. If none are available, a
second wrecker from the rotation will be dispatched.
      (7)   No towing service operator will move any vehicles until an NRPD tow
sheet is provided to him or her. The operator will review the tow sheet and
discuss any questions or discrepancies with the police officer requesting the
tow prior to moving the vehicle.
      (8)   Once the vehicle is released to the towing service employee, it
becomes the responsibility of the towing service. Any damage or claims are the
sole responsibility of the towing service.
   (J)   In the event of a traffic crash or disabled vehicle, the officer on
the scene shall ask the owner/operator of the vehicle if he or she has a
preference as to who tows the vehicle. If the owner/operator specifically
identifies a tow company and that tow company can be reasonably contacted by
either the police officer on the scene or the owner/operator of the vehicle,
then private arrangements can be made. This is considered an OWNER’S REQUEST,
and is exempted from the tow rotation.
      (1)   No vehicle will be towed outside of the tow rotation in the event
of an arrest, abandoned vehicle, search warrant or other enforcement actions.
      (2)   No tow sheet is required for owner request tows.
      (3)   In the event the owner/operator does not identify a tow company he
or she wishes to be called, but the officer feels it could still be an owner’s
request tow, then the County Communications Center will be contacted and the
next available rotation wrecker will be dispatched.
      (4)   Officers may assist owners/operators in notifying a motor club such
as AAA, but only under circumstances in which an owner’s request tow is
allowed. At no time will an officer contact an AAA authorized tow company
without going through the AAA dispatcher.
   (K)   If required by the state statutes, towing service companies will
provide secure storage of all vehicles towed or impounded by the Police
Department.
      (1)   In the event the Police Department needs secure, indoor storage for
evidence collection, the police officer requesting the tow will notify the
police dispatcher, who will, in turn, notify the towing service. If the towing
service is unable to provide indoor storage, the next available rotation
wrecker will be contacted.
      (2)   The Police Department has the option to have vehicles towed to a
separate impound facility or location that is not owned by a towing service. In
the rare case when a vehicle is towed to a different impound lot or location;
the Police Department is responsible for making sure all tow charges are paid
prior to the vehicle being released.
      (3)   Towing service companies will maintain hours of operation that are
reasonable to allow the release of vehicles impounded.
      (4)   Towing service companies will require a government issued photo ID
and proof of ownership (title, registration and the like) prior to releasing
any vehicles.
      (5)   It is solely the discretion of the towing service company whether
they allow any personal property to be removed from a towed vehicle once the
towing service assumes custody of the vehicle.
   (L)   The Police Department has the option to bypass the tow rotation list
in the following circumstances:
      (1)   When requesting towing service for village owned vehicles or
equipment;
      (2)   During a legitimate and unforeseen emergency situation; and
      (3)   During events when a large number of tow trucks are requested.
   (M)   (1)   Towing service employees will be responsible for clearing any
debris from the roadway after a traffic crash.
      (2)   In the event of a multi-vehicle traffic crash that is blocking
traffic, the police officer on the scene may request the first tow truck that
arrives on the scene to move all vehicles from the roadway prior to towing any
vehicles away from the scene.
      (3)   Towing service employees will strive to obey all traffic laws and
regulations when responding to service calls by the Police Department.
      (4)   Any towing service owner or employee that has a dispute with the
Police Department is responsible for notifying the Chief of Police immediately.
   (N)   Allegations of misconduct.
      (1)   Any allegation of misconduct, unbusinesslike actions by employees
or violations of the Village Police Department wrecker and towing rules and
regulations will be investigated immediately by the Chief of Police.
      (2)   The owner of any towing service investigated will be notified
either in person or in writing that his or her firm is under investigation.
      (3)   A hearing will be scheduled within 15 days of said notice. During
the hearing, any evidence or claims by the Police Department will be presented,
and the towing service will have the opportunity to present evidence or
information on his, her or its behalf.
      (4)   The Chief of Police will preside over the hearing and will make a
decision within five business days of the hearing. The Chief will provide his
or her decision in writing to the towing service company.
      (5)   In the event the allegations of misconduct are serious, the Police
Chief has the option to suspend the towing service company from the tow
rotation, pending the outcome of the investigation and/or hearing.
      (6)   The towing service has the right to appeal the decision of the
Police Chief within five days of the receipt of his or her decision. The
Village Council will hear the appeal during the next regularly scheduled
Council meeting. The decision of the Village Council is final.
   (O)   Nothing in this policy is meant to imply that a contract exists
between the Village Police Department, the village or any towing service
company.
(Prior Code, § 95.08) (Ord. 2007-36, passed 7-24-2007) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 96: WATERCRAFT
Section
   
96.01   Definitions; applicability
   
96.02   Failure to comply with law enforcement order; fleeing
   
96.03   Duty upon approach of law enforcement vessel
   
96.04   Flashing lights prohibited; exceptions
   
96.05   Siren prohibited; exceptions
   
96.06   Regulations for operation of powercraft of more than ten horsepower
   
96.07   Restrictions on child operators; duty of supervisory adult
   
96.08   Reckless operation; maintaining sufficient control; wakes restricted
   
96.09   Unsafe conditions
   
96.10   Marking of bathing and vessel areas
   
96.11   Mooring prohibited in certain areas
   
96.12   Operating under influence of alcohol or drugs prohibited
   
96.13   Implied consent
   
96.14   Incapacitated operators prohibited
   
96.15   Water skiing confined to ski zones
   
96.16   Observer required when towing skier
   
96.17   Water skiing after dark prohibited
   
96.18   Personal flotation device required for towed person
   
96.19   Ski jumps prohibited
   
96.20   Permit for special water events
   
96.21   Sale of single celled inflatable vessels prohibited
   
96.22   Sitting, standing, walking on moving vessels restricted
   
96.23   Engine warm-up required
   
96.24   Personal flotation devices for children under ten
   
96.25   Operation without personal flotation devices prohibited
   
96.26   Distress signal or flag required
   
96.27   Anchor requirements
   
96.28   Specification for fire extinguishers
   
96.29   Backfire flame control device required
   
96.30   Ventilation requirement on powercraft
   
96.31   Abandonment of junk vessels or outboard motors
   
96.32   Exhaust muffler required; noise levels; exceptions
   
96.33   Safety equipment on rental vessels
   
96.34   Capacity plate
   
96.35   Littering prohibited
   
96.36   Dwellings; sanitary systems
   
96.37   Prima facie evidence of negligence
   
96.38   Requirements for operating personal watercraft
   
96.39   Numbering
   
96.40   Registration
   
96.41   Tags indicating expiration date; attachment of identification number
   
96.42   Altering of serial numbers; false information prohibited
   
96.43   Accident reports
   
96.44   Enforcement
   
96.45   Firearms offenses; signaling devices
   
96.46   Tampering with navigation aid or vessel prohibited
   
96.47   Certificate of title; exceptions
   
96.48   Manufacturer’s or importer’s certificate
   
96.49   Prohibitions relating to certificates of title
   
96.50   Permanently displayed hull identification number
 
   
96.99   Penalty
§ 96.01 DEFINITIONS; APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CANOE. A paddlecraft that is normally an open, narrow vessel of shallow
draft, typically pointed at both ends and propelled by its occupants through
the use of paddles while kneeling or sitting on a raised seat, including a
flat-backed canoe and a racing canoe.
      COAST GUARD APPROVED. Bearing an approval number assigned by the United
States Coast Guard.
      CONDITIONAL APPROVAL. A personal flotation device approval that has one
or more conditions with which the user must comply in order for the device to
be considered appropriate for meeting the requirements for personal flotation
devices for the vessel on which it is being used.
      DIVER’S FLAG. A red flag not less than one foot square having a diagonal
white stripe extending from the masthead to the opposite lower corner that when
displayed indicates that divers are in the water.
      DRUG OF ABUSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4506.01.
      ELECTRONIC. Includes electrical, digital, magnetic, optical,
electromagnetic, or any other form of technology that entails capabilities
similar to these technologies.
      ELECTRONIC RECORD. A record generated, communicated, received, or stored
by electronic means for use in an information system or for transmission from
one information system to another.
      ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE. A signature in electronic form attached to or
logically associated with an electronic record.
      IDLE SPEED. The slowest possible speed needed to maintain steerage or
maneuverability.
      IMPOUNDMENT. The reservoir created by a dam or other artificial barrier
across a watercourse that causes water to be stored deeper than and generally
beyond the banks of the natural channel of the watercourse during periods of
normal flow, but does not include water stored behind rock piles, rock riffle
dams, and low channel dams where the depth of water is less than ten feet above
the channel bottom and is essentially confined within the banks of the natural
channel during periods of normal stream flow.
      INFLATABLE WATERCRAFT. Any vessel constructed of rubber, canvas, or other
material that is designed to be inflated with any gaseous substance,
constructed with two or more air cells, and operated as a vessel. An inflatable
watercraft propelled by a motor is a powercraft. An inflatable watercraft
propelled by a sail is a sailboat. An inflatable watercraft propelled by human
muscular effort utilizing a paddle or pole is a paddlecraft. An inflatable
watercraft propelled by human muscular effort utilizing an oar with the aid of
a fulcrum provided by oarlocks, tholepins, crutches, or similar arrangements is
a rowboat.
      IN OPERATION. In reference to a vessel means that the vessel is being
navigated or otherwise used on the waters in this state.
      KAYAK. A paddlecraft that is typically pointed at both ends and is
propelled by human muscular effort by one or more seated individuals who use a
double-bladed paddle, including an open kayak with an open deck for operator
seating, an enclosed kayak designed to enclose an occupant within a cockpit, a
tandem kayak designed for multiple occupants, and a racing kayak.
      LAW ENFORCEMENT VESSEL. Any vessel used in law enforcement or under the
command of a law enforcement officer.
      MUFFLER. An acoustical suppression device or system that is designed and
installed to abate the sound of exhaust gases emitted from an internal
combustion engine and that prevents excessive or unusual noise.
      NAVIGABLE WATERS. Waters that come under the jurisdiction of the
Department of the Army of the United States and any waterways within or
adjacent to this state, except inland lakes having neither a navigable inlet
nor outlet.
      NO WAKE. Has the same meaning as “idle speed”.
      OPERATOR. Includes any person who uses, navigates, employs, or has under
the person’s control a vessel, or vessel and detachable motor, on the waters in
this state.
      OWNER. Includes any person, other than a secured party, who claims lawful
possession of a vessel by virtue of legal title or equitable interest therein
that entitled the person to use or possess the vessel, including a person
entitled to use or possess a vessel subject to a security interest in another
person, but does not include a lessee under a lease not intended as a security.
      PADDLECRAFT. Any type of canoe, kayak, paddleboard, or other vessel
powered only by its occupants using a single or double-bladed paddle as a lever
without the aid of a fulcrum provided by oarlocks, tholepins, crutches, or
similar mechanisms.
      PERFORMANCE TYPE. The in-water performance classification of a personal
flotation device as determined by the United States Coast Guard.
      PERSON. Includes any legal entity defined as a person in R.C. § 1.59 and
any body politic, except the United States and this state, and includes any
agent, trustee, executor, receiver, assignee, or other representative thereof.
      PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE. A United States Coast Guard approved personal
safety device de-signed to provide buoyancy to support a person in the water.
      PERSONAL WATERCRAFT. A vessel, less than 16 feet in length, that is
propelled by a water-jet pump or other machinery and designed to be operated by
an individual sitting, standing, or kneeling on the vessel rather than by an
individual sitting or standing inside the vessel.
      POWERCRAFT. Any vessel propelled by machinery, fuel, rockets, or similar
device.
      ROWBOAT. An open vessel, other than a paddlecraft, that is designed to be
rowed and that is propelled by human muscular effort by oars and upon which no
mechanical propulsion device, electric motor, internal combustion engine, or
sail has been affixed or is used for the operation of the vessel. The term
includes a racing shell and a rowing skull regardless of length or
construction.
      RULES. Rules adopted by the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft
under R.C. Chapter 1547, unless the context indicates otherwise.
      SAILBOAT. Any vessel, equipped with mast and sails, dependent upon the
wind to propel it in the normal course of operation. A vessel with sail as its
primary method of propulsion and mechanical propulsion as its secondary method
of propulsion is an auxiliary sail. Any sailboat being propelled by mechanical
power, whether under sail or not, is deemed a powercraft and subject to all
laws and rules governing powercraft operation.
      SEWAGE. Human body wastes and the wastes from toilets and other
receptacles intended to receive or retain body waste.
      THROWABLE PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE. A device that is intended to be
thrown to a person in the water. The phrase includes a personal flotation
device marked as “Type IV” or “Type V with Type IV performance”. The phrase
does not include a wearable personal flotation device unless it is specifically
marked otherwise.
      TOWED WATERSPORT. Any activity that involves being towed by or riding in
the wake of a recreational vessel, including both of the following:
         (a)   Riding or attempting to ride on one or more water skis, a
wakeboard, a surfboard, an inflatable device, or any other device manufactured
or used for the purpose of being towed by a recreational vessel;
         (b)   Engaging or attempting to engage in barefoot skiing or
parasailing.
      TYPE ONE PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE. A device that is designed to turn an
unconscious person floating in water from a face downward position to a
vertical or slightly face upward position and that has at least nine kilograms,
approximately 20 pounds, of buoyancy.
      TYPE TWO PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE. A device that is designed to turn an
unconscious person in the water from a face downward position to a vertical or
slightly face upward position and that has at least seven kilograms,
approximately 15.4 pounds, of buoyancy.
      TYPE THREE PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE. A device that is designed to keep a
conscious person in a vertical or slightly face upward position and that has at
least seven kilograms, approximately 15.4 pounds, of buoyancy.
      TYPE FOUR PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE. A device that is designed to be
thrown to a person in the water and not worn and that has at least 7.5
kilograms, approximately 16.5 pounds, of buoyancy.
      TYPE FIVE PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE. A device that, unlike other personal
flotation devices, has limitations on its approval by the United States Coast
Guard, including, without limitation, any of the following:
         (a)   A designation that states the device is approved only for use
while participating in specific activities;
         (b)   A designation that states the device is approved only for use by
an operator or passenger of specific types of vessels;
         (c)   A designation that states the device is specifically approved as
a substitute for the type of personal flotation device required for use while
engaged in certain activities or as an operator or passenger of a vessel.
      VESSEL. Includes every description of craft, including nondisplacement
craft, multimodal craft, and submersibles, being used or capable of being used
as a means of transportation on water.
      VISIBLE. Means visible on a dark night with clear atmosphere.
      WATERCOURSE. A substantially natural channel with recognized banks and
bottom in which a flow of water occurs, with an average of at least ten feet
mean surface water width and at least five miles of length.
      WATERCRAFT.
         (a)   Any of the following when used or capable of being used for
transportation on the water:
            1.   A vessel operated by machinery either permanently or
temporarily affixed;
            2.   A sailboat other than a sailboard;
            3.   An inflatable, manually propelled vessel that is required by
federal law to have a hull identification number meeting the requirements of
the United States Coast Guard;
            4.   A canoe, kayak, pedalboat, or rowboat;
            5.   Any of the following multimodal craft being operated on waters
in this state:
               a.   An amphibious vehicle;
               b.   A submersible;
               c.   An airboat or hovercraft.
            6.   A vessel that has been issued a certificate of documentation
with a recreational endorsement under 46 C.F.R. 67.
         (b)   The term does not include ferries as referred to in R.C. Chapter
4583.
         (c)   Watercraft subject to R.C. § 1547.54 are divided into five
classes as follows:
            1.   Class A: less than 16 feet in length;
            2.   Class 1: at least 16 feet, but less than 26 feet in length;
            3.   Class 2: At least 26 feet, but less than 40 feet in length;
            4.   Class 3: At least 40 feet, but less than 65 feet in length;
            5.   Class 4: At least 65 feet in length.
      WATERCRAFT DEALER. Any person who is regularly engaged in the business of
manufacturing, selling, displaying, offering for sale, or dealing in vessels at
an established place of business that is used primarily for the selling,
displaying, offering for sale, or dealing of vessels. The phrase does not
include a person who is a marine salvage dealer or any other person who
dismantles, salvages, or rebuilds vessels using used parts.
      WATERS IN THIS STATE. All streams, rivers, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, and other bodies of water, natural or human-made, that
are situated wholly or partially within this state or within its jurisdiction
and are used for recreational boating.
      WEARABLE PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE. A device that is intended to be worn
or otherwise attached to a person’s body. The phrase includes a personal
flotation device marked as “Type I”, “Type II”, “Type III”, “Type V with Type
II performance”, or “Type V with Type III performance”.
(R.C. § 1546.01)
   (B)   Unless otherwise provided, this chapter applies to all vessels
operating on the waters in this municipality. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed in contravention of any valid federal or state act or regulation, but
is in addition to the act or regulation where not inconsistent.
(R.C. § 1547.02)
§ 96.02 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH LAW ENFORCEMENT ORDER; FLEEING.
   (A)   No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of
any law enforcement officer having authority to direct, control, or regulate
the operation or use of vessels.
   (B)   No person shall operate any vessel so as to purposely elude or flee
from a law enforcement officer after receiving a visible or audible signal from
a law enforcement officer to bring the vessel to a stop.
   (C)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.13)
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(B))
§ 96.03 DUTY UPON APPROACH OF LAW ENFORCEMENT VESSEL.
   (A)   Upon the approach of a law enforcement vessel with at least one
flashing, rotating, or oscillating light of a color conforming with the
requirements of federal law, the operator of any vessel shall stop if followed
or give way in any crossing, head-on, or overtaking situation and shall remain
in that position until the law enforcement vessel has passed, except when
otherwise directed by a law enforcement officer. If traffic conditions warrant,
a siren or other sound producing device also may be operated as an additional
signaling device. This section does not relieve the operator of any law
enforcement vessel from the duty to operate with due regard for the safety of
all persons and property on the waters in this state.
   (B)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.131)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(F))
§ 96.04 FLASHING LIGHTS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall install or use any intermittently flashing light of
any type or color on any vessel in use or operation on the waters in this
municipality, except in accordance with Federal law.
   (B)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.03) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.05 SIREN PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person, except an authorized watercraft representative of the
federal government, the state, or any of its political subdivisions shall use
or operate a siren on the waters in this municipality except for emergency
purposes.
   (B)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.04) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.06 REGULATIONS FOR OPERATION AND RENTAL OF POWERCRAFT OF MORE THAN TEN
HORSEPOWER.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2) of this section, no person
born on or after January 1, 1982, shall operate on the waters in this
municipality a powercraft powered by more than ten horsepower, unless the
operator successfully has completed either a safe boater course approved by the
National Association of State Boating Law Administrators or a proctored or
nonproctored proficiency examination that tests knowledge of information
included in the curriculum of such a course, and has received a certificate as
evidence of successful completion of the course or examination.
      (2)   Division (A)(1) of this section does not apply to an individual who
possesses valid merchant mariner credentials issued by the United States Coast
Guard in accordance with 46 C.F.R. 10.109 with at least one endorsement of
master or operator as defined in 46 C.F.R. § 10.107. Such an individual, while
operating any recreational vessel on the waters in this municipality, shall
carry onboard documentation of the merchant mariner credentials and required
endorsements and shall present the documentation to a natural resources officer
or law enforcement officer upon request.
      (3)   No person shall permit a powercraft to be operated in this
municipality in violation of division (A)(1) of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.05)
   (B)   A person born on or after January 1, 1982, who is operating on the
waters in this municipality a powercraft powered by more than ten horsepower
and who is stopped by a law enforcement officer in the enforcement of R.C.
Chapter 1547 or rules shall present to the law enforcement officer, not later
than 72 hours after being stopped, a certificate obtained by the person
pursuant to division (A) of this section prior to being stopped or proof of
holding such a certificate. Failure of the person to present the certificate or
proof of holding it within 72 hours constitutes prima facie evidence of a
violation of division (A) of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.051)
   (C)   No rental business shall lease, hire, or rent a powercraft powered by
more than ten horsepower for operation on the waters in this municipality to a
person born on or after January 1, 1982, unless the person meets one of the
following requirements:
      (1)   The person signs a statement on the rental agreement or attached to
the rental agreement that the person has successfully completed a safe boater
course approved by the National Association of State Boating Law Administrators
or has successfully completed a proficiency examination as provided in division
(A) of this section.
      (2)   The person receives educational materials from the rental business
and successfully passes, with a score of 90% or better, an abbreviated
examination given by the rental business. The achievement of a passing score on
the examination shall be indicated on or attached to the powercraft rental
agreement.
   (D)   Any person born on or after January 1, 1982, operating or supervising
the operation of a leased, hired, or rented powercraft shall:
      (1)   Meet the requirements for boater education of division (C) of this
section.
      (2)   Be named as an operator on the agreement that leases, hires, or
rents the powercraft.
   (E)   The Division of Parks and Watercraft shall make available to all
watercraft rental businesses in the state boater safety educational materials
and an abbreviated examination that shall be used by the watercraft rental
business for the purposes of division (C)(2) of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.052)
   (F)   Whoever violates division (A) or (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the violation is not related to a
collision, injury to a person, or damage to property and a misdemeanor of the
third degree if the violation is related to a collision, injury to a person, or
damage to property.
(R.C. § 1547.99(K)) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.07 RESTRICTIONS ON CHILD OPERATORS; DUTY OF SUPERVISORY ADULT.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, no person under 16
years of age shall operate a personal watercraft on the waters in this
municipality. A person who is not less than 12 nor more than 15 years of age
may operate a personal watercraft if a supervising person 18 years of age or
older is aboard the personal watercraft and, in the case of a supervising
person born on or after January 1, 1982, if the supervising person holds a
certificate obtained under §
96.06(A) or, in the case of a rented powercraft, meets the requirements of §
96.06(C) and (D).
   (B)   No person under 12 years of age shall operate any vessel on the waters
in this municipality unless the person is under the direct visual and audible
supervision, during the operation, of a person who is 18 years of age or older.
This division does not apply to a personal watercraft, which shall be governed
by division (A) of this section, or to a powercraft, other than a personal
watercraft, powered by more than ten horsepower, which shall be governed by
division (C) of this section.
   (C)   No person under 12 years of age shall operate on the waters in this
municipality a powercraft, other than a personal watercraft, powered by more
than ten horsepower unless the person is under the direct visual and audible
supervision, during the operation, of a person 18 years of age or older who is
aboard the powercraft and, in the case of such a supervising person born on or
after January 1, 1982, who holds a certificate obtained under §
96.06(A) or, in the case of a rented powercraft, meets the requirements of §
96.06(C) and (D).
   (D)   No supervising person 18 years of age or older shall permit any person
who is under the supervising person’s supervision and who is operating a vessel
on the waters in this municipality to violate any section of this chapter, R.C.
Chapter 1547 or a rule.
(R.C. § 1547.06) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.08 RECKLESS OPERATION; MAINTAINING SUFFICIENT CONTROL; WAKES RESTRICTED.
   (A)   Reckless operation.
      (1)   Any person who operates any vessel or manipulates any water skis,
aquaplane, or similar device on the waters in this municipality carelessly or
heedlessly, or in disregard of the rights or safety of any person, vessel, or
property, or without due caution, at a rate of speed or in a manner so as to
endanger any person, vessel, or property is guilty of reckless operation of the
vessel or other device.
      (2)   No person shall operate or permit the operation of a vessel in an
unsafe manner. A vessel shall be operated in a reasonable and prudent manner at
all times. Unsafe vessel operation includes, without limitation, any of the
following:
         (a)   A vessel becoming airborne or completely leaving the water while
crossing the wake of another vessel at a distance of less than 100 feet, or at
an unsafe distance, from the vessel creating the wake;
         (b)   Operating at such a speed and proximity to another vessel or to
a person attempting to ride on one or more water skis, surfboard, inflatable
device, or similar device being towed by a vessel so as to require the operator
of either vessel to swerve or turn abruptly to avoid collision;
         (c)   Operating less than 200 feet directly behind a person water
skiing or attempting to water ski;
         (d)   Weaving through congested traffic.
(R.C. § 1547.07)
   (B)   Maintaining sufficient control. No person shall operate or permit the
operation of a vessel on the waters in this municipality without maintaining
sufficient control to avoid an incident that results in property damage,
physical injury, loss of life, or any combination of them.
(R.C. § 1547.072)
   (C)   Wakes restricted.
      (1)   As used in this division (C), PUBLIC SERVICE means activities that
include but are not limited to escorting or patrolling special water events,
traffic control, salvage, firefighting, medical assistance, assisting disabled
vessels, and search and rescue.
      (2)   No person shall operate a vessel at a speed that creates a wake
within 100 feet of a stationary law enforcement vessel displaying at least one
flashing, oscillating, or rotating light conforming with 33 C.F.R. § 88.11.
      (3)   No person shall operate a vessel at a speed that creates a wake
within 100 feet of a vessel that is being used to provide public service and
that displays at least one flashing, oscillating, or rotating light conforming
with 33 C.F.R. § 88.12.
      (4)   No person shall permit any vessel to be operated on the waters in
this municipality in violation of this division (C).
(R.C. § 1547.132)
   (D)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates divisions (A) or (C) of this section without
causing injury to persons or damage to property is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(D))
      (2)   Whoever violates divisions (A) or (C) of this section causing
injury to persons or damage to property is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(E))
      (3)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section shall be subject to
the penalty provided in §
96.99.
§ 96.09 UNSAFE CONDITIONS.
   (A)   If a law enforcement officer observes a vessel being used and
determines that at least one of the unsafe conditions identified in division
(C) of this section is present and that an especially hazardous condition
exists, the officer may direct the operator of the vessel to take whatever
immediate and reasonable actions are necessary for the safety of the persons
aboard the vessel, including directing the operator to return the vessel to
mooring and remain there until the situation creating the hazardous condition
is corrected or has ended. For the purposes of this section, an especially
hazardous condition is one in which a reasonably prudent person would believe
that the continued operation of a vessel would create a special hazard to the
safety of the persons aboard the vessel.
   (B)   The refusal by an operator of a vessel to terminate use of the vessel
after being ordered to do so by a law enforcement officer under division (A) of
this section is prima facie evidence of a violation of §
96.08.
   (C)   For the purposes of this section, any of the following is an unsafe
condition:
      (1)   Insufficient personal flotation devices;
      (2)   Insufficient fire extinguishers;
      (3)   Overloaded, insufficient freeboard for the water conditions in
which the vessel is operating;
      (4)   Improper display of navigation lights;
      (5)   Fuel leaks, including fuel leaking from either the engine or the
fuel system;
      (6)   Accumulation of or an abnormal amount of fuel in the bilges;
      (7)   Inadequate backfire flame control;
      (8)   Improper ventilation.
   (D)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   Foreign vessels temporarily using waters that are subject to the
jurisdiction of the United States;
      (2)   Military vessels, vessels owned by the state or a political
subdivision, or other public vessels, except those that are used for
recreation;
      (3)   A ship’s lifeboats, as defined in R.C. § 1548.01;
      (4)   Vessels that are solely commercial and that are carrying more than
six passengers for hire.
(R.C. § 1547.071)
§ 96.10 MARKING OF BATHING AND VESSEL AREAS.
   (A)   No person shall operate a vessel within or through a designated
bathing area or within or through any area that has been buoyed off designating
it as an area in which vessels are prohibited.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall operate a vessel at greater than idle speed or
at a speed that creates a wake under any of the following circumstances:
         (a)   Within 300 feet of any marina, boat docking facility, boat
gasoline dock, launch ramp, recreational boat harbor, or harbor entrance on
Lake Erie or on the Ohio River;
         (b)   During the period from sunset to sunrise according to local time
within any water between the Dan Beard bridge and the Brent Spence bridge on
the Ohio River for any vessel not documented by the United States Coast Guard
as commercial;
         (c)   Within any area buoyed or marked as a no wake area on the waters
in this municipality.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply in either of the
following places:
         (a)   An area designated by the Chief of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft unless it is marked by a buoy or sign as a no wake or idle speed
area;
         (b)   Within any water between the Dan Beard bridge and the Brent
Spence bridge on the Ohio River when the United States Coast Guard has
authorized the holding of a special event of a community nature on that water.
   (C)   No person shall operate a vessel in any area of restricted or
controlled operation in violation of the designated restriction.
   (D)   No person shall operate a vessel within 300 feet of an official
diver’s flag unless the person is tendering the diving operation.
   (E)   (1)   All areas of restricted or controlled operation as described in
division (A) of this section or as provided for in §
96.15 or R.C. § 1547.16 or 1547.61 shall be marked by a buoy or sign
designating the restriction. All waters surrounded by or lying between such a
buoy or sign and the closest shoreline are thereby designated as an area in
which the designated restrictions shall apply in the operation of any vessel.
      (2)   Markings on buoys designating areas of restricted or controlled
operation shall be so spaced as to show all around the horizon. Lineal spacing
between the buoys shall be such that under normal conditions of visibility any
buoy shall be readily visible from the next adjacent buoy. No colors or
symbols, except as provided for in rules, shall be used on buoys or signs for
marking closed or controlled areas of boating waters.
      (3)   Any state department, conservancy district, or political
subdivision having jurisdiction and control of impounded boating waters may
place such buoys or signs on its waters. Any political subdivision may apply to
the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft for permission to place such
buoys or signs on other waters within its territorial limits. No person shall
place or cause to be placed a regulatory buoy or sign on, into, or along the
waters in this municipality unless the person has complied with all the
provisions of this chapter and R.C. Chapter 1547.
   (F)   No person shall enter, operate a vessel that enters, or allow a vessel
to enter a federally-declared security zone as defined in 33 C.F.R. Chapter 1,
subparts 6.01-1, 6.01-2, 6.01-3, 6.01-4, 6.01-5, 6.04-1, 6.04-5, 6.04-6, 6.04-
7, and 6.04-8.
   (G)   No person shall permit any vessel to be operated on the waters in this
municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.08)
   (H)   (1)   Whoever violates divisions (A), (B), (C), (D), (E), or (G) of
this section shall be punished as provided in §
96.99.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (F) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(B))
§ 96.11 MOORING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREAS.
   (A)   No person shall moor or anchor any vessel in a designated speed zone
or water ski zone. No person, unless in distress and no other vessel is
endangered thereby, shall moor to, anchor to, or tie up to any marker, aid,
buoy, light, or other aid to navigation.
   (B)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.09) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.12 OPERATING UNDER INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL OR DRUGS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall operate or be in physical control of any vessel
underway or shall manipulate any water skis, aquaplane, or similar device on
the waters in this municipality if, at the time of the operation, control, or
manipulation, any of the following applies:
      (1)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them.
      (2)   The person has a concentration of 0.08% or more by weight of
alcohol per unit volume in the person’s whole blood.
      (3)   The person has a concentration of 0.096% or more by weight per unit
volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or plasma.
      (4)   The person has a concentration of 0.11 grams or more by weight of
alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine.
      (5)   The person has a concentration of 0.08 grams or more by weight of
alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath.
      (6)   Except as provided in division (H) of this section, the person has
a concentration of any of the following controlled substances or metabolites of
a controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or
urine that equals or exceeds any of the following:
         (a)   The person has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s
urine of at least 500 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter
of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
         (b)   The person has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s urine
of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s urine or
has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma of at least 50 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.
         (c)   The person has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine metabolite per milliliter
of the person’s urine or has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of
cocaine metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.
         (d)   The person has a concentration of heroin in the person’s urine
of at least 2,000 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s urine or
has a concentration of heroin in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma of at least 50 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.
         (e)   The person has a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-
monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s urine of at least ten nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s urine or has
a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s whole blood
or blood serum or plasma.
         (f)   The person has a concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s urine
of at least 25 nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s urine or has
a concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma
of at least ten nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s whole blood
or blood serum or plasma.
         (g)   The person has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s
urine of at least ten nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma of at least two nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
         (h)   The State Board of Pharmacy has adopted a rule pursuant to R.C.
§ 4729.041 that specifies the amount of salvia divinorum and the amount of
salvinorin A that constitute concentrations of salvia divinorum and salvinorin
A in a person’s urine, in a person’s whole blood, or in a person’s blood serum
or plasma at or above which the person is impaired for purposes of operating or
being in physical control of any vessel underway or manipulating any water
skis, aquaplane, or similar device on the waters of this state, the rule is in
effect, and the person has a concentration of salvia divinorum or salvinorin A
of at least that amount so specified by rule in the person’s urine, in the
person’s whole blood, or in the person’s blood serum or plasma.
         (i)   Either of the following applies:
            1.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse,
or a combination of them, and, as measured by gas chromatography mass
spectrometry, the person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the
person’s urine of at least 15 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter
of the person’s urine or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least five nanograms of
marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum
or plasma.
            2.   As measured by gas chromatography mass spectrometry, the
person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person’s urine of at
least 35 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s urine
or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
         (j)   The person has a concentration of methamphetamine in the
person’s urine of at least 500 nanograms of methamphetamine per milliliter of
the person’s urine or has a concentration of methamphetamine in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of
methamphetamine per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.
         (k)   The person has a concentration of phencyclidine in the person’s
urine of at least 25 nanograms of phencyclidine per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of phencyclidine in the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of phencyclidine per milliliter
of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
   (B)   No person under 21 years of age shall operate or be in physical
control of any vessel underway or shall manipulate any water skis, aquaplane,
or similar device on the waters in this municipality if, at the time of the
operation, control, or manipulation, any of the following applies:
      (1)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02%, but less than
0.08% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.
      (2)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.03% but less than
0.096% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or
plasma.
      (3)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.028 grams, but less
than 0.11 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine.
      (4)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02 grams, but less
than 0.08 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath.
   (C)   In any proceeding arising out of one incident, a person may be charged
with a violation of division (A)(1) and a violation of division (B)(1), (B)(2),
(B)(3), or (B)(4) of this section, but the person shall not be convicted of
more than one violation of those divisions.
   (D)   (1)   (a)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding
for a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section or for an equivalent
offense that is watercraft-related, the result of any test of any blood or
urine withdrawn and analyzed at any health care provider, as defined in R.C. §
2317.02, may be admitted with expert testimony to be considered with any other
relevant and competent evidence in determining the guilt or innocence of the
defendant.
         (b)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (A) or (B) of this section or for an equivalent offense
that is watercraft-related, the court may admit evidence on the concentration
of alcohol, drugs of abuse, controlled substances, metabolites of a controlled
substance, or a combination of them in the defendant’s or child’s whole blood,
blood serum or plasma, urine, or breath at the time of the alleged violation as
shown by chemical analysis of the substance withdrawn, or specimen taken within
three hours of the time of the alleged violation. The three-hour time limit
specified in this division regarding the admission of evidence does not extend
or affect the two-hour time limit specified in §
96.13(C) or R.C. § 1547.111(C) as the maximum period of time during which a
person may consent to a chemical test or tests as described in that section.
The court may admit evidence on the concentration of alcohol, drugs of abuse,
or a combination of them as described in this division when a person submits to
a blood, breath, urine, or other bodily substance test at the request of a law
enforcement officer under R.C. § 1547.111, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, or a blood or urine sample is obtained pursuant to a
search warrant. Only a physician, a registered nurse, an emergency medical
technician-intermediate, an emergency medical technician-paramedic, or a
qualified technician, chemist, or phlebotomist shall withdraw blood for the
purpose of determining the alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a
controlled substance, or combination content of the whole blood, blood serum,
or blood plasma. This limitation does not apply to the taking of breath or
urine specimens. A person authorized to withdraw blood under this division may
refuse to withdraw blood under this division if, in that person’s opinion, the
physical welfare of the defendant or child would be endangered by withdrawing
blood.
         (c)   The whole blood, blood serum or plasma, urine, or breath
withdrawn under division (D)(1)(b) of this section shall be analyzed in
accordance with methods approved by the Director of Health by an individual
possessing a valid permit issued by the Director pursuant to R.C. § 3701.143.
      (2)   In a criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (A) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is
watercraft-related, if there was at the time the bodily substance was taken a
concentration of less than the applicable concentration of alcohol specified
for a violation of division (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section
or less than the applicable concentration of a listed controlled substance or a
listed metabolite of a controlled substance specified for a violation of
division (A)(6) of this section, that fact may be considered with other
competent evidence in determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant or in
making an adjudication for the child. This division does not limit or affect a
criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of division
(B) of this section or for a violation of a prohibition that is substantially
equivalent to that division.
      (3)   Upon the request of the person who was tested, the results of the
chemical test shall be made available to the person or the person’s attorney
immediately upon completion of the test analysis. If the chemical test was
administered pursuant to division (D)(1)(b) of this section, the person tested
may have a physician, registered nurse, or qualified technician, chemist, or
phlebotomist of the person’s own choosing administer a chemical test or tests
in addition to any administered at the direction of a law enforcement officer,
and shall be so advised. The failure or inability to obtain an additional test
by a person shall not preclude the admission of evidence relating to the test
or tests taken at the direction of a law enforcement officer.
   (E)   (1)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (A) or (B) of this section, of a municipal ordinance
relating to operating or being in physical control of any vessel underway or to
manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or similar device on the waters of this
state while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination
of them, or of a municipal ordinance relating to operating or being in physical
control of any vessel underway or to manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or
similar device on the waters of this state with a prohibited concentration of
alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine, if a law enforcement
officer has administered a field sobriety test to the operator or person found
to be in physical control of the vessel underway involved in the violation or
the person manipulating the water skis, aquaplane, or similar device involved
in the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the
officer administered the test in substantial compliance with the testing
standards for reliable, credible, and generally accepted field sobriety tests
for vehicles that were in effect at the time the tests were administered,
including but not limited to any testing standards then in effect that have
been set by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, that by their
nature are not clearly inapplicable regarding the operation or physical control
of vessels underway or the manipulation of water skis, aquaplanes, or similar
devices, all of the following apply:
         (a)   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered.
         (b)   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field sobriety
test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal prosecution
or juvenile court proceeding.
         (c)   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
division (E)(1)(a) or (E)(1)(b) of this section and if the testimony or
evidence is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the
testimony or evidence, and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the
trier of fact considers to be appropriate.
      (2)   Division (E)(1) of this section does not limit or preclude a court,
in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by
probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division,
from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by
division (E)(1) of this section.
   (F)   (1)   Subject to division (F)(3) of this section, in any criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of division (A) or (B)
of this section or for an equivalent offense that is substantially equivalent
to either of those divisions, the court shall admit as prima facie evidence a
laboratory report from any laboratory personnel issued a permit by the
Department of Health authorizing an analysis as described in this division that
contains an analysis of the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine,
or other bodily substance tested and that contains all of the information
specified in this division. The laboratory report shall contain all of the
following:
         (a)   The signature, under oath, of any person who performed the
analysis;
         (b)   Any findings as to the identity and quantity of alcohol, a drug
of abuse, a controlled substance, a metabolite of a controlled substance, or a
combination of them that was found;
         (c)   A copy of a notarized statement by the laboratory director or a
designee of the director that contains the name of each certified analyst or
test performer involved with the report, the analyst’s or test performer’s
employment relationship with the laboratory that issued the report, and a
notation that performing an analysis of the type involved is part of the
analyst’s or test performer’s regular duties;
         (d)   An outline of the analyst’s or test performer’s education,
training, and experience in performing the type of analysis involved and a
certification that the laboratory satisfies appropriate quality control
standards in general and, in this particular analysis, under rules of the
Department of Health.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding the admission
of evidence, a report of the type described in division (F)(1) of this section
is not admissible against the defendant or child to whom it pertains in any
proceeding, other than a preliminary hearing or a grand jury proceeding, unless
the prosecutor has served a copy of the report on the defendant’s or child’s
attorney or, if the defendant or child has no attorney, on the defendant or
child.
      (3)   A report of the type described in division (F)(1) of this section
shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents, identity, or amount of any
substance if, within seven days after the defendant or child to whom the report
pertains or the defendant’s or child’s attorney receives a copy of the report,
the defendant or child or the defendant’s or child’s attorney demands the
testimony of the person who signed the report. The judge in the case may extend
the seven-day time limit in the interests of justice.
   (G)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, any physician,
registered nurse, emergency medical technician-intermediate, emergency medical
technician-paramedic, or qualified technician, chemist, or phlebotomist who
withdraws blood from a person pursuant to this section, R.C. § 1547.111 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and a hospital, first-aid
station, or clinic at which blood is withdrawn from a person pursuant to this
section, R.C. § 1547.111 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
is immune from criminal and civil liability based upon a claim of assault and
battery or any other claim that is not a claim of malpractice, for any act
performed in withdrawing blood from the person. The immunity provided in this
division also extends to an emergency medical service organization that employs
an emergency medical technician-intermediate or an emergency medical
technician-paramedic who withdraws blood under this section. The immunity
provided in this division is not available to a person who withdraws blood if
the person engages in willful or wanton misconduct.
   (H)   Division (A)(6) of this section does not apply to a person who
operates or is in physical control of a vessel underway or manipulates any
water skis, aquaplane, or similar device while the person has a concentration
of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled
substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that
equals or exceeds the amount specified in that division, if both of the
following apply:
      (1)   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
      (2)   The person injected, ingested, or inhaled the controlled substance
in accordance with the health professional’s directions.
   (I)   As used in this section and §
96.13:
      COCAINE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
      CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
      EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-INTERMEDIATE and EMERGENCY MEDICAL
TECHNICIAN-PARAMEDIC. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4765.01.
      EQUIVALENT OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.181.
      EQUIVALENT OFFENSE THAT IS WATERCRAFT-RELATED. Means an equivalent
offense that is one of the following:
         (a)   A violation of division (A) of this section;
         (b)   A violation of a municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from
operating or being in physical control of any vessel underway or from
manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or similar device on the waters of this
state while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination
of them or prohibiting a person from operating or being in physical control of
any vessel underway or from manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or similar
device on the waters of this state with a prohibited concentration of alcohol,
a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine;
         (c)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
division (A) of this section;
         (d)   A violation of an existing or former law of this state that is
or was substantially equivalent to division (A) of this section.
      L.S.D. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
      MARIHUANA. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
      NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY ADMINISTRATION. Has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 4511.19.
      OPERATE. Means that a vessel is being used on the waters in this state
when the vessel is not securely affixed to a dock or to shore or to any
permanent structure to which the vessel has the right to affix or that a vessel
is not anchored in a designated anchorage area or boat camping area that is
established by the United States Coast Guard, this state, or a political
subdivision and in which the vessel has the right to anchor.
(R.C. § 1547.11)
   (J)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree and shall be punished as provided in division (J)(1), (J)(2), or (J)(3)
of this section.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (J)(2) or (J)(3) of this
section, the court shall sentence the offender to a jail term of three
consecutive days and may sentence the offender pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24 to a
longer jail term. In addition, the court shall impose upon the offender a fine
of not less than $150 nor more than $1,000. The court may suspend the execution
of the mandatory jail term of three consecutive days that it is required to
impose by this division (J)(1) if the court, in lieu of the suspended jail
term, places the offender under a community control sanction pursuant to R.C. §
2929.25 and requires the offender to attend, for three consecutive days, a
drivers’ intervention program that is certified pursuant to R.C. § 5119.38. The
court also may suspend the execution of any part of the mandatory jail term of
three consecutive days that it is required to impose by this division (J)(1) if
the court places the offender under a community control sanction pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.25 for part of the three consecutive days; requires the offender to
attend, for that part of the three consecutive days, a drivers’ intervention
program that is certified pursuant to R.C. § 5119.38; and sentences the
offender to a jail term equal to the remainder of the three consecutive days
that the offender does not spend attending the drivers’ intervention program.
The court may require the offender, as a condition of community control, to
attend and satisfactorily complete any treatment or education programs, in
addition to the required attendance at a drivers’ intervention program, that
the operators of the drivers’ intervention program determine that the offender
should attend and to report periodically to the court on the offender’s
progress in the programs. The court also may impose any other conditions of
community control on the offender that it considers necessary.
      (2)   If, within ten years of the offense, the offender has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of division (A) of this
section, R.C. § 1547.11(A) or one other equivalent offense, the court shall
sentence the offender to a jail term of ten consecutive days and may sentence
the offender pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24 to a longer jail term. In addition, the
court shall impose upon the offender a fine of not less than $150 nor more than
$1,000. In addition to any other sentence that it imposes upon the offender,
the court may require the offender to attend a drivers’ intervention program
that is certified pursuant to R.C. § 5119.38.
      (3)   If, within ten years of the offense, the offender has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to more than one violation or offense identified
in division (J)(2) of this section, the court shall sentence the offender to a
jail term of 30 consecutive days and may sentence the offender to a longer jail
term of not more than one year. In addition, the court shall impose upon the
offender a fine of not less than $150 nor more than $1,000. In addition to any
other sentence that it imposes upon the offender, the court may require the
offender to attend a drivers’ intervention program that is certified pursuant
to R.C. § 5119.38.
      (4)   Upon a showing that serving a jail term would seriously affect the
ability of an offender sentenced pursuant to division (J)(1), (J)(2), or (J)(3)
of this section to continue the offender’s employment, the court may authorize
that the offender be granted work release after the offender has served the
mandatory jail term of 3, 10, or 30 consecutive days that the court is required
by division (J)(1), (J)(2), or (J)(3) of this section to impose. No court shall
authorize work release during the mandatory jail term of 3, 10, or 30
consecutive days that the court is required by division (J)(1), (J)(2), or (J)
(3) of this section to impose. The duration of the work release shall not
exceed the time necessary each day for the offender to commute to and from the
place of employment and the place in which the jail term is served and the time
actually spent under employment.
      (5)   Notwithstanding any section of the Ohio Revised Code that
authorizes the suspension of the imposition or execution of a sentence or the
placement of an offender in any treatment program in lieu of being imprisoned
or serving a jail term, no court shall suspend the mandatory jail term of ten
or 30 consecutive days required to be imposed by division (J)(2) or (J)(3) of
this section or place an offender who is sentenced pursuant to division (J)(2)
or (J)(3) of this section in any treatment program in lieu of being imprisoned
or serving a jail term until after the offender has served the mandatory jail
term of ten or 30 consecutive days required to be imposed pursuant to division
(J)(2) or (J)(3) of this section. Notwithstanding any section of the Ohio
Revised Code that authorizes the suspension of the imposition or execution of a
sentence or the placement of an offender in any treatment program in lieu of
being imprisoned or serving a jail term, no court, except as specifically
authorized by division (J)(1) of this section, shall suspend the mandatory jail
term of 3 consecutive days required to be imposed by division (J)(1) of this
section or place an offender who is sentenced pursuant to division (J)(1) of
this section in any treatment program in lieu of imprisonment until after the
offender has served the mandatory jail term of 3 consecutive days required to
be imposed pursuant to division (J)(1) of this section.
      (6)   As used in this division (J) of this section:
         EQUIVALENT OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.181.
         JAIL TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
         MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
(R.C. § 1547.99(G))
§ 96.13 IMPLIED CONSENT.
   (A)   (1)   (a)   Any person who operates or is in physical control of a
vessel or manipulates any water skis, aquaplane, or similar device upon any
waters in this municipality shall be deemed to have given consent to a chemical
test or tests to determine the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance,
metabolite of a controlled substance, or combination content of the person’s
whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine if arrested for operating
or being in physical control of a vessel or manipulating any water skis,
aquaplane, or similar device in violation of R.C. § 1547.11 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
         (b)   The test or tests under division (A)(1) of this section shall be
administered at the request of a law enforcement officer having reasonable
grounds to believe the person was operating or in physical control of a vessel
or manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or similar device in violation of
R.C. § 1547.11 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance. The law
enforcement agency by which the officer is employed shall designate which test
or tests shall be administered.
      (2)   Any person who is dead or unconscious or who otherwise is in a
condition rendering the person incapable of refusal shall be deemed to have
consented as provided in division (A)(1) of this section, and the test or tests
may be administered, subject to R.C. §§ 313.12 through 313.16.
   (B)   (1)   If a law enforcement officer arrests a person for operating or
being in physical control of a vessel or manipulating any water skis,
aquaplane, or similar device in violation of R.C. § 1547.11 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance and if the person previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of R.C. § 1547.11(A) or other
equivalent offenses, the law enforcement officer shall request the person to
submit, and the person shall submit, to a chemical test or tests of the
person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine for the purpose
of determining the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of
a controlled substance, or combination content of the person’s whole blood,
blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine. A law enforcement officer who makes a
request pursuant to this division that a person submit to a chemical test or
tests is not required to advise the person of the consequences of refusing to
submit to the test or tests and is not required to give the person the form
described in division (C) of this section, but the officer shall advise the
person at the time of the arrest that if the person refuses to take a chemical
test the officer may employ whatever reasonable means are necessary to ensure
that the person submits to a chemical test of the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma. The officer shall also advise the person at the time of the
arrest that the person may have an independent chemical test taken at the
person’s own expense. The advice shall be in written form prescribed by the
Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft and shall be read to the person.
The form shall contain a statement that the form was shown to the person under
arrest and read to the person by the arresting officer. The reading of the form
shall be witnessed by one or more persons, and the witnesses shall certify to
this fact by signing the form. Divisions (A)(1)(b) and (A)(2) of this section
apply to the administration of a chemical test or tests pursuant to this
division.
      (2)   If a person refuses to submit to a chemical test upon a request
made pursuant to division (B)(1) of this section, the law enforcement officer
who made the request may employ whatever reasonable means are necessary to
ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the person’s whole blood
or blood serum or plasma. A law enforcement officer who acts pursuant to this
division to ensure that a person submits to a chemical test of the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma is immune from criminal and civil
liability based upon a claim for assault and battery or any other claim for the
acts, unless the officer so acted with malicious purpose, in bad faith, or in a
wanton or reckless manner.
   (C)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, any person under
arrest for violating R.C. § 1547.11 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance shall be advised of the consequences of refusing to submit to a
chemical test or tests designated as provided in division (A) of this section.
The advice shall be in a written form prescribed by the Chief of the Division
of Parks and Watercraft and shall be read to the person. The form shall contain
a statement that the form was shown to the person under arrest and read to the
person by the arresting officer. The reading of the form shall be witnessed by
one or more persons, and the witnesses shall certify to this fact by signing
the form. The person must submit to the chemical test or tests, subsequent to
the request of the arresting officer, within two hours of the time of the
alleged violation, and if the person does not submit to the test or tests
within that two-hour time limit, the failure to submit automatically
constitutes a refusal to submit to the test or tests.
   (D)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, if a law
enforcement officer asks a person under arrest for violating R.C. § 1547.11 or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to submit to a chemical test or
tests as provided in division (A) of this section, if the arresting officer
advises the person of the consequences of the person’s refusal as provided in
division (C) of this section, and the person refuses to submit, no chemical
test shall be given. Upon receipt of a sworn statement of the officer that the
arresting law enforcement officer had reasonable grounds to believe the
arrested person violated R.C. § 1547.11 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance and that the person refused to submit to the chemical test upon the
request of the officer, and upon receipt of the form as provided in division
(C) of this section certifying that the arrested person was advised of the
consequences of the refusal, the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft
shall inform the person by written notice that the person is prohibited from
operating or being in physical control of a vessel, from manipulating any water
skis, aquaplane, or similar device, and from registering any watercraft in
accordance with R.C. § 1547.54, for one year following the date of the alleged
violation. The suspension of these operation, physical control, manipulation,
and registration privileges shall continue for the entire one-year period,
subject to review as provided in this section.
      (2)   If the person under arrest is the owner of the vessel involved in
the alleged violation, the law enforcement officer who arrested the person
shall seize the watercraft registration certificate and tags from the vessel
involved in the violation and forward them to the Chief of the Division of
Parks and Watercraft. The Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft shall
retain the impounded registration certificate and tags and shall impound all
other registration certificates and tags issued to the person in accordance
with R.C. §§ 1547.54 and 1547.57, for a period of one year following the date
of the alleged violation, subject to review as provided in this section.
      (3)   If the arrested person fails to surrender the registration
certificate because it is not on the person of the arrested person or in the
watercraft, the law enforcement officer who made the arrest shall order the
person to surrender it within 24 hours to the law enforcement officer or the
law enforcement agency that employs the law enforcement officer. If the person
fails to do so, the law enforcement officer shall notify the Chief of the
Division of Parks and Watercraft of that fact in the statement the officer
submits to the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft under this
division.
   (E)   Upon suspending a person’s operation, physical control, manipulation,
and registration privileges in accordance with division (D) of this section,
the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft shall notify the person in
writing, at the person’s last known address, and inform the person that the
person may petition for a hearing in accordance with division (F) of this
section. If a person whose operation, physical control, manipulation, and
registration privileges have been suspended petitions for a hearing or appeals
any adverse decision, the suspension shall begin at the termination of any
hearing or appeal unless the hearing or appeal results in a decision favorable
to the person.
   (F)   (1)   Any person who has been notified by the Chief of the Division of
Parks and Watercraft that the person is prohibited from operating or being in
physical control of a vessel or manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or
similar device and from registering any watercraft in accordance with R.C. §
1547.54, or who has had the registration certificate and tags of the person’s
watercraft impounded pursuant to division (D) of this section, within 20 days
of the notification or impoundment, may file a petition in the municipal court
or the county court, or if the person is a minor in juvenile court, with
jurisdiction over the place at which the arrest occurred, agreeing to pay the
cost of the proceedings and alleging error in the action taken by the Chief of
the Division of Parks and Watercraft under division (D) of this section or
alleging one or more of the matters within the scope of the hearing as provided
in this section, or both. The petitioner shall notify the Chief of the Division
of Parks and Watercraft of the filing of the petition and send the Chief of the
Division of Parks and Watercraft a copy of the petition.
      (2)   The scope of the hearing is limited to the issues of whether the
law enforcement officer had reasonable grounds to believe the petitioner was
operating or in physical control of a vessel or manipulating any water skis,
aquaplane, or similar device in violation of R.C. § 1547.11 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, whether the petitioner was placed under arrest,
whether the petitioner refused to submit to the chemical test upon request of
the officer, and whether the petitioner was advised of the consequences of the
petitioner’s refusal.
   (G)   (1)   The Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft shall furnish
the court a copy of the affidavit as provided in division (C) of this section
and any other relevant information requested by the court.
      (2)   In hearing the matter and in determining whether the person has
shown error in the decision taken by the Chief of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft as provided in division (D) of this section, the court shall decide
the issue upon the relevant, competent, and material evidence submitted by the
Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft or the person whose operation,
physical control, manipulation, and registration privileges have been
suspended. In the proceedings, the Chief of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft shall be represented by the prosecuting attorney of the county in
which the petition is filed if the petition is filed in a county court or
juvenile court, except that if the arrest occurred within a city or village
within the jurisdiction of the county court in which the petition is filed, the
city director of law or village solicitor of that city or village shall
represent the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft. If the petition is
filed in the municipal court, the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft
shall be represented as provided in R.C. § 1901.34.
      (3)   If the court finds from the evidence submitted that the person has
failed to show error in the action taken by the Chief of the Division of Parks
and Watercraft under division (D) of this section or in one or more of the
matters within the scope of the hearing as provided in division (F) of this
section, or both, the court shall assess the cost of the proceeding against the
person and shall uphold the suspension of the operation, physical control, use,
and registration privileges provided in division (D) of this section. If the
court finds that the person has shown error in the action taken by the Chief of
the Division of Parks and Watercraft under division (D) of this section or in
one or more of the matters within the scope of the hearing as provided in
division (F) of this section, or both, the cost of the proceedings shall be
paid out of the county treasury of the county in which the proceedings were
held, Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft shall reinstate the
operation, physical control, manipulation, and registration privileges of the
person without charge, and the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft
shall return the registration certificate and tags, if impounded, without
charge.
      (4)   The court shall give information in writing of any action taken
under this section to the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft.
   (H)   At the end of any period of suspension or impoundment imposed under
this section, and upon request of the person whose operation, physical control,
use, and registration privileges were suspended or whose registration
certificate and tags were impounded, the Chief of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft shall reinstate the person’s operation, physical control,
manipulation, and registration privileges by written notice and return the
certificate and tags.
   (I)   No person who has received written notice from the Chief of the
Division of Parks and Watercraft that the person is prohibited from operating
or being in control of a vessel, from manipulating any water skis, aquaplane,
or similar device, and from registering a watercraft, or who has had the
registration certificate and tags of the person’s watercraft impounded, in
accordance with division (D) of this section or R.C. § 1547.111(D), shall
operate or be in physical control of a vessel or manipulate any water skis,
aquaplane, or similar device for a period of one year following the date of the
person’s alleged violation of R.C. § 1547.11 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 1547.111)
   (J)   Whoever violates division (I) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(B))
§ 96.14 INCAPACITATED OPERATORS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall operate any vessel if the person is so mentally or
physically incapacitated as to be unable to operate the vessel in a safe and
competent manner.
   (B)   No person shall permit any vessel to be operated on the waters in this
municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.12)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section without causing injury to persons or
damage to property is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(D))
   (D)   Whoever violates this section causing injury to persons or damage to
property is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(E))
§ 96.15 WATER SKIING CONFINED TO SKI ZONES.
   (A)   Except on the waters of the Ohio River, or Lake Erie and immediately
connected harbors and bays, any person who rides or attempts to ride upon one
or more water skis, surfboard, or similar device, or who engages or attempts to
engage in barefoot skiing, and any person who operates a vessel towing a person
riding or attempting to ride on one or more water skis, surfboard, or similar
device, or engaging or attempting to engage in barefoot skiing, shall confine
that activity to the water area within a designated ski zone on all bodies of
water on which a ski zone has been established.
   (B)   On all bodies of water where no specific activity zones have been
established, the activities described in division (A) of this section shall be
confined to areas where the activities are not specifically restricted by this
chapter, R.C. Chapter 1547 and rules.
   (C)   Divisions (A) and (B) of this section do not apply to an activity
described in division (A) of this section if the vessel involved in the
activity is traveling at idle speed in a designated no wake zone and the
activity is not being conducted in any of the following areas:
      (1)   Within 300 feet of a gas dock, marina, launch ramp, or harbor
entrance;
      (2)   Within a designated anchorage area, swim zone, boat swim zone, or
boat camping area;
      (3)   Under a bridge or within 300 feet of a bridge underpass;
      (4)   Any area designated as a no ski zone.
   (D)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.14) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.16 OBSERVER REQUIRED WHEN TOWING SKIER.
   (A)   Any person who operates a vessel towing any person riding or
attempting to ride upon one or more water skis or upon a surfboard or similar
device, or engaging or attempting to engage in barefoot skiing, on the waters
in this municipality shall have present in the vessel a person or persons other
than the operator, ten years of age or older, who shall at all times observe
the progress of the person being towed. The operator of the towing vessel shall
at all times observe the traffic pattern toward which the vessel is
approaching.
   (B)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.15) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.17 WATER SKIING AFTER DARK PROHIBITED.
   No person shall ride or attempt to ride upon water skis, surfboard, or
similar device, or engage or attempt to engage in barefoot skiing, or use or
operate any vessel to tow any person thereon on the waters in this municipality
during that period of the day between sunset and sunrise, except upon special
permit issued by the state department, conservancy district, or political
subdivision having jurisdiction and control of such water.
(R.C. § 1547.16) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.18 PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE REQUIRED FOR TOWED PERSON.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, no person shall
engage in any form of towed watersports without wearing an adequate and
effective Coast Guard approved wearable personal flotation device specifically
designed for towed watersports, in good and serviceable condition and of
appropriate size, except upon special permit issued by one of the following
persons or entities that manages the waterway:
      (1)   The political subdivision having primary jurisdiction;
      (2)   The administrator of a federal agency;
      (3)   The director of a state agency;
      (4)   The board of directors of a conservancy district;
      (5)   Any other governing body having jurisdiction.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to a person engaging or
attempting to engage in barefoot skiing if the person is wearing a wet suit
specifically designed for barefoot skiing that is in good and serviceable
condition and of appropriate size.
   (C)   No operator of a vessel shall allow any person who fails to comply
with division (A) or (B) of this section to engage in any form of towed
watersports.
(R.C. § 1547.18) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.19 SKI JUMPS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall install or maintain any structure or inclined platform known
as a water ski jump on the waters in this municipality. No person shall use any
such platform or structure for the purpose of water ski jumping, except upon
special permit issued by the state department, conservancy district, or
political subdivision having jurisdiction and control over such water.
(R.C. § 1547.19) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.20 PERMIT FOR SPECIAL WATER EVENTS.
   (A)   No person or organization shall conduct any race, regatta, or other
special event upon the waters in this municipality without first obtaining
written permission, upon application not less than 30 days prior to the time of
the proposed race, regatta, or event, of the federal agency, state department,
conservancy district, or political subdivision having jurisdiction and control
over such waters. Any state department, conservancy district, or political
subdivision may suspend its respective rules during a race, regatta, or special
event. Nothing in this section shall be construed to mean that the operator of
a vessel competing in a specially authorized race, regatta, or special event
shall not attempt to attain high speeds on a marked racing course.
   (B)   On any waters in this municipality over which no federal agency, state
department, conservancy district, or political subdivision has jurisdiction and
control, no person or organization shall conduct any race, regatta, or other
special event without first obtaining written permission, upon application not
less than 30 days prior to the time of the proposed race, regatta, or event, of
the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft. The Chief of the Division of
Parks and Watercraft may, after determining that the public safety will be
adequately protected, grant written permission for holding such race, regatta,
or special event. This section does not apply to privately owned lakes or ponds
nor to canoes or rowboats.
(R.C. § 1547.20) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.21 SALE OF SINGLE CELLED INFLATABLE VESSELS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall use or offer for use on the waters in this municipality any
inflatable vessel made of canvas, rubber, synthetic rubber, or vinyl plastic
unless the inflatable vessel is of multiple air cell or compartment
construction and is capable of remaining afloat if one air cell or compartment
is punctured or collapsed.
(R.C. § 1547.21) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.22 SITTING, STANDING, WALKING ON MOVING VESSELS RESTRICTED.
   (A)   No occupant of any vessel underway on the waters in this municipality
shall sit, stand, or walk upon any portion of the vessel not specifically
designed for that movement, except when immediately necessary for the safe and
reasonable navigation or operation of the vessel. No operator of a vessel
underway on the waters in this municipality shall allow any occupant of the
vessel to sit, stand, or walk on any portion of the vessel underway not
specifically designed for that use, except when immediately necessary for the
safe and reasonable navigation or operation of the vessel.
   (B)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.22) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.23 ENGINE WARM-UP REQUIRED.
   The pilot or engineer of any powercraft for hire to carry passengers shall
not permit passengers to come aboard before the engine of such powercraft has
been permitted to run for a minimum of two minutes.
(R.C. § 1547.23) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.24 PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICES FOR CHILDREN UNDER TEN.
   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel under 18 feet in
length while there is present in the vessel any person under ten years of age,
not wearing a Coast Guard approved wearable personal flotation device in good
and serviceable condition of appropriate size securely attached to the person
under ten years of age.
(R.C. § 1547.24) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.25 OPERATION WITHOUT PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel, other
than a vessel exempted by rules, on the waters in this municipality:
      (1)   That is 16 feet or greater in length without carrying aboard one
wearable personal flotation device for each person aboard and one throwable
personal flotation device;
      (2)   That is less than 16 feet in length, including paddlecraft of any
length, without carrying aboard one wearable personal flotation device for each
person aboard.
   (B)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any commercial vessel
on the waters in this municipality:
      (1)   That is less than 40 feet in length and is not carrying persons for
hire without carrying aboard at least one wearable personal flotation device
for each person aboard;
      (2)   That is carrying persons for hire or is 40 feet in length or longer
and is not carrying persons for hire without carrying aboard at least one type
one wearable personal flotation device for each person aboard that complies
with all of the following:
         (a)   It is designed to support the person wearing the wearable
personal flotation device in the water in an upright or slightly backward
position and provides support to the head so that the face of an unconscious or
exhausted person is held above the water.
         (b)   It is capable of turning the person wearing the wearable
personal flotation device, upon entering the water, to a safe flotation
position.
         (c)   It is capable of being worn inside out.
         (d)   It is capable of supporting a minimum of 22 pounds in fresh
water for 48 hours.
         (e)   It is a highly visible color.
      (3)   That is 26 feet in length or longer without carrying aboard at
least one throwable personal flotation device in addition to the applicable
requirements of divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) of this section.
   (C)   Each personal flotation device carried aboard a vessel, including a
commercial vessel, pursuant to this section shall be Coast Guard approved and
in good and serviceable condition, of appropriate size for the wearer, and
readily accessible to each person aboard the vessel at all times, and used in
accordance with any requirements on its approval label or in accordance with
requirements in its owner’s manual if the approval label refers to such a
manual.
   (D)   A personal flotation device shall not be used in a manner that is
inconsistent with any limitations or restrictions related to federal approval
under 46 C.F.R. 160 or special instructions for use provided by the
manufacturer. Appropriate use shall be indicated on the label of an approved
personal flotation device.
   (E)   As used in this section, COMMERCIAL VESSEL means any vessel used in
the carriage of any person or property for a valuable consideration whether
flowing directly or indirectly from the owner, partner, or agent or any other
person interested in the vessel. The phrase does not include any vessel that is
manufactured or used primarily for noncommercial use or that is leased, rented,
or chartered to another for noncommercial use.
(R.C. § 1547.25)
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(F))
§ 96.26 DISTRESS SIGNAL OR FLAG REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall operate on the waters of Lake Erie or the immediately
connecting bays, harbors, and anchorage areas at any time a vessel that is 16
or more feet in length or any vessel carrying six or fewer passengers for hire
without carrying Coast Guard approved visual distress signals for both day and
night use.
   (B)   No person shall operate upon the waters of Lake Erie or the
immediately connecting bays, harbors, and anchorage areas during the period
from sunset to sunrise according to local time any of the following without
carrying Coast Guard approved visual distress signals for night use:
      (1)   A vessel less than 16 feet in length;
      (2)   A vessel competing in an organized marine parade, race, regatta, or
similar event;
      (3)   A manually propelled vessel;
      (4)   A sailboat less than 26 feet in length with completely open
construction and without propulsion machinery.
   (C)   No person shall operate a vessel on the waters in this state other
than Lake Erie or the immediately connecting bays, harbors, and anchorage areas
unless the vessel carries either a distress flag at least two feet square and
international orange in color or a Coast Guard approved daytime distress
signal.
   (D)   No person shall display any distress signal unless a vessel or a
person is in distress and in need of help.
   (E)   Divisions (A) and (C) of this section do not apply to any of the
following:
      (1)   Vessels competing in an organized marine parade, race, regatta, or
similar event;
      (2)   Manually propelled vessels;
      (3)   Sailboats less than 26 feet in length with completely open
construction and without propulsion machinery.
   (F)   The distress signals required by this section shall be in good and
serviceable condition, readily accessible, and of the type and quantities
required by regulations adopted under 46 U.S.C. § 4302, as amended.
   (G)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.251) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.27 ANCHOR REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All watercraft, except sailboats less than 16 feet long having a
cockpit depth of less than 12 inches and except canoes, shall carry an anchor
and line of sufficient weight and length to anchor the watercraft securely. The
Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft, by rule, may exempt other types
of watercraft from this section after determining that carrying such an anchor
and line would constitute a hazard.
   (B)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any watercraft on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.26) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.28 SPECIFICATION FOR FIRE EXTINGUISHERS.
   (A)   Except those powercraft less than 26 feet in length designed for use
with an outboard motor, of open construction that is not capable of entrapping
explosive or flammable gases or vapors, and not carrying passengers for hire,
all powercraft shall carry fire extinguishers as prescribed in this section.
The fire extinguishers shall be capable of extinguishing a burning gasoline
fire, shall be in such condition as to be ready for immediate and effective
use, and shall comply with minimum or higher standards for such extinguishers
then prevailing as prescribed by the United States coast guard.
   (B)   Except for vessels subject to exemptions listed in 33 C.F.R. § 175.380
or § 175.390, any vessel not equipped with fixed fire extinguishing systems in
machinery spaces shall carry the following:
      (1)   Class A and Class 1 powercraft shall carry at least one 5-
B portable fire extinguisher.
      (2)   Class 2 powercraft shall carry at least two 5-B portable fire
extinguishers or at least one 20-B portable fire extinguisher.
      (3)   Class 3 powercraft shall carry at least three 5-B portable fire
extinguishers, or at least one 5-B portable and one 20-B portable fire
extinguishers.
      (4)   Class 4 powercraft shall carry the number and type of 20-B portable
fire extinguishers specified by gross tonnage as prescribed by 33 C.F.R. Part
175, Subpart E.
   (C)   All portable and semi-portable fire extinguishers for use on a vessel
shall:
      (1)   Be on board the vessel and be readily accessible;
      (2)   Be of an approved type;
      (3)   Not be expired or appear to have been previously used;
      (4)   Be maintained in good and serviceable working condition. As used in
division (C)(4) of this section, “good and serviceable working condition” means
all of the following:
         (a)   If the fire extinguisher has a pressure gauge or indicator, the
reading or indicator is in the operable range or position;
         (b)   The fire extinguisher’s lock pin is firmly in place;
         (c)   The fire extinguisher’s discharge nozzle is clean and free of
obstruction;
         (d)   The fire extinguisher does not show visible signs of significant
corrosion or damage.
   (D)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated on the waters in this
municipality any powercraft that does not comply with this section.
(R.C. § 1547.27) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.29 BACKFIRE FLAME CONTROL DEVICE REQUIRED.
   Every gasoline engine installed in a vessel after April 25, 1940, except an
outboard motor, shall be equipped with an acceptable device to control backfire
flame. The device shall comply with all of the following:
   (A)   Be securely attached to the air intake with a flame-tight connection;
   (B)   Be in proper working order;
   (C)   Be Coast Guard approved or comply with either SAE J1928 or UL 1111;
   (D)   Be marked to indicate approval or compliance under division (C) of
this section.
(R.C. § 1547.28) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.30 VENTILATION REQUIREMENT ON POWERCRAFT.
   All powercraft using gasoline or other liquid fuel having a flashpoint of
less than 110°F. shall be provided with ventilation as follows:
   (A)   At least two ventilators fitted with cowls or their equivalent for the
purpose of properly and efficiently ventilating the bilges of every engine and
fuel tank compartment in order to remove any inflammable or explosive gases;
   (B)   Any type of ventilating system approved for use by the United States
Coast Guard;
   (C)   The ventilation of the boat is not required where the greater portion
of the bilges of the engine and fuel tank compartment is open to the natural
atmosphere.
(R.C. § 1547.29) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.31 ABANDONMENT OF JUNK VESSELS OR OUTBOARD MOTORS.
   (A)   Law enforcement official may order storage of vessel or outboard motor
left on private property; towing by private dock owner.
      (1)   As used in this section:
         LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Means any organization or unit comprised of
law enforcement officers, as defined in R.C. § 2901.01.
         VESSEL OR OUTBOARD MOTOR. Excludes an abandoned junk vessel or
outboard motor, as defined in division (D) of this section, or any vessel or
outboard motor under R.C. § 1547.305.
      (2)   (a)   The County Sheriff, Chief of Police, or other chief of a law
enforcement agency, within the Sheriff’s or Chief’s respective territorial
jurisdiction, upon complaint of any person adversely affected, may order into
storage any vessel or outboard motor that has been left on private property,
other than a private dock or mooring facility or structure, for at least 72
hours without the permission of the person having the right to the possession
of the property. The Sheriff or Chief, upon complaint of the owner of a marine
repair facility or place of storage, may order into storage any vessel or
outboard motor that has been left at the facility or place of storage for a
longer period than that agreed upon. The place of storage shall be designated
by the Sheriff or Chief. When ordering a vessel or motor into storage under
division (A)(2)(a) of this section, a Sheriff or Chief, whenever possible,
shall arrange for the removal of the vessel or motor by a private tow truck
operator or towing company.
         (b)   1.   Except as provided in division (A)(2)(b)4. of this section,
no person, without the consent of the owner or other person authorized to give
consent, shall moor, anchor, or tie a vessel or outboard motor at a private
dock or mooring facility or structure owned by another person if the owner has
posted, in a conspicuous manner, a prohibition against the mooring, anchoring,
or tying of vessels or outboard motors at the dock, facility, or structure by
any person not having the consent of the owner or other person authorized to
give consent.
            2.   If the owner of a private dock or mooring facility or
structure has posted at the dock, facility, or structure, in a conspicuous
manner, conditions and regulations under which the mooring, anchoring, or tying
of vessels or outboard motors is permitted at the dock, facility, or structure,
no person, except as provided in division (A)(2)(b)4. of this section, shall
moor, anchor, or tie a vessel or outboard motor at the dock, facility, or
structure in violation of the posted conditions and regulations.
            3.   The owner of a private dock or mooring facility or structure
may order towed into storage any vessel or outboard motor found moored,
anchored, or tied in violation of division (A)(2)(b)1. or (A)(2)(b)2. of this
section, provided that the owner of the dock, facility, or structure posts on
it a sign that states that the dock, facility, or structure is private, is
visible from all entrances to the dock, facility, or structure, and contains
all of the following information:
               a.   The information specified in division (A)(2)(b)1. or (A)(2)
(b)2. of this section, as applicable;
               b.   A notice that violators will be towed and that violators
are responsible for paying the cost of the towing;
               c.   The telephone number of the person from whom a towed vessel
or outboard motor may be recovered, and the address of the place to which the
vessel or outboard motor will be taken and the place from which it may be
recovered.
            4.   Divisions (A)(2)(b)1. or (A)(2)(b)2. of this section do not
prohibit a person from mooring, anchoring, or tying a vessel or outboard motor
at a private dock or mooring facility or structure if either of the following
applies:
               a.   The vessel or outboard motor is disabled due to a
mechanical or structural malfunction, provided that the person immediately
removes the vessel or outboard motor from the dock, facility, or structure when
the malfunction is corrected or when a reasonable attempt has been made to
correct it;
               b.   Weather conditions are creating an imminent threat to safe
operation of the vessel or outboard motor, provided that the person immediately
removes the vessel or outboard motor from the dock, facility, or structure when
the weather conditions permit safe operation of the vessel or outboard motor.
            5.   A person whose vessel or outboard motor is towed into storage
under division (A)(2)(b)3. of this section either shall pay the costs of the
towing of the vessel or outboard motor or shall reimburse the owner of the dock
or mooring facility or structure for the costs that the owner incurs in towing
the vessel or outboard motor.
         (c)   Subject to division (A)(3) of this section, the owner of a
vessel or motor that has been removed under division (A)(2) of this section may
recover the vessel or motor only in accordance with division (A)(6) of this
section.
      (3)   If the owner or operator of a vessel or outboard motor that has
been ordered into storage under division (A)(2) of this section arrives after
the vessel or motor has been prepared for removal, but prior to its actual
removal from the property, the owner or operator shall be given the opportunity
to pay a fee of not more than one-half of the charge for the removal of vessels
or motors under division (A)(2) of this section that normally is assessed by
the person who has prepared the vessel or motor for removal, in order to obtain
release of the vessel or motor. Upon payment of that fee, the vessel or motor
shall be released to the owner or operator, and upon its release, the owner or
operator immediately shall move it so that it is not on the private property
without the permission of the person having the right to possession of the
property, or is not at the facility or place of storage without the permission
of the owner, whichever is applicable.
      (4)   The County Sheriff, Chief of Police, and each other chief of a law
enforcement agency shall maintain a record of vessels or outboard motors that
are ordered into storage under division (A)(2)(a) of this section. The record
shall include an entry for each such vessel or motor that identifies the
vessel’s hull identification number or serial number, if any, the vessel’s or
motor’s make, model, and color, the location from which it was removed, the
date and time of its removal, the telephone number of the person from whom it
may be recovered, and the address of the place to which it has been taken and
from which it may be recovered. Any information in the record that pertains to
a particular vessel or motor shall be provided to any person who, pursuant to a
statement the person makes either in person or by telephone, is identified as
the owner or operator of the vessel or motor and requests information
pertaining to its location.
      (5)   Any person who registers a complaint that is the basis of a
Sheriff’s or Chief’s order for the removal and storage of a vessel or outboard
motor under division (A)(2)(a) of this section shall provide the identity of
the law enforcement agency with which the complaint was registered to any
person who, pursuant to a statement the person makes, is identified as the
owner or operator of the vessel or motor and requests information pertaining to
its location.
      (6)   (a)   The owner of a vessel or outboard motor that is ordered into
storage under division (A)(2) of this section may reclaim it upon payment of
any expenses or charges incurred in its removal, in an amount not to exceed
$200, and storage, in an amount not to exceed $5 per 24-hour period, and upon
presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a certificate of
title to the vessel or motor, certificate of United States Coast Guard
documentation, or certificate of registration if the vessel or motor is not
subject to titling under R.C. § 1548.01.
         (b)   If a vessel or outboard motor that is ordered into storage under
division (A)(2)(a) of this section remains unclaimed by the owner for 30 days,
the procedures established by divisions (B) and (C) of this section shall
apply.
         (c)   If a vessel or outboard motor ordered into storage under
division (A)(2)(b) of this section remains unclaimed for 72 hours after being
stored, the tow truck operator or towing company that removed the vessel or
out-board motor shall provide notice of the removal and storage to the County
Sheriff, Chief of Police, or other chief of a law enforcement agency within
whose territorial jurisdiction the vessel or outboard motor had been moored,
anchored, or tied in violation of division (A)(2)(b) of this section. The
notice shall be in writing and include the vessel’s hull identification number
or serial number, if any, the vessel’s or outboard motor’s make, model, and
color, the location from which it was removed, the date and time of its
removal, the telephone number of the person from whom it may be recovered, and
the address of the place to which it has been taken and from which it may be
recovered.
            1.   Upon receipt of the notice, the Sheriff or Chief immediately
shall cause a search to be made of the records of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft to ascertain the owner and any lienholder of the vessel or outboard
motor, and, if known, shall send notice to the owner and lienholder, if any, at
the owner’s and lienholder’s last known address by certified mail, return
receipt requested, that the vessel or outboard motor will be declared a
nuisance and disposed of if not claimed not later than 30 days after the date
of the mailing of the notice.
            2.   If the owner or lienholder makes no claim to the vessel or
outboard motor within 30 days of the date of the mailing of the notice, the
Sheriff or Chief shall file with the Clerk of Courts of the county in which the
place of storage is located an affidavit showing compliance with the
requirements of division (A)(6)(c) of this section, and the vessel or outboard
motor shall be disposed of in accordance with division (C) of this section.
      (7)   No person shall remove, or cause the removal of, any vessel or
outboard motor from private property other than in accordance with division (A)
(2) of this section or division (B) of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.30)
   (B)   Storage of vessel or motor left in sunken, beached, drifting or docked
condition; notice; affidavit; salvage certificate.
      (1)   The County Sheriff, Chief of Police, or other chief of a law
enforcement agency, within the Sheriff’s or Chief’s respective territorial
jurisdiction, or a state highway patrol trooper, upon notification to the
Sheriff or Chief of such action and of the location of the place of storage,
may order into storage any vessel or outboard motor that has been left in a
sunken, beached, or drifting condition for any period of time, or in a docked
condition, on a public street or other property open to the public, or upon or
within the right-of-way of any waterway, road, or highway, for 48 hours or
longer without notification to the Sheriff or Chief of the reasons for leaving
the vessel or motor in any such place or condition. The Sheriff or Chief shall
designate the place of storage of any vessel or motor ordered removed by the
Sheriff or Chief.
      (2)   The Sheriff or Chief shall immediately cause a search to be made of
the records of the Division of Parks and Watercraft to ascertain the owner and
any lienholder of a vessel or outboard motor ordered into storage by the
Sheriff or Chief, and, if known, shall send notice to the owner and lienholder,
if any, at the owner’s or lienholder’s last known address by certified mail,
return receipt requested, that the vessel or motor will be declared a nuisance
and disposed of if not claimed within ten days of the date of mailing of the
notice. The owner or lienholder of the vessel or motor may reclaim it upon
payment of any expenses or charges incurred in its removal and storage, and
presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a certificate of
title to the vessel or motor, certificate of United States Coast Guard
documentation, or certificate of registration if the vessel or motor is not
subject to titling under R.C. § 1548.01.
      (3)   If the owner or lienholder makes no claim to the vessel or outboard
motor within ten days of the date of mailing of the notice, and if the vessel
or motor is to be disposed of at public auction as provided in division (C) of
this section, the Sheriff or Chief shall file with the Clerk of Courts of the
county in which the place of storage is located an affidavit showing compliance
with the requirements of this division (B). Upon presentation of the affidavit,
the Clerk of Courts shall without charge issue a salvage certificate of title,
free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, to the Sheriff or Chief and shall
send a copy of the affidavit to the Chief of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft. If the vessel or motor is to be disposed of to a marine salvage
dealer or other facility as provided in division (C) of this section, the
Sheriff or Chief shall execute in triplicate an affidavit, as prescribed by the
Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft, describing the vessel or motor
and the manner in which it was disposed of, and that all requirements of this
division (B) have been complied with. The Sheriff or Chief shall retain the
original of the affidavit for the Sheriff’s or Chief’s records and shall
furnish two copies to the marine salvage dealer or other facility. Upon
presentation of a copy of the affidavit by the marine salvage dealer or other
facility, the Clerk of Courts shall issue to such owner a salvage certificate
of title, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances.
      (4)   Whenever the marine salvage dealer or other facility receives an
affidavit for the disposal of a vessel or outboard motor as provided in this
division (B), such owner shall not be required to obtain an Ohio certificate of
title to the vessel or motor in the owner’s own name if the vessel or motor is
dismantled or destroyed and both copies of the affidavit are delivered to the
Clerk of Courts. Upon receipt of such an affidavit, the Clerk of Courts shall
send one copy of it to the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft.
(R.C. § 1547.301)
   (C)   Disposal of unclaimed vessel or motor.
      (1)   Unclaimed vessels or outboard motors ordered into storage under
division (A)(2) of this section or division (B) of this section shall be
disposed of at the order of the County Sheriff, the Chief of Police, or another
chief of a law enforcement agency, in any of the following ways:
         (a)   To a marine salvage dealer;
         (b)   To any other facility owned, operated, or under contract with
the state or the county, municipality, township, or other political
subdivision;
         (c)   To a charitable organization, religious organization, or similar
organization not used and operated for profit;
         (d)   By sale at public auction by the Sheriff, the Chief, or an
auctioneer licensed under R.C. Chapter 4707, after giving notice of the auction
by advertisement, published once a week for two consecutive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in the county or as provided in R.C. § 7.16.
      (2)   Any moneys accruing from the disposition of an unclaimed vessel or
motor that are in excess of the expenses resulting from the removal and storage
of the vessel or motor shall be credited to the General Revenue Fund or to the
General Fund of the county, municipality, township, or other political
subdivision, as appropriate.
      (3)   As used in this division (C), CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 1716.01.
(R.C. § 1547.302)
   (D)   Disposal of abandoned vessel or motor.
      (1)   As used in this division and division (E) of this section:
         ABANDONED JUNK VESSEL OR OUTBOARD MOTOR. Means any vessel or outboard
motor meeting all of the following requirements:
            1.   It has been left on private property for at least 72 hours
without the permission of the person having the right to the possession of the
property; left in a sunken, beached, or drifting condition for any period of
time; or left in a docked condition, on a public street or other property open
to the public, or upon or within the right-of-way of any waterway, road, or
highway, for 48 hours or longer without notification to the County Sheriff, the
Chief of Police, or other chief of a law enforcement agency having territorial
jurisdiction with respect to the location of the vessel or motor, of the
reasons for leaving the vessel or motor in any such place or condition;
            2.   It is three years old or older;
            3.   It is extensively damaged, such damage including but not
limited to any of the following: missing deck, hull, transom, gunwales, motor,
or outdrive;
            4.   It is apparently inoperable;
            5.   It has a fair market value of $200 or less.
         LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Means any organization or unit comprised of
law enforcement officers, as defined in R.C. § 2901.01.
      (2)   The County Sheriff, Chief of Police, or other chief of a law
enforcement agency, within the Sheriff’s or Chief’s respective territorial
jurisdiction, or a state highway patrol trooper, upon notification to the
Sheriff or Chief of such action, shall order any abandoned junk vessel or
outboard motor to be photographed by a law enforcement officer. The officer
shall record the make of vessel or motor, the hull identification number or
serial number when available, and shall also detail the damage or missing
equipment to substantiate the value of $200 or less. The Sheriff or Chief shall
thereupon immediately dispose of the abandoned junk vessel or outboard motor to
a marine salvage dealer or other facility owned, operated, or under contract to
the state, the county, township, or municipality for the destruction of such
vessels or motors. The records and photographs relating to the abandoned junk
vessel or outboard motor shall be retained by the law enforcement agency
ordering the disposition of the vessel or motor for a period of at least two
years. The law enforcement agency shall execute in quadruplicate an affidavit,
as prescribed by the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft, describing
the vessel or motor and the manner in which it was disposed of, and that all
requirements of this section have been complied with, and shall sign and file
the same with the Clerk of Courts of the county in which the vessel or motor
was abandoned. The Clerk of Courts shall retain the original of the affidavit
for the Clerk’s files, shall furnish one copy thereof to the Chief of the
Division of Parks and Watercraft, one copy to the marine salvage dealer or
other facility handling the disposal of the vessel or motor, and one copy to
the law enforcement agency ordering the disposal, who shall file such copy with
the records and photographs relating to the disposal. Any moneys arising from
the disposal of an abandoned junk vessel or outboard motor shall be credited to
the General Revenue Fund, or to the General Fund of the county, township,
municipality, or other political subdivision, as appropriate.
      (3)   Notwithstanding division (B) of this section, any vessel or
outboard motor meeting the requirements of divisions (D)(1)(a)3. to (D)(1)(a)5.
of this section which has remained unclaimed by the owner or lienholder for a
period of ten days or longer following notification as provided in division (B)
of this section may be disposed of as provided in this division (D).
(R.C. § 1547.303)
   (E)   Abandonment of vessel or motor without notice to law enforcement
official prohibited.
      (1)   No person shall purposely leave an abandoned junk vessel or
outboard motor on private property for more than 72 hours without the
permission of the person having the right to the possession of the property; in
a sunken, beached, or drifting condition for any period of time; or in a docked
condition, on a public street or other property open to the public, or upon or
within the right-of-way of any waterway, road, or highway, for 48 hours or
longer without notification to the County Sheriff, Chief of Police or other
chief of a law enforcement agency having territorial jurisdiction with respect
to the location of the vessel or motor, of the reasons for leaving the vessel
or motor in any such place or condition.
      (2)   For purposes of this division (E), the fact that an abandoned junk
vessel or outboard motor has been so left without permission or notification is
prima facie evidence of abandonment.
      (3)   Nothing in this section or R.C. §§ 1547.30, 1547.301, and 1547.303
invalidates the provisions of any ordinance of the municipality regulating or
prohibiting the abandonment of vessels or outboard motors on waterways,
beaches, docks, streets, highways, public property, or private property within
the boundaries of the municipality.
(R.C. § 1547.304)
   (F)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(7) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(F))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree and also shall be assessed any costs incurred
by the state or a county, township, municipal corporation, or other political
subdivision in disposing of an abandoned junk vessel or outboard motor, less
any money accruing to the state, county, township, municipal corporation, or
other political subdivision from that disposal.
(R.C. § 1547.99(H)) Penalty, see §
96.99
Statutory reference:
   Alternate procedure to obtain certificate of title for unclaimed vessel or
outboard motor, see R.C. § 1547.305
§ 96.32 EXHAUST MUFFLER REQUIRED; NOISE LEVELS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Every powercraft operated on the waters in this municipality shall be
equipped at all times with a muffler or a muffler system that is in good
working order, in constant operation, and effectively installed to prevent
excessive or unusual noise.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall operate or give permission for the operation of
a powercraft on the waters in this municipality in such a manner as to exceed a
noise level of 90 decibels on the “A” scale when subjected to a stationary
sound level test as prescribed by SAE J2005.
      (2)   No person shall operate or give permission for the operation of a
powercraft on the waters in this municipality in such a manner as to exceed a
noise level of 75 decibels on the “A” scale measured as specified by SAE J1970.
Measurement of a noise level of not more than 75 decibels on the “A” scale of a
powercraft in operation does not preclude the conducting of a stationary sound
level test as prescribed by SAE J2005.
   (C)   No person shall operate or give permission for the operation of a
powercraft on the waters in this municipality that is equipped with an altered
muffler or muffler cutout, or operate or give permission for the operation of a
powercraft on the waters in this municipality in any manner that bypasses or
otherwise reduces or eliminates the effectiveness of any muffler or muffler
system installed in accordance with this section, unless the applicable
mechanism has been permanently disconnected or made inoperable.
   (D)   No person shall remove, alter, or otherwise modify in any way a
muffler or muffler system in a manner that will prevent it from being operated
in accordance with this section.
   (E)   No person shall manufacture, sell, or offer for sale a powercraft that
is not equipped with a muffler or muffler system that prevents noise levels in
excess of those established in division (B)(1) of this section.
   (F)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   A powercraft that is designed, manufactured, and sold for the sole
purpose of competing in racing events. The exception established under this
division (F)(1) shall be documented in each sale agreement and shall be
acknowledged formally by the signatures of the buyer and the seller. The buyer
and the seller shall maintain copies of the sale agreement. A copy of the sale
agreement shall be kept aboard the powercraft when it is operated. A powercraft
to which the exception established under this division (F)(1) applies shall be
operated on the waters in this municipality only in accordance with division
(F)(2) of this section.
      (2)   A powercraft that is actually participating in a sanctioned racing
event or in tune-up periods for a sanctioned racing event on the waters in this
municipality and that is being operated in accordance with this division (F)
(2). For the purposes of this division (F)(2), a sanctioned racing event is a
racing event that is conducted in accordance with §
96.20 or R.C. § 1547.20 or that is approved by the United States Coast Guard.
The operator of a powercraft that is operated on the waters in this
municipality for the purpose of a sanctioned racing event shall comply with §
96.20 and R.C. § 1547.20 and requirements established under it or with
requirements established by the Coast Guard, as appropriate. Failure to comply
subjects the operator to this section.
      (3)   A powercraft that is being operated on the waters in this
municipality by or for a boat or engine manufacturer for the purpose of
testing, development, or both and that complies with this division (F)(3). The
operator of such a powercraft shall have aboard at all times and shall produce
on demand of a law enforcement officer a current, valid letter issued by the
Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft in accordance with rules adopted
under R.C. § 1547.31(I)(1). Failure to produce the letter subjects the operator
to this section.
   (G)   A law enforcement officer who is trained in accordance with rules
adopted under R.C. § 1547.31(I)(2) and who has reason to believe that a
powercraft is not in compliance with the noise levels established in this
section may direct the operator of the powercraft to submit it to an on-site
test to measure the level of the noise emitted by the powercraft. The operator
shall comply with that direction. The officer may remain aboard the powercraft
during the test at the officer’s discretion. If the level of the noise emitted
by the powercraft exceeds the noise levels established in this section, the
officer may direct the operator to take immediate and reasonable measures to
correct the violation, including returning the powercraft to a mooring and
keeping it at the mooring until the violation is corrected or ceases.
   (H)   A law enforcement officer who conducts powercraft noise level tests
pursuant to this section shall be trained to do so in accordance with rules
adopted under R.C. § 1547.31(I)(2).
(R.C. § 1547.31(A) - (H))
   (I)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree on a first offense. On each subsequent offense, the person is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(J))
§ 96.33 SAFETY EQUIPMENT ON RENTAL VESSELS.
   (A)   No person who lets vessels for hire, or the agent or employee thereof,
shall rent, lease, charter, or otherwise permit the use of a vessel, unless the
person provides the vessel with the equipment required under R.C. §§ 1547.25,
1547.251, 1547.26, 1547.27, 1547.28, 1547.29, and 1547.31 and rules, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, regarding the equipment of
vessels, and complies with the requirements of R.C. §§ 1547.24, 1547.40,
1547.53, 1547.57, and either R.C. § 1547.54 or 1547.542, and rules, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, to implement and enforce those
sections.
(R.C. § 1547.38)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(F))
§ 96.34 CAPACITY PLATE.
   (A)   Required; display.
      (1)   No person, after January 1, 1977, shall manufacture, sell, or offer
for sale any watercraft propelled by machinery as its principal source of
power, or watercraft designed to be manually propelled, less than 20 feet in
length, and designed to carry two or more persons, manufactured after that
date, unless a capacity plate containing the correct information, as prescribed
by regulations adopted by the United States Coast Guard, is firmly attached to
the watercraft. The capacity plate shall be attached in such a location that it
is clearly legible from the position designed or intended to be occupied by the
operator when the watercraft is underway.
      (2)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated on the waters in
this municipality watercraft for which a capacity plate is required under this
section unless the capacity plate is attached.
      (3)   No person shall alter, remove, or deface any information contained
on the capacity plate unless the manufacturer has altered the watercraft in
such a way that would require a change in the information contained on the
capacity plate.
      (4)   As used in this division (A), MANUFACTURE means to construct or
assemble a watercraft, or to alter a watercraft in such a manner as to affect
or change its weight capacity or occupant capacity.
(R.C. § 1547.39)
   (B)   Prohibitions.
      (1)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated on the waters in
this municipality a watercraft to which a capacity plate is attached if the
total load exceeds the weight capacity indicated on the capacity plate, if the
number of persons aboard exceeds the occupant capacity indicated on the
capacity plate, or if the horsepower of any attached outboard motor exceeds the
maximum horsepower indicated on the capacity plate.
      (2)   When no capacity plate exists, no person shall operate or permit to
be operated on the waters in this municipality a watercraft if a reasonably
prudent person would believe that either of the following circumstances
applies:
         (a)   The total load aboard the watercraft has associated with it a
risk of physical harm to persons or property;
         (b)   The total horsepower of any inboard engine or attached outboard
motor has associated with it a risk of physical harm to persons or property.
(R.C. § 1547.40)
   (C)   Penalty. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(F))
§ 96.35 LITTERING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   As used in this section, LITTER means garbage, trash, waste, rubbish,
ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons, vessel parts, vehicle parts,
furniture, glass, or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.
   (B)   No operator or occupant of a vessel shall, regardless of intent,
throw, drop, discard, or deposit litter from any vessel in operation or control
upon or in any waters in this municipality, except into a litter receptacle in
a manner that prevents its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (C)   No operator of a vessel in operation upon any waters in this
municipality shall allow litter to be thrown, dropped, discarded, or deposited
from the vessel, except into a litter receptacle in a manner that prevents its
being carried away or deposited by the elements.
(R.C. § 1547.49)
   (D)   Whoever violates division (B) or (C) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(I))
§ 96.36 DWELLINGS: SANITARY SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Watercraft dwelling unlawful if a nuisance; exception. No person shall
use any vessel for the purpose of establishing or maintaining a dwelling which
creates a nuisance of either permanent or temporary nature on any of the waters
in this state except Lake Erie, the Muskingum River, the Ohio River, and the
immediately connected harbors and anchorage facilities or in such other areas
as may be designated for the purpose.
(R.C. § 1547.32)
   (B)   Discharging sanitary systems prohibited; exception. Except on the
waters of Lake Erie, the Muskingum River, or the Ohio River, no person shall
launch, moor, dock, use, operate, or permit to be operated on any of the waters
in this state any vessel that contains a sink, toilet, or sanitary system that
is capable of discharging urine, fecal matter, contents of a chemical commode,
kitchen wastes, laundry wastes, slop sink drainage, or other household wastes
into the waters in this state. Such a sink, toilet, or sanitary system shall be
removed, sealed, or made to drain into a tank or reservoir that can be carried
or pumped ashore for disposal in a sewage treatment works approved by the
Director of Environmental Protection.
(R.C. § 1547.33)
   (C)   Penalty. Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(F)) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.37 PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF NEGLIGENCE.
   Violations of §§
96.02 through
96.36 and/or R.C. §§ 1547.02 through 1547.36 which result in injury to persons
or damage to property shall constitute prima facie evidence of negligence in a
civil action.
(R.C. § 1547.34)
§ 96.38 REQUIREMENTS FOR OPERATING PERSONAL WATERCRAFT.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate or permit the operation of a personal
watercraft unless each person on the watercraft is wearing a Coast Guard
approved wearable personal flotation device used in compliance with
manufacturer labeling.
      (2)   A person operating a personal watercraft that is equipped by the
manufacturer with a lanyard type engine cutoff switch shall attach the lanyard
to the person, the person’s clothing, or the personal flotation device as
appropriate for the specific watercraft.
      (3)   No person shall operate a personal watercraft at any time between
sunset and sunrise.
      (4)   No person who owns a personal watercraft or who has charge over or
control of a personal watercraft shall authorize or knowingly permit the
personal watercraft to be operated in violation of this chapter or R.C. Chapter
1547.
   (B)   This section does not apply to a person who is participating in a
regatta, race, marine parade, tournament, or exhibition that is operated in
accordance with §
96.20 or R.C. § 1547.20 or that is United States Coast Guard approved.
(R.C. § 1547.41) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.39 NUMBERING.
   (A)   Every watercraft operated on the waters in this municipality shall be
numbered by this state in accordance with federal law or a federally approved
numbering system of another state. A watercraft numbered by this state shall
display the number on the watercraft as provided in R.C. § 1547.57.
   (B)   Watercraft exempt from numbering by the state are:
      (1)   Those currently documented by the United States Coast Guard or its
successor;
      (2)   Those whose principal use is not on the waters in this state and
that have not been used within this state for more than 60 days and have a
valid number assigned under a federally approved numbering system by another
state if the number is displayed in accordance with the requirements of that
system and the certificate of number is available for inspection whenever the
watercraft is on waters in this state;
      (3)   Those from a country other than the United States, temporarily
using the waters in this state;
      (4)   Those whose owner is the United States, a state, or a political
subdivision of a state, that fit either of the following descriptions, and that
are clearly identifiable as such:
         (a)   A powercraft that principally is used for governmental purposes
other than recreational purposes;
         (b)   A watercraft other than a powercraft;
      (5)   A ship’s lifeboat. As used in this division, LIFEBOAT means a
watercraft that is held aboard another vessel and used exclusively for
emergency purposes;
      (6)   Those that have been exempted from numbering by the Chief of the
Division of Parks and Watercraft after the Chief of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft has found that the numbering of the watercraft will not materially
aid in their identification and, if an agency of the United States has a
numbering system applicable to the watercraft, after the Chief of the Division
of Parks and Watercraft has further found that they also would be exempt from
numbering by the United States government if they were subject to the federal
law;
      (7)   Those temporarily using the waters in this state under a waiver
issued by the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft to an organization
sponsoring a race, regatta, or special event. The Chief of the Division of
Parks and Watercraft may issue a waiver upon application by the sponsoring
organization at least 15 days before the date of the proposed race, regatta, or
special event. The waiver shall be effective for ten days including the day or
days of the proposed race, regatta, or special event. Such a waiver does not
obviate the need for compliance with §
96.20 or R.C. § 1547.20;
      (8)   Canoes, rowboats, and inflatable watercraft that are registered
under R.C. § 1547.54 and that an owner, in accordance with this division,
chooses not to have numbered under this section. An owner of a canoe, rowboat,
or inflatable watercraft may choose to do either of the following:
         (a)   Have it numbered under this section, pay a lesser registration
fee under R.C. § 1547.54(A)(2)(a), and obtain square tags under R.C. § 1547.57
(A);
         (b)   Not have it numbered under this section, pay a higher
registration fee under R.C. § 1547.54(A)(2)(b), and obtain a rectangular tag
under R.C. § 1547.57(C).
(R.C. § 1547.53) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.40 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2) or (B) of this section, no
person shall operate or give permission for the operation of any watercraft on
the waters in this municipality unless the watercraft is registered in the name
of the current owner in accordance with R.C. § 1547.54, and the registration is
valid and in effect.
      (2)   (a)   On and after January 1, 1999, if a watercraft that is
required to be issued a certificate of title under R.C. Chapter 1548 is
transferred to a new owner, it need not be registered under R.C. § 1547.54 for
60 days following the date of the transfer, provided that the new owner
purchases a temporary watercraft registration under division (A) of this
section or holds a bill of sale from a watercraft dealer.
         (b)   For the purposes of division (A)(2) of this section, a temporary
watercraft registration or a bill of sale from a watercraft dealer shall
contain at least all of the following information:
            1.   The hull identification number or serial number of the
watercraft;
            2.   The make of the watercraft;
            3.   The length of the watercraft;
            4.   The type of propulsion, if any;
            5.   The state in which the watercraft principally is operated;
            6.   The name of the owner;
            7.   The address of the owner, including the zip code;
            8.   The signature of the owner;
            9.   The date of purchase;
            10.   A notice to the owner that the temporary watercraft
registration expires 60 days after the date of purchase of the watercraft or
that the watercraft cannot be operated on the waters in this State solely under
the bill of sale beginning 60 days after the date of purchase of the
watercraft, as applicable.
      (3)   A person may purchase a temporary watercraft registration from the
Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft or from an authorized agent
designated under R.C. § 1547.54. The Chief of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft shall furnish forms for temporary watercraft registrations to
authorized agents. In addition to completing the registration form with the
information specified in divisions (A)(2) of this section, the person shall pay
one of the applicable fees required under R.C. § 1547.54(A)(2)(a) through (A)
(2)(g) as provided in that section. Moneys received for the payment of
temporary watercraft registrations shall be deposited to the credit of the
Waterways Safety Fund created in R.C. § 1547.75.
      (4)   In addition to the applicable fee required under division (A)(3) of
this section, the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft or an
authorized agent shall charge an additional writing fee of $3 for a temporary
watercraft registration that the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft
or the authorized agent issues. When the temporary watercraft registration is
issued by an authorized agent, the agent may retain the additional writing fee.
When the temporary watercraft registration is issued by the Chief of the
Division of Parks and Watercraft, the additional writing fee shall be deposited
to the credit of the Waterways Safety Fund.
      (5)   A person who purchases a temporary watercraft registration for a
watercraft and who subsequently applies for a registration certificate under
R.C. § 1547.54 need not pay the fee required under R.C. § 1547.54(A)(2) for the
initial registration certificate issued for that watercraft, provided that at
the time of application for the registration certificate, the person furnishes
proof of payment for the temporary watercraft registration.
      (6)   A person who purchases a temporary watercraft registration, who
subsequently applies for a registration certificate under R.C. § 1547.54, and
who is exempt from payment for the registration certificate under R.C. §
1547.54(P), may apply to the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft for
a refund of the amount paid for the temporary watercraft registration at the
time that the person applies for a registration certificate. The Chief of the
Division of Parks and Watercraft shall refund that amount upon issuance to the
person of a registration certificate.
      (7)   All records of the Division of Parks and Watercraft made or
maintained for the purposes of divisions (A)(2) through (A)(8) of this section
are public records. The records shall be available for inspection at reasonable
hours and in a manner that is compatible with normal operations of the
division.
      (8)   Pursuant to R.C. § 1546.04(C)(2), the Chief of the Division of
Parks and Watercraft may adopt rules establishing all of the following:
         (a)   Record-keeping requirements governing the issuance of temporary
watercraft registrations and the use of bills of sale from watercraft dealers
for the purposes of division (A)(2) of this section;
         (b)   Procedures and requirements for the refund of fees under
division (A)(6) of this section;
         (c)   Any other procedures and requirements necessary for the
administration and enforcement of divisions (A)(2) through (A)(8) of this
section.
   (B)   All of the following watercraft are exempt from registration:
      (1)   Those that are exempt from numbering by the State under R.C. §
1547.53(B) through (G);
      (2)   Those that have been issued a commercial documentation by the
United States Coast Guard or its successor and are used exclusively for
commercial purposes;
      (3)   Those that have been documented by the United States Coast Guard or
its successor as temporarily transitting, whose principal use is not on the
waters in this state, and that have not been used within this state for more
than 60 days.
   (C)   No person shall operate a watercraft documented by the United States
Coast Guard or its successor unless the certificate of documentation is valid,
is on the watercraft for which it has been issued, and is available for
inspection whenever the watercraft is in operation. In accordance with 46
C.F.R. § 67, as amended, the watercraft shall display the official number, the
vessel name, and the home port listed on the certificate of documentation.
   (D)   (1)   For the purposes of this section and R.C. § 1547.53, a
watercraft is principally using the waters in this state if any of the
following applies:
         (a)   The owner resides in this state and declares that the watercraft
principally is using the waters in this state.
         (b)   The owner resides in another state but declares that the
watercraft principally is using the waters in this state.
         (c)   The watercraft is registered in another state or documented by
the United States Coast Guard and is used within this state for more than 60
days regardless of whether it has been assigned a seasonal or permanent mooring
at any public or private docking facility in this State.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (D)(1)(c) of this section, a person on
active duty in the armed forces of the United States may register a watercraft
in the person’s state of permanent residence in lieu of registering it in this
state regardless of the number of days that the watercraft is used in this
state.
(R.C. § 1547.531)
   (E)   No person shall operate a watercraft in this municipality if it
displays an identification number or registration decal that is any of the
following:
      (1)   Fictitious;
      (2)   A counterfeit or an unlawfully made copy of any identification
number or registration decal;
      (3)   An identification number or registration decal that belongs to
another watercraft.
(R.C. § 1547.533) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.41 TAGS INDICATING EXPIRATION DATE; ATTACHMENT OF IDENTIFICATION NUMBER.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C) of this section, when the
Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft issues a registration certificate
under R.C. § 1547.54, the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft also
shall issue to the applicant two tags not larger than three inches square,
color coded, indicating the expiration date of the certificate. The owner of
watercraft currently documented by the United States Coast Guard and for which
a registration certificate is issued shall securely affix one tag to the
watercraft’s port side and the other tag to the starboard side so that the tags
are clearly visible under normal operating conditions. The tags shall be
removed from the watercraft when they become invalid. The owner of any other
watercraft for which a registration certificate is issued shall securely affix
one tag to the watercraft’s port side, six inches toward the stern from the
identification number, and the other tag to the starboard side, six inches
toward the stern from the identification number. The tags shall be securely
affixed to the watercraft prior to its operation, but shall be removed from the
watercraft when they become invalid. A person may operate without a
registration certificate issued under R.C. § 1547.54, for a period not to
exceed 45 days, any watercraft required to be titled on the waters in this
state if the person is in compliance with R.C. § 1547.531.
   (B)   The owner of every watercraft requiring numbering by this state shall
attach to each side of the bow of the watercraft the permanent identification
number in such manner as may be prescribed by applicable federal standards in
order that it shall be clearly visible. The number shall be maintained in a
legible condition at all times. No number other than the number assigned to a
watercraft or granted by reciprocity pursuant to R.C. Chapter 1547 shall be
painted, attached, or otherwise displayed on either side of the bow of the
watercraft.
   (C)   When the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft issues a
registration certificate under R.C. § 1547.54 for a canoe, rowboat, or
inflatable watercraft that has not been numbered under R.C. § 1547.53, the
Chief shall also issue to the applicant a tag not larger than three inches by
six inches, with distinguishing color coding and a number for identification
purposes. The owner of the canoe, rowboat, or inflatable watercraft for which
the registration certificate is issued shall affix the tag securely to a
location on the canoe, rowboat, or inflatable watercraft as prescribed by
rules.
   (D)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any watercraft on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.57) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.42 ALTERING OF SERIAL NUMBERS; FALSE INFORMATION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall deface or alter any serial number, model designation,
or other identifying mark on any watercraft or motor as placed thereon by the
manufacturer thereof, or remove, deface, or alter the registration number of
any watercraft as the registration number appears on the bow thereof except by
specific order of the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft.
   (B)   No person shall give purposely false information concerning any
watercraft or motor when applying for registration of the watercraft. Any
certificate issued which is found to be based on such false information is
void.
(R.C. § 1547.66)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(B))
§ 96.43 ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   (A)   Operator to stop and furnish information upon accident or collision.
      (1)   In case of accident to or collision with persons or property on the
waters of this municipality, due to the operation of any vessel, the operator
having knowledge of the accident or collision shall immediately stop the vessel
at the scene of the accident or collision, to the extent that it is safe and
practical, and shall remain at the scene of the accident or collision until he
or she has given his or her name and address and, if he or she is not the
owner, the name and address of the owner of the vessel, together with the
registration number of the vessel, if any, to any person injured in the
accident or collision or to the operator, occupant, owner, or attendant of any
vessel damaged in the accident or collision, or to any law enforcement officer
at the scene of the accident or collision.
      (2)   If the injured person is unable to comprehend and record the
information required to be given by this section, the other operator involved
in the accident or collision shall forthwith notify the nearest law enforcement
agency having authority concerning the location of the accident or collision,
and his or her name, address, and the registration number, if any, of the
vessel he or she was operating, and then remain at the scene of the accident or
collision or at the nearest location from which notification is possible until
a law enforcement officer arrives, unless removed from the scene by an
emergency vehicle operated by the state or a political subdivision or by an
ambulance.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
vessel, the operator so colliding with the vessel shall securely attach the
information required to be given in this section, in writing, to a conspicuous
place in or on the unoccupied or unattended vessel.
(R.C. § 1547.10)
   (B)   Duties after collision or accident; accident reports.
      (1)   The operator of a vessel involved in a collision, accident, or
other casualty, so far as the operator can do so without serious danger to the
operator’s own vessel, crew, and passengers, shall render to other persons
affected by the collision, accident, or other casualty such assistance as may
be practicable and as may be necessary in order to save them from or minimize
any danger caused by the collision, accident, or other casualty. The operator
also shall give the operator’s name, address, and identification of the
operator’s vessel in writing to any person injured and to the owner of any
property damaged in the collision, accident, or other casualty.
      (2)   Any person who renders assistance at the scene of a collision,
accident, or other casualty involving a vessel is not liable in a civil action
for damages or injury to persons or property resulting from any act or omission
in rendering assistance or in providing or arranging salvage, towage, medical
treatment, or other assistance, except that the person is liable for willful or
wanton misconduct in rendering assistance. Nothing in this section precludes
recovery from any tortfeasor causing a collision, accident, or other casualty
of damages caused or aggravated by the rendering of assistance.
      (3)   In the case of collision, accident, or other casualty involving a
vessel, the operator thereof, if the collision, accident, or other casualty
results in loss of life, personal injury requiring medical treatment beyond
first aid, or damage to property in excess of $1,000, or the total loss of a
vessel, shall file with the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft a
full description of the collision, accident, or other casualty on a form
prescribed by the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft.
      (4)   If the operator of the vessel involved in a collision, accident, or
other casualty is incapacitated, the investigating law enforcement officer
shall file the required form as prescribed by the Chief of the Division of
Parks and Watercraft.
(R.C. § 1547.59)
   (C)   Penalty. Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(B)) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.44 ENFORCEMENT.
   Every Sheriff, deputy sheriff, Marshal, deputy marshal, member of the
organized police department of any municipal corporation, police constable of
any township, wildlife officer, natural resources officer, conservancy district
police officer, and other law enforcement officer, within the area of any such
law enforcement officer’s authority, may enforce this chapter, R.C. Chapter
1547 and rules and, in the exercise thereof, may stop and board any vessel
subject to this chapter and R.C. Chapter 1547, and rules.
(R.C. § 1547.63)
§ 96.45 FIREARMS OFFENSES; SIGNALING DEVICES.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      ACTIVE DUTY, CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE, FIREARM, HANDGUN, and VALID
CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2923.11.
      UNLOADED. Has the same meaning meanings as in R.C. § 2923.16(K)(5) and
(K)(6), except that all references in the definition in R.C. § 2923.16(K)(5) to
“vehicle” shall be construed for purposes of this section to be references to
“vessel”.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly discharge a firearm while in or on a vessel.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded firearm in a
vessel in a manner that the firearm is accessible to the operator or any
passenger.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a firearm in a vessel
unless it is unloaded and is carried in one of the following ways:
      (1)   In a closed package, box, or case;
      (2)   In plain sight with the action opened or the weapon stripped, or,
if the firearm is of a type on which the action will not stay open or that
cannot easily be stripped, in plain sight.
   (E)   (1)   The affirmative defenses authorized in R.C. § 2923.12(D)(1) and
(D)(2) are affirmative defenses to a charge under division (C) or (D) of this
section that involves a firearm other than a handgun. It is an affirmative
defense to a charge under division (C) or (D) of this section of transporting
or having a firearm of any type, including a handgun, in a vessel that the
actor transported or had the firearm in the vessel for any lawful purpose and
while the vessel was on the actor’s own property, provided that this
affirmative defense is not available unless the actor, prior to arriving at the
vessel on the actor’s own property, did not transport or possess the firearm in
the vessel or in a motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by this section or R.C.
§ 2923.16(B) or (C) while the vessel was being operated on a waterway that was
not on the actor’s own property or while the motor vehicle was being operated
on a street, highway, or other public or private property used by the public
for vehicular traffic.
      (2)   No person who is charged with a violation of division (C) or (D) of
this section shall be required to obtain a license or temporary emergency
license to carry a concealed handgun under R.C. § 2923.125 or 2923.1213 as a
condition for the dismissal of the charge.
   (F)   Divisions (B), (C), and (D) of this section do not apply to the
possession or discharge of a United States Coast Guard approved signaling
device required to be carried aboard a vessel under R.C. § 1547.251 when the
signaling device is possessed or used for the purpose of giving a visual
distress signal. No person shall knowingly transport or possess any signaling
device of that nature in or on a vessel in a loaded condition at any time other
than immediately prior to the discharge of the signaling device for the purpose
of giving a visual distress signal.
   (G)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
   (H)   (1)   This section does not apply to officers any of the following:
         (a)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or of
the United States, or to a law enforcement officer, when authorized to carry or
have loaded or accessible firearms in a vessel and acting within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s duties;
         (b)   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry or have loaded or accessible firearms in a vessel, and who is subject to
and in compliance with the requirements of R.C. § 109.801, unless the
appointing authority of the person has expressly specified that the exemption
provided in this division (H)(1)(b) does not apply to the person;
         (c)   Any person legally engaged in hunting.
      (2)   Divisions (C) and (D) of this section do not apply to a person who
transports or possesses a handgun in a vessel and who has been issued a
concealed handgun license that is valid at the time of that transportation or
possession or who, at the time of that transportation or possession, is an
active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is carrying a
valid military identification card and documentation of successful completion
of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements described
in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), unless the person knowingly is in a place on the
vessel described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
   (I)   If a law enforcement officer stops a vessel for a violation of this
section or any other law enforcement purpose, if any person on the vessel
surrenders a firearm to the officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a
request or demand of the officer, and if the officer does not charge the person
with a violation of this section or arrest the person for any offense, the
person is not otherwise prohibited by law from possessing the firearm, and the
firearm is not contraband, the officer shall return the firearm to the person
at the termination of the stop.
   (J)   The provisions of R.C. § 2923.16(L) applies with respect to division
(A)(2) of this section, except that all references in R.C. § 2923.16(L) to
“vehicle”, to “this chapter”, or to “division (K)(5)(a) or (b) of this section”
shall be construed for purposes of this section to be, respectively, references
to “vessel”, to “this section”, and to R.C. § 2923.16(K)(5)(a) and (K)(5)(b) as
incorporated under the definition of “firearm” adopted under division (A) of
this section.
(R.C. § 1547.69)
   (K)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(F))
§ 96.46 TAMPERING WITH NAVIGATION AID OR VESSEL PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly:
      (1)   Damage, remove, or tamper with any signal, buoy, or other aid to
navigation;
      (2)   Sever the mooring lines of, set adrift, or tamper with any vessel
that is moored or tied up on the waters in this municipality.
(R.C. § 1547.92)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(F))
§ 96.47 CERTIFICATE OF TITLE; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person, except as provided in §
96.48, shall sell or otherwise dispose of a watercraft or outboard motor
without delivering to the purchaser or transferee a physical certificate of
title with an assignment on it as is necessary to show title in the purchaser
or transferee; nor shall any person purchase or otherwise acquire a watercraft
or outboard motor without obtaining a certificate of title for it in the
person’s name in accordance with R.C. Chapter 1548; however, a purchaser may
take possession of and operate a watercraft or outboard motor on the waters in
this state without a certificate of title for a period not exceeding 60 days if
the purchaser has been issued and has in the purchaser’s possession a dealer’s
dated bill of sale, or in the case of a casual sale, a notarized bill of sale.
(R.C. § 1548.03)
   (B)   Division (A) of this section and §§
96.48 and
96.49 do not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   A watercraft covered by a marine document in effect that has been
assigned to it by the United States government pursuant to federal law;
      (2)   A watercraft from a country other than the United States
temporarily using the waters in this state;
      (3)   A watercraft whose owner is the United States, a state, or a
political subdivision of a state;
      (4)   A ship’s lifeboat. As used in this division (B)(4), LIFEBOAT means
a watercraft that is held aboard another vessel and used exclusively for
emergency purposes;
      (5)   A canoe;
      (6)   A watercraft less than 14 feet in length without a permanently
affixed mechanical means of propulsion;
      (7)   A watercraft less than 14 feet in length with a permanently fixed
mechanical means of propulsion of less than ten horsepower as determined by the
manufacturer’s rating;
      (8)   Outboard motors of less than ten horsepower as determined by the
manufacturer’s rating.
   (C)   The various certificates, applications, and assignments necessary to
provide certificates of title for watercraft and outboard motors shall be made
on appropriate forms approved by the Chief of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft.
(R.C. § 1548.01(B), (C))
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
§ 96.48 MANUFACTURER’S OR IMPORTER’S CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   No manufacturer, importer, dealer, or other person shall sell or
otherwise dispose of a new watercraft or outboard motor to a dealer to be used
by the dealer for purposes of display and resale without delivering to the
dealer a manufacturer’s or importer’s certificate executed in accordance with
this section and with such assignments on it as are necessary to show title in
the name of the purchaser. No dealer shall purchase or acquire a new watercraft
or outboard motor without obtaining from the seller the manufacturer’s or
importer’s certificate.
   (B)   A manufacturer’s or importer’s certificate of the origin of a
watercraft or outboard motor shall contain the following information in such
form and together with such further information as the Chief of the Division of
Parks and Watercraft may require:
      (1)   Description of the watercraft, including the make, year, length,
series or model, if any, body type, hull identification number or serial
number, and make, manufacturer’s serial number, and horsepower of any inboard
motor or motors; or description of the outboard motor, including the make,
year, series or model, if any, manufacturer’s serial number, and horsepower;
      (2)   Certification of the date of transfer of the watercraft or outboard
motor to a distributor or dealer or other transferee, and the name and address
of the transferee;
      (3)   Certification that this was the first transfer of the new
watercraft or outboard motor in ordinary trade and commerce;
      (4)   Signature and address of a representative of the transferor.
   (C)   An assignment of a manufacturer’s or importer’s certificate before a
notary public or other officer empowered to administer oaths shall be printed
on the reverse side of the manufacturer’s or importer’s certificate in the form
to be prescribed by the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft. The
assignment form shall include the name and address of the transferee, a
certification that the watercraft or outboard motor is new, and a warranty that
the title at the time of delivery is subject only to such liens and
encumbrances as are set forth and described in full in the assignment.
(R.C. § 1548.05)
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
§ 96.49 PROHIBITIONS RELATING TO CERTIFICATES OF TITLE.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in this municipality a watercraft for which a certificate
of title is required or a watercraft powered by an outboard motor for which a
certificate of title is required without having the certificate or a valid
temporary permit and number in accordance with R.C. Chapter 1548 or, if a
physical certificate of title has not been issued for it, operate the
watercraft or outboard motor in this state knowing that the ownership
information relating to the watercraft or outboard motor has not has not been
entered into the automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas;
      (2)   Operate in this municipality a watercraft for which a certificate
of title is required, or a watercraft powered by an outboard motor for which a
certificate of title is required, upon which the certificate of title has been
canceled;
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title upon cancellation of it
by the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft and notice of the
cancellation as prescribed in R.C. Chapter 1548;
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas as provided in R.C. Chapter 1548, in case of the destruction or
dismantling or change of a watercraft or outboard motor in such respect that it
is not the watercraft or outboard motor described in the certificate of title;
      (5)   Violate any provision of R.C. Chapter 1548 for which no penalty is
otherwise provided, or any lawful rules adopted pursuant to R.C. Chapter 1548;
      (6)   Operate in this municipality a watercraft or outboard motor knowing
that the certificate of title to or ownership of the watercraft or outboard
motor as otherwise reflected in the automated title processing system has been
canceled.
(R.C. § 1548.18)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 1548.99(A))
§ 96.50 PERMANENTLY DISPLAYED HULL IDENTIFICATION NUMBER.
   (A)   A watercraft constructed on or after November 1, 1972, shall have a
hull identification number permanently displayed and affixed to it in
accordance with federal law.
   (B)   A watercraft constructed before November 1, 1972, shall have a hull
identification number assigned to it by the Chief of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft at the time of registration, at the time of application for title,
after transfer of ownership, or at the time of a change to this state as the
principal location of operation. The number shall be permanently displayed and
affixed as prescribed by rules.
   (C)   A person who builds a watercraft or imports a watercraft from another
county for personal use and not for the purpose of sale shall request a hull
identification number from the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft
and permanently display and affix the number as prescribed by rules.
   (D)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any watercraft on the
waters in this state in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.65)
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(F))
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates a provision of this chapter for which no penalty is
otherwise provided, is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
   (B)   The sentencing court, in addition to the penalty provided under this
chapter for a violation of this chapter that involves a powercraft powered by
more than ten horsepower and that, in the opinion of the court, involves a
threat to the safety of persons or property, shall order the offender to
complete successfully a boating course approved by the National Association of
State Boating Law Administrators before the offender is allowed to operate a
powercraft powered by more than ten horsepower on the waters in this state.
Violation of a court order entered under this division is punishable as
contempt under R.C. Chapter 2705.
(R.C. § 1547.99(L))
CHAPTER 97: PARKS AND PUBLIC FACILITIES
Section
General Provisions
   
97.01   Recreation Board
   
97.02   Board of Park Trustees
   
97.03   Public parks
   
97.04   River Pines R.V. Resort
Cemeteries
   
97.15   Rules and regulations
   
97.16   Head/foot marker requirements
   
97.17   Ornamentation
   
97.18   Sale and transfer
   
97.19   Fees
   
97.20   Operation of village cemetery
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 97.01 RECREATION BOARD.
   (A)   Establishment; powers; membership; Joint Board and District.
      (1)   If the Legislative Authority determines that the power to equip,
operate and maintain parks, play-grounds, playfields, gymnasiums, public baths,
swimming pools or recreation centers shall be exercised by a Recreation Board,
it may establish such a Board, which shall possess all the powers and be
subject to all the responsibilities of the respective local authorities under
R.C. §§ 755.12 through 755.18. The Board shall consist of five persons, two of
whom shall be members of the Board of Education of the Municipal School
District or shall be appointed by that Board of Education. The other members of
the Recreation Board shall be appointed by the Mayor, as executive of the
municipality, with the consent of the Legislative Authority. The members who
are Board of Education members and members appointed by the Board of Education
shall be residents of the school district making the appointment, but need not
be residents of the municipality. All other members of the Board shall be
residents of the municipality. All members of the Board shall serve for terms
of five years, except that the members first appointed shall be appointed for
such terms that the term of one member shall expire annually thereafter.
Members of the Board shall serve without pay. Vacancies on the Board, occurring
otherwise than by expiration of term, shall be for the unexpired term and shall
be filled in the same manner as original appointments.
      (2)   The legislative authorities of the municipal corporations, boards
of township trustees of the townships, boards of township park commissioners,
boards of county commissioners of the counties, and boards of education of the
school districts joined in the operation and maintenance of parks or recreation
facilities under R.C. § 755.16 may, by resolution, establish a Joint Recreation
Board which may possess all the powers and be subject to all the
responsibilities of the respective local authorities under R.C. §§ 755.12
through 755.18. The resolutions shall specify the number of members of the
Joint Recreation Board and the method of appointing members and filling
vacancies. Members of the Board shall serve without pay.
      (3)   If the municipality joins in the operation and maintenance of
recreation facilities under R.C. § 755.16, the Legislative Authority may, by
resolution, establish a Joint Recreation District, consisting of all the
territory of the subdivisions so joined. The Joint Recreation District Board of
Trustees shall be the governing body of a District and shall possess all the
powers of a Legislative Authority of an individual subdivision under R.C. §§
755.12 through 755.18. Subject to R.C. § 755.141, the number of Trustees shall
be fixed by the resolutions creating the District and may be any number so long
as there is representation of all participating subdivisions.
(R.C. § 755.14)
   (B)   Organization of boards.
      (1)   The members of Boards established pursuant to division (A) of this
section shall elect their own Chairperson and Secretary, shall select all other
necessary officers to serve for a period of one year, and may employ such other
persons as are needed. Such Boards may adopt rules for the conduct of all
business within their jurisdiction.
      (2)   A Joint Recreation District Board of Trustees formed pursuant to
division (A)(3) of this section shall appoint one of its members or employ
another as fiscal officer of the District.
(R.C. § 755.15)
§ 97.02 BOARD OF PARK TRUSTEES.
   (A)   Establishment for donated property. When a deed of gift, devise, or
bequest of property or funds to the municipality for park purposes requires the
investment or change of investment of the principal of such property or funds,
or any part thereof, to be made upon the approval of an advisory committee
appointed by a court or judge, or an advisory committee appointed by a civic
organization of the municipality, or by the Legislative Authority, then such
property or funds, and any park for the improvement of which, in whole or in
part, such funds are to be used, or any property for the care or management of
which, in whole or in part, such funds are to be used, shall be managed,
controlled and administered by a Board of Park Trustees.
(R.C. § 755.20)
   (B)   Membership. The Board of Park Trustees mentioned in division (A) of
this section shall consist of four resident electors of the municipality who
shall be appointed by the Mayor and who shall serve without compensation for
the term of four years. The Park Trustees shall be appointed in the first
instance to serve for one, two, three and four years, respectively, and
thereafter their successors shall be appointed one each year to serve for the
term of four years, but not more than two shall be of the same political party.
A vacancy in the Board caused by death, resignation or otherwise shall be
filled in like manner for the remainder of the term.
(R.C. § 755.21)
   (C)   Powers.
      (1)   The Board of Park Trustees shall have the entire management and
control of any property or funds acquired as provided in R.C. § 755.19, all
improvements within any such park, moneys derived from levies made for park
purposes, moneys from the General Fund appropriated by the Legislative
Authority for such purposes, proceeds of bonds issued or sold for park
purposes, moneys or other property donated to the municipality for park
purposes, and all other park property legally acquired. All such moneys shall
be placed in a special fund called the “Park Fund” and shall be disbursed by
the Treasurer only upon a warrant of the Clerk, drawn in accordance with the
order of the Board.
      (2)   Such Board shall have the control and management of parks, park
entrances, parkways, boulevards, connecting viaducts, subways, children’s
playgrounds, public baths and stations of public comfort located in such parks,
of all improvements thereon, and the acquisition, construction, repair and
maintenance thereof. The Board shall exercise exclusively all the powers and
perform all the duties in regard to such property vested in and imposed upon a
director of public service in a city under general law.
      (3)   The Board may apply, control, invest and reinvest the funds coming
or arising from a gift, devise or bequest according to the terms on which the
same are acquired.
(R.C. § 755.22)
   (D)   Compensation; oath; bond. The members of the Board of Park Trustees
shall serve without compensation. Before entering upon the discharge of their
duties, they shall each take the oath of office prescribed by R.C. § 733.68
and, except as otherwise provided in the municipal charter or in R.C. § 3.061,
shall give bond in the sum of $2,500, conditioned according to R.C. § 733.71
and to the approval of the Mayor and the Legislative Authority.
(R.C. § 755.23)
   (E)   Meetings: rules and regulations; Clerk. The Board of Park Trustees
shall hold meetings at least once a month and shall adopt necessary rules for
the regulation of its business. It shall keep a complete record of its
proceedings, which record, or a copy thereof, certified by the Clerk of the
Board, shall be competent evidence of its transactions in the courts of the
state. The yeas and nays shall be called upon the passage of every resolution
or order. Three members of the Board shall constitute a quorum, but no
resolution or order shall be adopted unless three members vote in its favor.
The Municipal Clerk shall act as the Clerk of the Board of Park Trustees, but
shall receive no additional salary or compensation for such services.
(R.C. § 755.24)
§ 97.03 PUBLIC PARKS.
   (A)   The portion of Front Street extending from Hauserman Park to Augusta
Street and commonly referred to the wall and encompassing the south sidewalk of
Front Street and that portion of the bank of the Ohio River extending to the
shore of the Ohio River shall be and is declared to be park land in and within
the village.
   (B)   (1)   All village parks are closed between the hours of 11:00 p.m. to
sunrise.
      (2)   Violation of this division (B) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
      (C)   The Village Administrator is directed to post hours in all village
parks.
(Prior Code, § 97.01) (Ord. 1977-15, passed 6-13-1977; Ord. 2012-27, passed 1-
22-2013)
§ 97.04 RIVER PINES R.V. RESORT.
   (A)   (1)   Water service to the River Pines R.V. Resort is disconnected
during the period of November 1 to April 1.
      (2)   The Village Police Department is authorized to notify and further
ensure that all units within the River Pines R.V. Resort remain unoccupied
during the months of November through March. Persons in violation of this
section shall be given a three-day notice to vacate the premises/unit.
   (B)   Failure to comply with any order to vacate said premises/unit shall
result in a fine of $100 per day for each day the structure remains occupied
beyond the stated compliance date. Any second or subsequent conviction of said
violation shall result in a fine of not more than $250 and/or a 30-day sentence
in County Jail.
(Prior Code, § 97.03) (Ord. 2000-3, passed 3-14-2000)
CEMETERIES
§ 97.15 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The cemeteries are open from 8:00 a.m. to dusk every day.
   (B)   Visitors shall observe good order while in the cemetery. Loud talking,
loud music, excessive vehicle noise or any other type of disruptive behavior is
not permitted. No intoxicating beverages, drugs or hallucinogens shall be
permitted in the village cemeteries.
   (C)   There shall be no littering of waste paper, weeds, grass, garbage,
trash and the like.
   (D)   Pets (with the exception of service dogs on a leash) are not permitted
in the cemeteries.
   (E)   Posted Green Mound cemetery traffic sign regulations must be followed.
The maximum speed limit is 15 miles per hour. The cemetery driveways are narrow
with few pull-off points for traffic traveling in the opposite direction to
pass. The only major parking area is between sections K and I.
   (F)   Shrubs, tress, bushes, vines, monument foundations, unrecorded
cremations, benches, fountains, glass items or any construction is prohibited
without consent of the Village Administrator.
   (G)   All mowing/trimming of cemeteries shall be completed by the village or
contracted service agents.
   (H)   All burials must be human and are to be made in a concrete or metal
vault. Cremation remains must be placed in an approved impervious urn, vault or
other approved impervious container. Ceramic and marble urns must placed in an
impervious vault. Sprinkling of cremation remains (ashes) are only permitted in
a designated scatter area.
   (I)   A maximum of four interments are permitted in a four foot by ten foot
full size grave sire. A secondary level is limited to cremation remains. The
depth of the first level interments will determine second level inability and
the associated open/close and exhumation fees. Some sites within the cemetery
may be limited to one level of cremation remains or an above ground
columbarium; due to topography or substrate conditions. At least one foot of
earth must overlay all in ground burial vaults.
   (J)   The following interment options are a sample of possible single level
grave site usage options. The first two feet of a site is normally reserved for
markers, but can be used for interment with the marker overlaid.
 
Internment Options: 10’ Length x 4’ Wi6’x44’x44’x22’x2’
Site Dimensions
Internment Options:                             10’ Length x 4’ 6’x44’x44’x22’x2’
Site Dimensions                                 Width
95”x 39”x39” Full adult casket/vault      8
48”x21”x24”                                     4   4             4
Infant casket/vault
36”x16”x14”                                     3
Cherub casket/vault
21”x10”x9”                                        2                 2
Cherub casket/vault                  Internment
15”x15”x18”                    area                     2     2                 2
Single urn/vault                     length
15”xl5”x17”                    used                   2 2       2       2
Single urn/vault                      
15”x15”x12”                                 2 2   2   2         2       2
Single short urn/vault
16”x13”x12” Universal urn/vault               2   2   2
15”x30”x18”                                             2 2   2       2
Double urn/vault
Number of occupants per grave site              1 1 2 2 3 1 3 4 2   3 2 1 1 2 2 1     1
Unused feet of interment area length            0 6 4 1 2 4 2 2 6   0 0 0 0 0 0 0     0
 
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 12-10-2024)
Editor’s note:
   These rules and regulations are subject to change to maintain compliance
with R.C. Chapters 517 and 759 and to enhance administrative processes and
procedures. The current version of this document is available on the village
website or at Village Hall.
§ 97.16 HEAD/FOOT MARKER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   All markers must be granite, bronze or other approved material.
Temporary aluminum markers must be legible for a period of one year. The marker
description (composition, dimensions, weight) and placement and associated
foundation should be approved by the Village Administrator before purchase.
 
Head Marker Requirements: Grave    Foundation Requirements
Site Width
Grave site 2’Wx  4’Wx10’L    Foundati on    2’Wx    4’Wx10’L
dimensions                         Dimensions
Graves per 1   2   1   2   4   6                  1    2    1    2   4   6
marker
Maximu m   1”36�48�48�48�48�Minimum depth  24 �24 �24 �24�24�24”
height
Maximu m   16�16�16�16�16�16�Minimum length 24 �24 �24 �24�24�24”
length
Maximu m   12�36�36�60�72�96�Minimum width  20 �44 �44 �68�80�104 ”
width
                                   Maximum height 0” 0” 12 �12�12�12”
                                   above grade
 
      (2)   The first two feet of ten feet length grave sites is reserved for
placement of a head marker/monument to minimize potential settling of
subsequent internments. Some lots are restricted to ground level head markers
or an approved columbarium. Interments made in the monument area may require an
extended time frame before foundation/monument installation. The resale/
transfer of unused site(s) may be prohibited if a common marker overlays unused
site(s).
   (B)   All markers must have level concrete foundations that extend four
inches outward from the edges of the marker and leave at least two inches of
space between it and an adjoining unshared grave site. It must be installed at
ground level (except where required to maintain a level base with a maximum of
one foot above ground). This will minimize the need for trimming grass and
minimize a potential contact with service equipment. The foundation must have
an adequate depth to support the selected marker. Some areas may restrict
foundations and associated markers to the slope of the ground.
   (C)   Only ground level areas may be used at the foot of a grave due to
maintenance/mower requirements. Foot markers may be prohibited in some grave
site areas (noted on section maps). Foot markers are susceptible to heavy
maintenance traffic.
 
Foot Marker Requirements       Foot Marker Foundation Requirements
Grave site 2’Wx  4’Wx10’LRestricted to 8’–10’ length pre-approved sites
dimensions
Graves per n/a n/a 1   n/a n/a Foot marker not shared by grave sites
marker
Maximum                        Foot marker foundation preferred at ground
height             1”        level
                              Minimum foundation depth below grade 24”
Maximum            12”       Maximum foundation marker length 20”
length
Maximum            24”       Maximum foundation width 32”
width
 
   (D)   Grave marker upkeep shall be the responsibility of the family/owners
of the grave(s). The village and its representatives will not be responsible
for any damage, vandalism or upkeep of markers. All rubble and broken grave
markers will be subject to action deemed necessary by the Village Cemetery
Administrator(s).
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 12-10-2024) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.17 ORNAMENTATION.
   (A)   (1)   Ornamentation is restricted to the head marker area above the
ground where it will not impede mowing, trimming and other maintenance tasks.
      (2)   Monuments with built in or top mounted flower holders will aid in
this process.
   (B)   No other add on devices should extend beyond the maximum monument
height of four feet. Sheppard’s Hooks or other extended decoration devises
should not extend more than 18 inches above a monument. They must be removable,
anchored within one inch of the foundation and not extend beyond the monument
area. An owner may present other ideas for approval to the Cemetery
Administrator (i.e., allowing extension of the marker base for approved
decorative containers).
   (C)   Ornamentation of foot markers is prohibited due to access requirements
for maintenance/mowing access.
   (D)   (1)   Decorations are permitted throughout the year.
      (2)   Decorations will be left in place for two weeks after any major
holiday.
      (3)   The cemetery maintenance personnel may discard decorations as
conditions dictate.
      (4)   The recorded owner(s) of the grave(s) shall be the controller in
respect to the placement, care and maintenance of flowers and/or decorations on
the grave(s) within village guidelines.
   (E)   Any ornamentation deemed unsightly will be removed and discarded. Any
object(s) that are determined by the village personnel to be obstructing the
maintenance of the cemeteries shall be removed. They will be stored for a
period of three to six months before disposal after written or oral
notification of recorded owner(s) is attempted.
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 97.18 SALE AND TRANSFER.
   (A)   The deed must specify the full name of the owner(s) and associated
contact information. The owner(s) or beneficiaries are responsible for
notifying the village of any changes in ownership as soon as possible and pay
the applicable transfer fees to ensure that the village can properly administer
the deeded property.
   (B)   A grave must be paid in full before burial can be made or markers or
ornamentation placed.
   (C)   Opening and closing fees must be paid in full at the time of burial or
as arranged by the authorized agent. A maintenance fee is required far each
interment for maintenance and administrative costs.
   (D)   The full names of occupants and related documentation of death are
required for appropriate identification for interment. This includes cremation
remains held for later interment.
   (E)   Graves may be reserved for purchase for 180 days at the option of the
Village Administrator. A payment plan may be accepted. Failure to comply with
arrangements will result in the return of site(s) to the village and the return
of any payments made less the cost of a transfer fee.
   (F)   All sales and transfers must be approved by the Village Administrator.
No graves may be sold for profit. A transfer fee is required for grave
transfers before an existing deed can be modified and a new deed is created. A
partially used grave is only transferable to direct heirs.
   (G)   Violation of cemetery rules may result in fines and/or arrest as
specified in village ordinances.
   (H)   The village and its employees are not responsible for any accident or
injury that may occur on village property.
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 97.19 FEES.
Grave site purchase:                                                               
   Full grave site 4’ width x 10’ length                                   $1,200
   4’ width x 6’ length (cherub casket or cremains)                        $600
   4’ width x 4’ length (cremains)                                         $400
   4’ width x 2’ length (cremains)                                         $120
   2’ width x 2’ length (cremains-only ground level marker over site)      $60
   All sites will be mapped within lots that are delineated with lot markers.  Based on $100
                                                                                  per 2’ x 2’
Transfer fee:
   To cover village administrative costs involved in the transfer of burial    $25 per deed
rights of site(s) from one party to another;
   Including associated current deed modification and creation
Maintenance fee:                                                                  $400
   To cover village administrative and maintenance costs associated with each
interment or exhumation.
   i.e., Grave site maintenance, leveling, reseeding, mowing, trimming and
associated administrative documentation requirements for site(s).
   Payment may be arranged through funeral home.
Landscaped scatter area - Includes scattering, 4” x 3” bronze name plaque to bFuture option
affixed to a granite memorial book/tablet
Grave marker foundation fee:                                                      External
                                                                                  contractor
   To cover an external contractor’s time and material costs associated with
creating a foundation that adheres to the current village’s “Cemetery Rules and
Regulations”, is vetted by the associated Monument Co. and is okayed and
scheduled through the Village Administrator
Opening/closing fees for a full grave site:                                       External
                                                                                  contractor
   Opening/closing fee for an infant or cremation burial
   To cover an external contractor’s time and material costs associated with the
open/close process that adheres to the current village cemetery rules and
regulations
   Note: The maintenance fee to the village is also required
   These costs may be covered through a funeral home arrangement
Exhumation fee:                                                                   External
                                                                                  contractor
   To cover an external contractor’s time and material costs associated with the
exhumation process that adheres to the current village cemetery rules and          
regulations
   Note: The maintenance fee to the village is also required                    
   These costs may be covered through a funeral home arrangement                
Special requests:                                                                  
   Must be arranged through the Village Administrator                           
Note to Table:
All costs are subject to change and should be validated with the village. Current village
cemetery rules and regulations and fees documents are available via the village website or
hardcopy at Village Hall. All activity must be scheduled through the Village Administrator to
avoid scheduling conflicts.
 
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 97.20 OPERATION OF VILLAGE CEMETERY.
   The operation of the village cemetery shall be placed under the Village
Administrator, who shall have all powers and duties as set forth in R.C. §§
759.19 through 759.23.
(Ord. 1990-29, passed 10-9-1990)
CHAPTER 98: PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES; PARADES
Section
   
98.01   Definitions
   
98.02   Parade permits and violations
 
   
98.99   Penalty
§ 98.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ATV. A class of off-road and un-licensed motorized vehicles which includes
all three-, four-, six- or eight-wheel all terrain vehicles, but excluding
other ATV’s powered by electric.
   MARCH. A group of pedestrians forming a procession and moving through public
streets.
   MOTORCYCLE. Any two-wheeled motorized vehicle, including those designed or
designated for on-road and off-road use, but excluding other motorcycles
powered by electric.
   PARADE. A procession consisting of persons marching or in vehicles moving
through the public streets with or without animals, floats, banners and other
decorative displays.
   PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES. A congregation of individuals engaged in any activity,
mobile or stationary, in a location which impedes, hinders or otherwise renders
hazardous the movement of traffic on a public street.
(Prior Code, § 98.01) (Ord. 1999-12, passed 6-8-1999)
§ 98.02 PARADE PERMITS AND VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   All parades, marches and processions, except funeral processions, and
all persons participating in such parades, marches and processions, shall obey
all laws and regulations relating to pedestrian and vehicular traffic. All such
parades, marches and processions shall not obstruct or unreasonably interfere
with the rights of the public to use and enjoy the streets, sidewalks and
public ways of the village. The rights of the public and owners of adjacent
property to access to and from the streets and sidewalks of the village to and
from abutting or adjacent property shall not be unreasonably hindered.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall operate a motorcycle or ATV in a village
sponsored parade, march or procession.
      (2)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle or ATV while participating
in a village sponsored parade, march, or procession.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the provisions contained in division (A) above, the
Village Administrator, or person designated by the Village Administrator, may
grant permission to a group, association or organization holding or sponsoring
a parade, march or procession to do so without strict compliance with special
provisions of the laws and regulations relating to vehicular and pedestrian
traffic, including the section prohibiting motorcycle and ATV participation,
and may restrict parking along a proposed route of a parade, march or
procession and provide police escorts therefor upon the following terms and
conditions.
      (1)   The group, organization or association sponsoring a parade, march
or procession shall apply in writing at least 30 calendar days in advance of
the date of the parade, march or procession for a permit to hold a parade at
variance with the laws and regulations relating to pedestrian and vehicular
traffic. The application is to include the following details:
         (a)   The date, time and proposed route of the parade;
         (b)   The nature of the parade; whether it will consist of or include:
            1.   Pedestrians;
            2.   Vehicles;
            3.   Motorcycles or ATV’s;
            4.   Animals;
            5.   A combination of any of the above; and
            6.   The approximate size or length of the parade.
         (c)   The traffic laws or regulations which the group, association or
organization holding or sponsoring the parade wish to be waived in regard to
it;
         (d)   Whether or not it is desirous that parking be restricted along
the parade route or any part of the parade route; and
         (e)   Whether or not a police escort is desired.
      (2)   The Village Administrator, or person designated by the Village
Administrator, shall, in appropriate cases, have the authority to waive the
time period within which the application for a parade permit must be made.
      (3)   Application for such permit shall be on forms provided by the
Village Administrator or person designated by the Village Administrator, and
shall state:
         (a)   The name and address of the sponsoring group, association or
organization; and
         (b)   The names and addresses and telephone numbers of officers of the
organization or persons authorized to speak for and on behalf of such
organization and to represent the organization in all matters pertaining to the
parade permit.
      (4)   Before issuing a permit, the Village Administrator or person
designated by the Village Administrator shall determine that:
         (a)   Waiver of laws or regulations relating to the movement of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic for the proposed parade will not present an
unreasonable hazard to the village or the public;
         (b)   The waiver of enforcement of laws and regulations relating to
vehicular and pedestrian traffic along the route of the suggested parade will
not substantially and unreasonably increase traffic congestion in the congested
area or in any other area of the village during peak traffic hours;
         (c)   There will be available sufficient village human power to
provide for the reasonably safe movement of the parade and other traffic, the
safety of the public and the restriction of parking along the parade route or
police escorts when requested or when determined to be necessary for the safety
of the public by the Village Administrator or person designated by the Village
Administrator; and
         (d)   The parade will not unreasonably interfere with access to public
or private property adjacent to the streets and sidewalks to the proposed
parade route.
      (5)   If the parade, march or procession involves the use of motor
vehicles, motorcycles, ATV’s, or animals, the organization, group or
association sponsoring or holding the parade shall obtain liability insurance
and provide a copy of the policy to the village, which policy shall:
         (a)   List the sponsoring group, association or organization and the
village as a named insured; and
         (b)   Provide liability coverage against all hazards arising from the
holding of the parade for personal injuries and property damage in the amount
of $500,000.
      (6)   If the Village Administrator, or person designated by the Village
Administrator, finds that the determinations required by division (C)(4) above
cannot be made without changes in the proposed route, time or waiver of laws or
regulations relating to movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic as
requested in the application, or the restriction of parking along the proposed
route, the Village Administrator, or person designated by the Village
Administrator, shall suggest, in writing, alternate times, routes or procedures
or conditions which would meet the requirements of division (C)(4) above. Such
suggestions shall be noted upon the application for the special parade permit.
If these suggestions are accepted in writing, which shall also be noted upon
the application, the Village Administrator or person designated by the Village
Administrator shall proceed as though such changes were originally part of the
application.
   (D)   The Village Administrator or person selected by the Village
Administrator is authorized, whenever it is determined necessary to prohibit or
restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a
part of the route of a parade or a procession, to erect temporary traffic signs
to that effect.
   (E)   (1)   All vehicles parked on Front Street less than three hours from
the start of a scheduled parade will be towed at the owner’s expense.
      (2)   No person shall park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation
of signs described in division (D) above.
   (F)   No person in or upon any sidewalk or in or upon any premises abutting
thereon shall make any speech or harangue or demonstrate, sell or offer for
sale goods, wares or merchandise, or shall display any sign, device,
information or exhibition, in consequence of which there is caused or created
such a gathering of persons on such sidewalk as to interfere with pedestrian
traffic thereon.
   (G)   No pedestrians shall gather and remain in crowds or assemblies at or
about any point or place, or move in crowds or assemblies from place to place,
upon the roadways or sidewalk, in such numbers and in such manner as to
interfere with orderly flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
   (H)   No person shall stand or loiter on any sidewalk, street or public
place in a manner so as to willfully block or obstruct the free passage of
pedestrians or vehicles in the lawful use of sidewalks, streets or public
places.
(Prior Code, § 98.02) (Ord. 1999-12, passed 6-8-1999; Ord. 2000-20, passed 6-
27-2000) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   A violation of any provision of §
98.02 shall be a minor misdemeanor. Whoever is convicted of or pleads guilty to
a violation of any provision of §
98.02 shall be fined not more than $100.
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of any provision
of § 98,02, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
Whoever is convicted of or pleads guilty to any provision of §
98.02 after having been convicted or having pled guilty to any provision of §
98.02 within the last year shall be imprisoned not more than 30 days and fined
not more than $250.
(Prior Code, § 98.99) (Ord. 1999-12, passed 6-8-1999)
CHAPTER 99: TREES
Section
   
99.01   Definitions
   
99.02   Authority of Director of Public Works
   
99.03   Permit required
   
99.04   Placing harmful substances near trees
   
99.05   Placing stone or concrete near trees
   
99.06   Care of trees during building operations
   
99.07   Moving of trees
   
99.08   Trimming of trees on public property
   
99.09   Trimming of trees on private property
   
99.10   Prohibited trees
   
99.11   Preservation and removal of trees on public property
   
99.12   Enforcement; interference
   
99.13   Preservation and removal of trees and shrubs on private property
   
99.14   Inspection; destruction of diseased trees; costs
   
99.15   Gift-A-Tree Program
   
99.16   Tree Fund
 
   
99.99   Penalty
§ 99.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ARBORICULTURE or TREE PRESERVATION. Includes the treating, spraying,
priming, maintaining and any other care or work intended for the strengthening
of trees, and the removal and prevention of tree pests, blights and diseases of
any and all kinds.
   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS or DIRECTOR. The Director of Public Works of the
village.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any public street, public highway, public park or any property
owned or held by the village, within the boundaries of the village.
   TREE. Any tree.
   TREE LAWN. The grassy area of the right-of-way located between the sidewalk
and the roadway along streets with closed curbed and guttered storm drainage
systems. Rights-of-way with open storm drain ditches are not classified as TREE
LAWNS.
   VILLAGE. The Village of New Richmond, Ohio.
(Ord. 2006-2, passed 2-14-2006)
§ 99.02 AUTHORITY OF DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   The Director is given full jurisdiction, authority, control, supervision and
direction of all trees which now or which may hereafter exist upon any public
place in this village, and over all trees which exist upon any private property
in this village when, in his or her opinion, such trees constitute a menace to
public property, public safety or public welfare of this village. The Director
is also given full jurisdiction, authority and control in connection with the
issuing of permits hereinafter provided for. In the exercise of any or all of
the powers herein granted, the Director shall have the authority to delegate
all or such part of his or her power and duties with respect to supervision and
control of trees to his or her subordinates and assistants in the employ of the
village as he or she may, from time to time, determine.
(Ord. 2006-2, passed 2-14-2006)
§ 99.03 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall plant, remove, destroy, cut, prune, fertilize, treat, break,
climb, injure or spray any tree existing on any public place in this village,
or authorize or procure any person to do so, or remove or tamper with any
device placed for the protection of any such tree, or attach any rope, wire,
chain, sign or other device whatsoever either to such tree or to any device
placed for the protection of the tree, or authorize or cause the same to be
done, except having first obtained written permission from the Director to do
so.
(Ord. 2006-2, passed 2-14-2006; Ord. 2007-16, passed 4-24-2007) Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.04 PLACING HARMFUL SUBSTANCES NEAR TREES.
   No person shall permit any natural or artificial gas, salt, brine, water,
oil, liquid dye or any other substances deleterious to trees to come in contact
with the soil surrounding the roots of any tree upon any public place in this
village in such a manner as to kill, injure, deface, destroy or affect the
growth of such trees.
(Ord. 2006-2, passed 2-14-2006; Ord. 2007-16, passed 4-24-2007) Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.05 PLACING STONE OR CONCRETE NEAR TREES.
   (A)   No person shall place or maintain upon the ground in any public place
any stone, concrete, brick or other impervious material or substance in such a
manner as may obstruct the free access of air and water to the roots of any
tree upon any public place in the village, without first having obtained
written permission from the Director.
   (B)   Unless otherwise provided for, there shall be maintained about the
base of the trunk of each such tree at least nine square feet of open ground
for a tree three inches in diameter, and for every two inches of increase of
such diameter, there shall be an increase of at least one square foot of open
ground.
(Ord. 2006-2, passed 2-14-2006; Ord. 2007-16, passed 4-24-2007)
§ 99.06 CARE OF TREES DURING BUILDING OPERATIONS.
   No person in charge of or responsible for the erection, alteration or
removal of any building or structure in the village shall permit any tree upon
any public place in the vicinity of such operation to stand without a good and
sufficient guard or protection as shall prevent injury, damage or defacement to
such tree arising out of, in connection with or by reason of, such operation.
The quality of the guard or protection is to be determined by the Director.
(Ord. 2006-2, passed 2-14-2006; Ord. 2007-16, passed 4-24-2007) Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.07 MOVING OF TREES.
   All moving of trees upon any public place in the village made necessary by
the moving of a building or structure or any other private enterprise shall be
done under the supervision and with the written permission of the Director, and
at the expense of the applicant or person seeking the removal of such tree.
Such applicant, as one of the conditions to obtaining such permission, shall
deposit with the village such sum, in cash, as the Director may determine and
specify to cover all of the cost of moving and replacing such tree, if the
conditions of such permission require the replacement thereof. However, in lieu
of such cash deposit, the Director may, in his or her discretion, accept a good
and sufficient bond in like amount conditioned upon the payment of all the cost
of such moving and replacing.
(Ord. 2006-2, passed 2-14-2006; Ord. 2007-16, passed 4-24-2007) Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.08 TRIMMING OF TREES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   The Director shall, and is directed to, keep all trees standing upon
any public place in the village trimmed so that the branches of such trees
projecting over any public sidewalk, private driveway or into any public street
beyond the curb line shall not conflict with the public welfare.
   (B)   Tree trimming crews that are clearing under power or phone lines must
meet with the Director and get his or her approval before doing the work. The
Director may request the complete removal (cutting to the ground) instead of
trimming, especially if the result of the trimming will create an aesthetically
unpleasing tree.
(Ord. 2006-2, passed 2-14-2006; Ord. 2007-16, passed 4-24-2007) Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.09 TRIMMING OF TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   All trees standing upon private property in the village having branches
projecting into public highways or public places shall, under the supervision
of the Director, be kept trimmed by the owner or occupant of such private
property to such an extent that the lowest branches of such trees shall not
come within seven feet of the ground where they overhang any public sidewalk,
public place or public highway.
(Ord. 2006-2, passed 2-14-2006; Ord. 2007-16, passed 4-24-2007) Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.10 PROHIBITED TREES.
   (A)   No Tree of Heaven, Ailanthus altisima, Box Elder, Acer negundo, Honey
Locust (with thorns) Gleditsia triacanthos, White Poplar or Populus alba shall
be permitted upon any tree lawn in the village, and the Director is authorized
to cause all such trees now existing to be removed.
   (B)   Any Tree of Heaven, Ailanthus altisima, Box Elder, Acer negundo,
native Honey Locust (with thorns) Gleditsia triacanthos, White Poplar or
Populus alba upon private property in the village, in such close proximity to
any public place as will permit the roots of such tree to penetrate through or
under the surface of any public place, is declared to be a public nuisance, and
shall be abated by the Director.
(Ord. 2006-2, passed 2-14-2006; Ord. 2007-16, passed 4-24-2007) Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.11 PRESERVATION AND REMOVAL OF TREES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   The Director shall have the right and duty to trim any tree existing on any
public place in the village so as to ensure the public safety or to preserve
the function or beauty of such public place. He or she shall further have the
right to remove any such tree, or any part thereof, which is in an unsafe
condition or which, by reason of its location or nature, is injurious or
detrimental to other public improvements, or is infected with any injury,
fungus, insect or other pest or disease which cannot otherwise be controlled.
(Ord. 2006-2, passed 2-14-2006; Ord. 2007-16, passed 4-24-2007)
§ 99.12 ENFORCEMENT; INTERFERENCE.
   No person shall interfere with the Director or his or her subordinates or
assistants while engaged in or about the carrying out of the provisions of this
chapter or the doing of any of the work ordered by the Director to be done
hereunder.
(Ord. 2006-2, passed 2-14-2006; Ord. 2007-16, passed 4-24-2007) Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.13 PRESERVATION AND REMOVAL OF TREES AND SHRUBS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   The Director of Public Works is authorized to cause to be inspected any tree
or shrub in the village reported or supposed to be infected, infested by any
parasite or insect pest or in any way reported or supposed to be a menace to
public property, public health, public safety or public welfare or a public
nuisance. If, upon such inspection, the Director determines that such tree or
shrub is infected or infested or is a menace to public property, public safety,
public health or public welfare or is a public nuisance, he or she shall, if
such tree is located on private property, immediately serve upon the owner of
such property a written notice that such tree or shrub must be treated or
removed within five days of the service of such notice. If such owner cannot be
found, a copy of such notice shall be posted upon the affected tree or shrub.
If such tree or shrub is not treated or removed within seven days after the
service or posting of such notice, the Director shall cause such tree to be
treated or removed, at his or her reasonable discretion, and, if removed, to be
disposed of in accordance with current village practices. The cost of such
treatment or removal shall be assessed against the owner of the property in the
same manner as in other cases of the abatement of nuisances, and, in default of
the payment of such cost, the same shall be assessed against the property on
which such tree or shrub is located. In the event that the Director determines
that such tree or shrub constitutes an immediate danger to public property,
public safety, public health or the public welfare, or constitutes a public
nuisance so as to require immediate action, the Director, upon reasonable
determination, shall be empowered to cause the immediate treatment or removal
of such tree or shrub and assess such costs as set forth in this section.
(Ord. 2006-2, passed 2-14-2006; Ord. 2007-16, passed 4-24-2007)
§ 99.14 INSPECTION; DESTRUCTION OF DISEASED TREES; COSTS.
   The Director of Public Works is authorized to cause to be inspected any tree
or shrub within the village reported or supposed to be infected with the Dutch
elm disease or the virus disease phlegm necrosis commonly known as “elm
blight”. If, upon such inspection, the Director determines that such tree or
shrub is infected with either of such diseases, he or she shall, if the tree is
in any public street or grounds within the village, immediately remove and burn
the same in such manner as to prevent, as fully as possible, the spread of such
disease. If such tree is located on private property, the Director shall
immediately serve upon the owner of such property a written notice that such
tree is infected and that the same must be removed and burned under the
supervision of the Director within five days of the service of such notice. If
such owner cannot be found, a copy of such notice shall be posted upon such
infected tree. If such tree is not so removed and burned within seven days
after the service or posting of such notice, the Director shall cause such tree
to be removed and burned. The cost of such removal and burning shall be
assessed against such owner in the same manner as in other cases of the
abatement of nuisances, and in default of payment shall be assessed against the
property on which such tree is located.
(Ord. 2006-2, passed 2-14-2006; Ord. 2007-16, passed 4-24-2007)
§ 99.15 GIFT-A-TREE PROGRAM.
   There is established, in and for the village, a Gift-A-Tree Program, which
shall be administered by the Clerk-Treasurer.
   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall establish a separate designated fund,
maintained in accordance with applicable village finance procedures, to receive
cash donations to the Gift-A-Tree Program.
   (B)   Donations shall be recorded by the name of the donor, the date and the
donation amount. All such donations shall be used solely for the purchase and
placement of trees in the village. Donations may also include trees in lieu of
money.
   (C)   All trees shall be purchased by the Director of Public Works in
accordance with appropriate ordinances of the village. Siting, planting and
maintenance of trees will be the responsibility of and at the sole discretion
of the Director of Public Works. The Director of Public Works is authorized to
adopt rules and regulations as are necessary to implement this program.
   (D)   Donations will be acknowledged by a personal letter to the individual
honored, a representative of the individual memorialized, and the donor
notified as appropriate. The Clerk-Treasurer shall cause a Gift-A-Tree Program
record book to be created, acknowledging donations, honorariums and memorials.
Entered in the Gift-A-Tree Program record book will be individual donations of
trees or monies, which meet or exceed the currently established cost of the
acquisition of a single tree. Donations will be accepted throughout the year
and will be encouraged throughout the year to facilitate planning.
   (E)   The initial minimum donation for inclusion in the Gift-A-Tree Program
record book shall be $50 per tree or the donation of a tree acceptable to the
Director of Public Works. Such amount may be amended, from time to time, by
resolution of the Council so that the Gift-A-Tree Program contribution is
maintained at a level equivalent to the current cost of the acquisition and
placement of individual trees. Donations of lesser amounts than the cost of a
single tree, as currently established or as may be established by resolution of
the Council, may be accepted by the Clerk-Treasurer, but will not be
individually recorded in the Gift-A-Tree Program record book. Such donations
may be, from time to time, at the discretion of the Clerk-Treasurer, added to
the record book in groups representative of purchases of trees and their
placement without regard to specific locations or designations.
(Ord. 2006-2, passed 2-14-2006; Ord. 2007-16, passed 4-24-2007)
§ 99.16 TREE FUND.
   (A)   There is established a special account to be known as the Tree Fund
which account shall be maintained in accordance with regulations of the State
Auditor and administrated by the Clerk-Treasurer of the village.
   (B)   Upon the submittal of an application for a zoning permit for any new
residential structure, the owner or applicant shall pay an urban forestry fee
of $75 per lot to the village’s Tree Fund.
   (C)   This fund shall be used for the purpose of planting approved trees in
established tree lawns and for accessory materials to be utilized in the
planting of such trees. The planting of trees within the tree lawns will be
done in a manner so as to add a variety of species, placed to assure proper
visibility and clearances at intersections and from accessory items such as
utilities, electric components and the like. Not all parcels within a
subdivision may receive trees. Surplus funds from this fund may be deposited
into a tree maintenance account. The Tree Fund may also be used for the
planting of trees within village parks, other public areas and the tree
nursery.
(Ord. 2006-2, passed 2-14-2006; Ord. 2007-16, passed 4-24-2007)
Cross-reference:
   Creation of funds, see §
40.20
§ 99.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree, and each day during which the violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 2006-2, passed 2-14-2006; Ord. 2007-16, passed 4-24-2007)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
111.   VEHICLES FOR HIRE
      
112.   PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND    SOLICITORS
      
113.   COMMERCIAL AMUSEMENTS
      
114.   TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING SERVICES
      
115.   SPECIALIZED SALES AND SERVICES
      
116.   CELLULAR OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
      
117.   MOBILE FOOD UNITS
      
118.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
110.01   Licenses required to engage in certain businesses; exceptions
   
110.02   Application for license
   
110.03   Issuance of license
   
110.04   Date and duration of license
   
110.05   License not transferable
   
110.06   License certificate to be displayed
   
110.07   Revocation or suspension
   
110.08   Appeal and review
 
   
110.99   General penalty for Title XI
Statutory reference:
   Revocation of licenses for conviction of certain fraud and theft offenses,
see R.C. § 2961.03
§ 110.01 LICENSES REQUIRED TO ENGAGE IN CERTAIN BUSINESSES; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall engage in any of the trades, businesses, or
professions for which licenses are required by Title XI or by any other
ordinance of the municipality or provision of this code without first applying
for and obtaining a license from the Clerk or other duly authorized issuing
authority.
   (B)   The municipality shall not require a license for:
      (1)   The owner of any product of his or her own raising, or the
manufacturer of any article manufactured by him or her, to vend or sell, by
himself, herself or his or her agent, any such article or product, including
but not limited to agricultural articles or products offered or exposed for
sale by the producer;
      (2)   Any person who by state or federal law or constitutional provision
has been exempted from obtaining such license;
      (3)   Any person selling by sample only;
      (4)   Advertising;
      (5)   Any sale under order of court or at a bona fide auction;
      (6)   Any sale at wholesale to a retail dealer.
Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   Municipal licensing power, exceptions, see R.C. §§ 715.27, 715.48, and
715.60 through 715.68
§ 110.02 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   All original applications for licenses, unless otherwise specifically
provided, shall be made to the Clerk or other authorized official in writing
upon forms to be furnished by him or her and shall contain:
      (1)   The applicant’s full name, address, and telephone number, and the
full name of each officer, partner or business associate, if applicable;
      (2)   His or her present occupation and principal place of business;
      (3)   His or her place of residence for the preceding five years;
      (4)   The nature and location of the intended business or enterprise;
      (5)   The period of time for which the license is desired;
      (6)   A description of the merchandise, goods or services to be sold;
      (7)   If a motor vehicle is to be used, a full description of such motor
vehicle, including the make, model, year, color, license number, and vehicle
registration (VIN) number of such vehicle.
      (8)   Such other information concerning the applicant and his or her
business as may be reasonable and proper, having regard to the nature of the
license desired.
   (B)   Any change in the information required by division (A) of this section
must be reported to the Clerk or other authorized official within 14 days of
such change.
   (C)   Renewal of an annual license may be granted to a licensee in good
standing on the basis of the original application, unless otherwise provided.
However, if a request for renewal is not submitted to the Clerk or other
authorized official within 21 days after the date of expiration for the
preceding license, the applicant must fill out an original application.
   (D)   With each original or renewal application, the applicant shall deposit
the fee required for the license requested.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful to knowingly make any false statement or
representation in the license application.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.03 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   Upon receipt of such application for a license, accompanied by the proper
fee, if approval by another officer or department is not required, the Clerk,
with the written approval of the Mayor or other chief administrative officer,
shall deposit the fee in the General Fund of the municipality and issue to the
applicant a proper license certificate signed by the Clerk and Mayor or other
chief administrative officer. If for any reason the license is not issued, this
fee less $5 to cover administrative expenses of considering such application
shall be returned to the applicant.
§ 110.04 DATE AND DURATION OF LICENSE.
   A license shall not be valid beyond the expiration date therein specified
and, unless otherwise provided, shall not extend beyond December 31 of the year
issued. However, at any time after December 1, licenses may be issued for the
next calendar year. Unless otherwise specified, the full annual fee will be
required of licensees irrespective of the date of issuance of the license.
§ 110.05 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   Every license shall be issued to a real party in interest in the enterprise
or business, and unless otherwise provided, no license shall be assigned or
transferred.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.06 LICENSE CERTIFICATE TO BE DISPLAYED.
   Every licensee carrying on business at a fixed location shall keep posted in
a prominent place upon the premises the license certificate. Other licensees
shall carry their licenses at all times, and whenever requested by any officer
or citizen, shall exhibit such license.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.07 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   (A)   Any license may be suspended or revoked by the Mayor or other chief
administrative officer at any time for the following reasons:
      (1)   For conditions or considerations which, had they existed at the
time of issuance, would have been valid grounds for its denial;
      (2)   For any misrepresentation of a material fact in the application
discovered after issuance of the license;
      (3)   For any misrepresentation or materially false statement made in the
course of carrying on the trade, business or profession;
      (4)   For violation of any provision of this chapter or other federal,
state or municipal law or ordinance relating to the operation of the business
or enterprise for which the license has been issued; or
      (5)   Upon conviction of a licensee for any federal, state or municipal
law or ordinance involving the creation of a nuisance, a breach of the peace,
interference with the rights of property owners, or any other offense
constituting a threat to the public health, safety, morals or general welfare
of the public.
   (B)   The suspension or revocation shall become effective upon notice served
upon such licensee. The notice shall contain a written summary of the reasons
for the suspension or revocation and a statement concerning the right to appeal
the decision. The notice shall be delivered by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the address given on the licensee’s application.
§ 110.08 APPEAL AND REVIEW.
   In case any applicant has been denied a license, or if his or her license
has been suspended or revoked, the applicant or licensee shall within ten
business days have the right to appeal to the Legislative Authority from such
denial, suspension or revocation. Notice of appeal shall be filed in writing
with the Clerk or other authorized official who shall fix the time and place
for a hearing which shall be held not later than 21 days thereafter. The Clerk
shall notify the Mayor and all members of the Legislative Authority of the time
and place of such hearing not less than 24 hours in advance thereof. Three
members of the Legislative Authority shall constitute a quorum to hear such
appeal. The appellant may appear and be heard in person or by counsel. If,
after hearing, a majority of the members of the Legislative Authority present
at such meeting declare in favor of the applicant, the license shall be issued
or fully reinstated as the case may be; otherwise the order appealed from shall
become final.
§ 110.99 GENERAL PENALTY FOR TITLE XI.
   Whoever violates any provision of this title, for which another penalty is
not already provided, shall be fined not more than $500, imprisoned for not
more than six months, or both.
CHAPTER 111: VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Section
Taxicabs
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   Certificate of public convenience and necessity required
   
111.03   Application for certificate
   
111.04   Issuance of certificate
   
111.05   Liability insurance required
   
111.06   License fees
   
111.07   Transfer of certificates and licenses
   
111.08   Suspension and revocation of certificates
   
111.09   Taxicab driver’s license
   
111.10   Application for driver’s license
   
111.11   Examination of applicant; motor vehicle operator’s permit required
   
111.12   Police investigation of applicant; traffic and police record
   
111.13   Consideration of application
   
111.14   Issuance of license; duration; annual fee
   
111.15   Display of license
   
111.16   Suspension and revocation of license
   
111.17   Failure to comply with federal, state and municipal laws
   
111.18   Vehicle equipment and maintenance
   
111.19   Designation of taxicabs
   
111.20   Taximeter and display of rates required
   
111.21   Number of passengers allowed
   
111.22   Articles left in vehicles
   
111.23   Vehicles from other municipalities
   
111.24   Receipts
   
111.25   Refusal of passenger to pay legal fare
   
111.26   Solicitation, acceptance and discharge of passengers
   
111.27   Open stands; use
   
111.28   Taxicab service
   
111.29   Manifests
   
111.30   Records and reports of holders
   
111.31   Police department; duty to enforce chapter
   
111.32   Disposition of vehicle license fees
Horse Drawn Carriages
   
111.45   License required
   
111.46   Application for license
   
111.47   License fee
   
111.48   Carriage equipment requirements
   
111.49   Liability insurance
   
111.50   Revocation of license
 
   
111.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Power to establish taxi stands and fix rates, see R.C. § 715.25   
   Power to regulate, see R.C. §§ 715.22 and 715.66
TAXICABS
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CERTIFICATE. A certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the
Legislative Authority authorizing the holder thereof to conduct a taxicab
business in this municipality.
   DRIVER’S LICENSE. The permission granted by the municipality to a person to
drive a taxicab upon the streets of the municipality.
   HOLDER. A person to whom a certificate of public convenience and necessity
has been issued.
   LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY. Means the Legislative Authority of the municipality
or an authorized municipal official designated by the Legislative Authority of
the municipality.
   MANIFEST. A daily record prepared by a taxicab driver of all trips made by
such driver showing time and place of origin, destination, number of
passengers, and the amount of fare of each trip.
   OPEN STAND. A public place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere, in
the municipality which has been designated and reserved exclusively for the use
of taxicabs.
   PERSONS. Includes an individual, a corporation or other legal entity, a
partnership, and any unincorporated association.
   TAXICAB. A motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business of carrying
passengers for hire, having a seating capacity of less than five passengers and
not operated on a fixed route.
   TAXIMETER. A meter, instrument or device attached to a taxicab which
measures mechanically the distance driven and the waiting time upon which the
fare is based.
   WAITING TIME. The time when a taxicab is not in motion from the time of
acceptance of a passenger or passengers to the time of discharge, but does not
include any time that the taxicab is not in motion if due to any cause other
than the request, act or fault of a passenger.
§ 111.02 CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate or permit a taxicab owned or controlled by him or
her to be operated as a vehicle for hire upon the streets of the municipality
without having first obtained a certificate of public convenience and necessity
from the Legislative Authority.
Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.03 APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE.
   An application for a certificate shall be filed with the Legislative
Authority upon forms provided by the municipality; and such application shall
be verified under oath and shall furnish the following information:
   (A)   The name and address of the applicant.
   (B)   The financial status of the applicant, including the amounts of all
unpaid judgments against the applicant and the nature of the transaction or
acts giving rise to such judgement.
   (C)   The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers.
   (D)   Any facts which the applicant believes tend to prove that public
convenience and necessity require the granting of a certificate.
   (E)   The number of vehicles to be operated or controlled by the applicant
and the location of proposed depots and terminals.
   (F)   The color scheme or insignia to be used to designate the vehicle of
the applicant.
   (G)   Such further information as the Legislative Authority may require.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 111.04 ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   If the Legislative Authority finds that further taxicab service in the
municipality is required by the public convenience and necessity and that the
applicant is fit, willing, and able to perform such public transportation and
to conform to the provisions of this chapter and the rules promulgated by the
Legislative Authority, then the Legislative Authority shall issue a certificate
stating the name and address of the applicant, number of vehicles authorized
under such certificate and the date of issuance; otherwise, the application
shall be denied.
   (B)   In making the above findings, the Legislative Authority shall take
into consideration the number of taxicabs already in operation, whether
existing transportation is adequate to meet the public need, the probable
effect of increased service in local traffic conditions, and the character,
experience, and responsibility of the applicant.
§ 111.05 LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   No certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be issued or
continued in operation unless there is in full force and effect liability
insurance for each vehicle authorized in the amount of $100,000 for bodily
injury to any one person, $300,000 for injuries to more than one person which
are sustained in the accident, and $50,000 for property damage resulting from
any one accident. Such liability insurance shall inure to the benefit of any
person who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to property proximately
caused by the negligence of a holder, his or her servants or agents. Policies
shall be filed with the Legislative Authority prior to issuance of license, and
shall be retained by the Legislative Authority during the term of the license.
Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.06 LICENSE FEES.
   No certificate shall be issued or continued in operation unless the holder
has paid an annual license fee of an amount to be determined by the Legislative
Authority for the right to engage in the taxicab business and an amount to be
determined by the Legislative Authority for each vehicle operated under a
certificate of public convenience and necessity. Such license fees shall be for
the calendar year and shall be in addition to any other license fees or charges
established by the proper authority and applicable to such holder or the
vehicles under his or her operation and control.
§ 111.07 TRANSFER OF CERTIFICATES AND LICENSES.
   No certificate of public convenience and necessity or license may be sold,
assigned, mortgaged or otherwise transferred without the consent of the
Legislative Authority.
Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.08 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATES.
   (A)   A certificate issued under the provisions of this section may be
revoked or suspended by the Legislative Authority if the holder thereof has:
      (1)   Violated any of the provisions of this section;
      (2)   Discontinued operations for more than 30 days;
      (3)   Violated any state or local law or regulations which reflects
unfavorably on the fitness of the holder to offer public transportation.
   (B)   Prior to suspension or revocation, the holder shall be given notice of
the proposed action to be taken and shall have an opportunity to be heard.
§ 111.09 TAXICAB DRIVER’S LICENSE.
   No person shall operate a taxicab for hire upon the streets of the
municipality, and no person who owns or controls a taxicab shall permit it to
be so driven, and no taxicab licensed by the municipality shall be so driven at
any time for hire, unless the driver of such taxicab shall have first obtained
and shall have then in force a taxicab driver’s license under the provisions of
this section.
Penalty, see §
111.99
Statutory reference:
   Minors not to drive taxicabs, see R.C. § 4507.321
   State driver’s license law, see R.C. Chapter 4507
§ 111.10 APPLICATION FOR DRIVER’S LICENSE.
   (A)   An application for a taxicab driver’s license shall be filed with the
Police Chief on forms provided by the municipality, and such application shall
be verified under oath and shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The names and addresses of four residents of the municipality who
have known the applicant for a period of one year and who will vouch for the
sobriety, honesty, and general good character of the applicant.
      (2)   The experience of the applicant in the transportation of
passengers.
      (3)   The educational background of the applicant.
      (4)   The concise history of his or her employment.
   (B)   Each application shall be accompanied by a certificate from a
reputable physician of the municipality certifying that, in his or her opinion,
the applicant is not inflicted with any disease or infirmity which might make
him or her an unsafe or unsatisfactory driver. At the time the application is
filed the applicant shall pay a fee of $5.
Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.11 EXAMINATION OF APPLICANT; MOTOR VEHICLE OPERATOR’S PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Before any application is finally passed upon by the Police Chief the
applicant shall be required to pass a satisfactory examination as to his or her
knowledge of the municipality and to show that he or she has a current motor
vehicle operator’s permit issued by the State of Ohio.
§ 111.12 POLICE INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT; TRAFFIC AND POLICE RECORD.
   The Police Chief shall conduct an investigation of each applicant for a
taxicab driver’s license and a report of such investigation and a copy of the
traffic and police record of the applicant, if any, shall be attached to the
application.
§ 111.13 CONSIDERATION OF APPLICATION.
   The Police Chief, upon consideration of the application and the reports and
certificates required to be attached thereto, shall approve or reject the
application. If the application is rejected, the applicant may request a
personal appearance before the Police Chief to offer evidence why the
application should be reconsidered.
§ 111.14 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; DURATION; ANNUAL FEE.
   (A)   Upon approval of an application for a taxicab driver’s license, the
Police Chief shall issue a license to the applicant which shall bear the name,
address, age, signature and photograph of the applicant.
   (B)   Such license shall be in effect for the remainder of the calendar
year. A license for every calendar year thereafter shall issue upon the payment
of $3 unless the license for the preceding year has been revoked.
§ 111.15 DISPLAY OF LICENSE AND RATES.
   Every driver licensed under this chapter shall post his or her driver’s
license in such a place as to be in full view of all passengers while the
driver is operating a taxicab.
Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.16 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The Police Chief is hereby given the authority to suspend any driver’s
license issued under this section for a driver’s failing or refusing to comply
with the provisions of this section, such suspension to last for a period of
not more than 14 days. The Police Chief is also given authority to revoke any
driver’s license for failure to comply with the provisions of this section.
However, a license may not be revoked unless the driver has received notice and
has had an opportunity to present evidence on his or her behalf.
§ 111.17 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH FEDERAL, STATE AND MUNICIPAL LAWS.
   Every driver licensed under this chapter shall comply with all federal,
state and municipal laws. Failure to do so will justify the suspending or
revoking of a license by the Police Chief.
Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.18 VEHICLE EQUIPMENT AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Prior to the use and operation of any vehicle under the provisions of
this section, a license shall be issued for such vehicle by the Legislative
Authority. Each application for a license shall be filed with the police
department. The Police Chief shall endorse thereon approval of the mechanical
conditions as set forth hereunder. The applicant must present to the Police
Chief a certificate of a local garage whose name appears on a list prepared and
approved by the Police Chief. Such certificate shall be on a form provided by
the municipality stating that the taxicab has been inspected and that it meets
the standard of safety as prescribed by the Police Chief. Furthermore, the
certificate must state that the vehicle is found to be in a good condition of
mechanical operation. Each taxicab must receive a similar inspection every
third month thereafter by an approved local garage, and a similar certificate
shall be provided the Police Chief on each occasion. All costs of inspection
shall be borne by the applicant.
   (B)   Every vehicle operating under this section shall be periodically
inspected by the police department at such intervals as shall be established by
the Police Chief to ensure the continued maintenance of safe operating
conditions.
   (C)   Every vehicle operating under this chapter shall be kept in a clean
and sanitary condition, according to rules and regulations promulgated by the
Police Chief.
Penalty, see §
111.99
Statutory reference:
   Seat belts required in, see R.C. § 4513.263
§ 111.19 DESIGNATION OF TAXICABS.
   Each taxicab shall bear on the outside of each rear door, in painted letters
not less than four inches nor more than six inches in height, the name of the
owner or cab company and in addition, may bear an identifying design, approved
by the Legislative Authority. No taxicab shall have a color scheme or
identifying design, which in the opinion of the Legislative Authority,
conflicts with or imitates any color scheme or identifying design used on
vehicles already operating under this chapter, in such a manner as to be
misleading or tend to deceive or defraud the public.
Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.20 TAXIMETER AND DISPLAY OF RATES REQUIRED.
   (A)   All taxicabs operated under the authority of this chapter shall be
equipped with taximeters fastened in front of the passengers, visible to them
at all times day and night; and after sundown, the face of the taximeter shall
be illuminated. Such taximeter shall be operated mechanically by a mechanism or
from one of the front wheels by a flexible and permanently attached driving
mechanism. They shall be sealed at all points and connections that would effect
their correct reading and recording if manipulated. Each taximeter shall have
thereon a flag to denote when the vehicle is employed and when it is not
employed; and it shall be the duty of the driver to place the flag of such
taximeter into a nonrecording position on the termination of each trip. The
taximeters shall be subject to inspection from time to time by the police
department. Any inspector or other officer of the police department is hereby
authorized either on complaint of any person or without such complaint to
inspect any meter and upon discovery of any inaccuracy therein, to notify the
person operating such taxicab to cease operation. Thereupon such taxicab shall
be kept off the highways until the taximeter is repaired and in the required
working condition.
   (B)   Every taxicab shall display at all times a printed rate card of the
fares and rates to be charged passengers for transportation. No operator shall
charge a fare or rate in excess of those so displayed.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 111.21 NUMBER OF PASSENGERS ALLOWED.
   No taxicab operator shall seat or transport more passengers within the
taxicab than the number of passengers rated by the manufacturer of the vehicle.
Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.22 ARTICLES LEFT IN VEHICLES.
   Drivers of taxicabs shall promptly deliver to the police department all
property of value left in their vehicles by passengers.
Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.23 VEHICLES FROM OTHER MUNICIPALITIES.
   Taxicabs having no license with this municipality and the place of business
of the owner of which is not in the municipality may bring passengers into the
municipality but may not pick up new passengers or accept any business within
the municipality.
Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.24 RECEIPTS.
   The driver of any taxicab shall, upon demand by the passenger, render to
such passenger a receipt for the amount charged, either by a mechanically
printed receipt or by a specially prepared receipt on which shall be the name
of the owner, license number or vehicle number, amount of meter reading or
charges and date of transaction.
Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.25 REFUSAL OF PASSENGER TO PAY LEGAL FARE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the fare of any taxicab
after having hired the same, and it shall be unlawful for any persons to hire
any taxicab with the intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired of the
value of such service. Whoever violates this section shall be charged with
theft pursuant to either appropriate state law or pursuant to the appropriate
theft offense under Chapter 131 of this code.
§ 111.26 SOLICITATION, ACCEPTANCE AND DISCHARGE OF PASSENGERS.
   (A)   Solicitation of passengers by driver. No driver shall solicit
passengers for a taxicab except when sitting in the driver’s compartment of
such taxicab or while standing immediately adjacent to the curb side thereof.
The driver of any taxicab shall remain in the driver’s compartment or
immediately adjacent to his or her vehicle at all times when such vehicle is
upon the public street, except that when necessary, a driver may be absent from
his or her taxicab for not more than five consecutive minutes, and provided
further that nothing herein contained shall be held to prohibit any driver from
alighting to the street or sidewalk for the purpose of assisting passengers
into or out of such vehicle.
   (B)   Prohibited solicitation. No driver shall solicit patronage in a loud
or annoying tone of voice or by sign or in any manner to annoy any person or
obstruct the movement of any persons, or follow any person for the purpose of
soliciting patronage.
   (C)   Receipt and discharge of passengers on sidewalk only. Drivers of
taxicabs shall not receive or discharge passengers in the roadway but shall
pull up to the right hand sidewalk as nearly as possible or in the absence of a
sidewalk, to the extreme right hand side of the road and there receive or
discharge passengers, except upon one-way streets, where passengers may be
discharged at either the right or left sidewalk, or the side of the roadway in
the absence of a sidewalk.
   (D)   Additional passengers. No driver shall permit any other persons to
occupy or ride in such taxicab, unless the person first employing the taxicab
shall consent to the acceptance of additional passenger or passengers, except
for the transportation of school children to or from school on a regular pickup
schedule. No charge shall be made for an additional passenger except when the
additional passenger rides beyond the previous passengers destination and then
only for the additional distance so traveled. If two or more passengers are
transported to different destinations, the taximeter shall be reset at the end
of each trip.
   (E)   Refusal to carry orderly passengers prohibited. No driver shall refuse
or neglect to convey any orderly person, upon request, unless previously
engaged or unable or forbidden by the provisions of this chapter to do so.
   (F)   Prohibitions of drivers. It shall be a violation of this chapter for
any driver of a taxicab to solicit business for any hotel, or to attempt to
divert patronage from one hotel to another. Neither shall such driver engage in
selling intoxicating liquors or solicit business for any house of ill repute or
use his or her vehicle for any purpose other than the transporting of
passengers, or the transporting of parcels or packages not exceeding 100
pounds.
Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.27 OPEN STANDS; USE.
   Open stands shall be used by the different drivers on a first come-first
served basis. The driver shall pull on to the open stand from the rear and
shall advance forward as the cabs ahead pull off. Drivers shall stay within
five feet of their cabs; they shall not solicit passengers or engage in loud or
boisterous talk while at an open stand. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed as preventing a passenger from boarding the cab of his or her choice
that is parked at open stands.
Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.28 TAXICAB SERVICE.
   All persons engaged in the taxicab business in the municipality operating
under the provisions of this chapter shall render a comprehensive taxicab
service to the public desiring to use taxicabs. Holders of certificates of
public convenience and necessity shall maintain a central place of business for
the purpose of receiving calls and dispatching cabs. They shall answer all
calls received by them for services inside the corporate limits of the
municipality, as soon as they can do so and if such services cannot be rendered
within a reasonable time they shall notify the prospective passengers how long
it will be before the call can be answered and give the reason therefor. Any
holder who refuses to accept a call anywhere in the corporate limits of the
municipality, at any time when such holder has available cabs, or who fails or
refuses to give comprehensive taxicab service, shall be deemed a violator of
this chapter and the certificate granted to such holder shall be revoked at the
discretion of the Legislative Authority.
Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.29 MANIFESTS.
   (A)   Each driver shall maintain a daily manifest upon which are recorded
all trips made each day, showing time and place of origin and destination of
each trip and amount of fare, and all such completed manifests shall be
returned to the owner by the driver at the conclusion of his or her tour of
duty. The forms for each manifest shall be furnished to the driver by the owner
and shall be of a character approved by the Police Chief.
   (B)   Every holder of a certificate of public convenience and necessity
shall retain and preserve all driver’s manifests in a safe place for at least
the calendar year next preceding the current calendar year, and such manifests
shall be available to the Legislative Authority, Police Chief, or other
authorized official.
Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.30 RECORDS AND REPORTS OF HOLDERS.
   (A)   Every holder shall keep accurate records of receipts from operations,
operating, and other expenses, capital expenditures, and such other operating
information as may be required by the Legislative Authority. Every holder shall
maintain the records containing such information and other data required by
this chapter at a place readily accessible for examination by the Legislative
Authority.
   (B)   Every holder shall submit reports or receipts, expenses, and
statistics of operation to the Legislative Authority for each calendar year, in
accordance with a uniform system prescribed by the Legislative Authority. Such
reports shall reach the Legislative Authority on or before the 15th of February
of the year following the calendar year for which such reports are prepared.
   (C)   All accidents arising from or in connection with the operation of
taxicabs which result in death or injury to any person, or in damage to any
vehicle or to any property in the amount exceeding the sum of $25 shall be
reported within 24 hours from the time of occurrence to the police department
in a form of report to be furnished by the department.
Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.31 POLICE DEPARTMENT; DUTY TO ENFORCE CHAPTER.
   The police department is hereby given the authority and is instructed to
watch and observe the conduct of holders and drivers operating under this
chapter. Upon discovering a violation of the provision of this chapter, the
police department shall report the same to the Mayor or other designated
official, who will order or take appropriate action.
§ 111.32 DISPOSITION OF VEHICLE LICENSE FEES.
   All monies and receipts which are derived from the enforcement of the
vehicle licensing fees of this chapter shall be credited and paid into a
separate fund, known as the “Public Service Street Repair Fund.” All monies and
receipts credited to such Fund shall be used for the sole purpose of repairing
streets, avenues, alleys, and lanes within the municipality.
Statutory reference:
   Vehicle license money to be used for street repairs, see R.C. § 715.66
HORSE DRAWN CARRIAGES
§ 111.45 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate an animal drawn carriage for hire upon the streets
and public ways in the village without a valid license.
(Prior Code, § 114A.01) (Ord. 1990-13, passed 5-8-1990) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.46 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   (1)   License application for a carriage for hire shall be on forms as
designated by the Police Chief and, at a minimum, shall contain:
         (a)   Name and address of the applicant;
         (b)   The trade name under which the business is conducted;
         (c)   The seating capacity of the carriage for which the license is
being sought;
         (d)   The days of week and hours of operation of the carriage; and
         (e)   Information concerning the liability insurance required under
this subchapter.
      (2)   Upon the filing of the application, an inspection shall be made by
the Chief of Police, or his or her designee. If the carriage meets the
requirements of this subchapter, the Chief of Police shall make a
recommendation to the Mayor that a license be issued.
   (B)   The license shall be issued by the Mayor upon the recommendation from
the Chief of Police or such person(s) designated by the Chief. The license
shall be issued to the applicant for the specific carriage being licenses and
is not transferable. The license issued under this subchapter shall be
displayed on the licensed carriage while in operation. Carriage licenses shall
expire on December 31 of the year of issuance.
(Prior Code, § 114A.02) (Ord. 1990-13, passed 5-8-1990)
§ 111.47 LICENSE FEE.
   A nonrefundable license fee of $10 shall be submitted with the application
for a license. If the license is denied because of noncompliance with the
provisions of this subchapter, a new application and fee must be submitted.
(Prior Code, § 114A.03) (Ord. 1990-13, passed 5-8-1990)
§ 111.48 CARRIAGE EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   Each carriage operating on the license issued under the provisions of this
subchapter shall, at a minimum, have the following equipment.
   (A)   Lighting system. Carriages operating on open public streets and ways
during the time requiring headlights as defined by the state statutes shall
have two headlamps capable of emitting a white light visible a distance of at
least 500 feet ahead of the carriage and two tail lamps capable of emitting a
red light visible at least 500 feet from the rear of the carriage.
   (B)   Slow moving vehicle emblem. A triangular slow moving vehicle emblem
shall be mounted so as to be visible for a distance of 500 feet from the rear.
   (C)   Reflective material. Reflective material shall be upon the shafts of
the vehicle or other part of the vehicle parallel thereto so as to render the
vehicle visible from the side after dark from a distance of 500 feet.
   (D)   Braking systems. The carriage shall be equipped with a braking device
capable at all times and under all conditions in which it is operated, of being
stopped upon application of the braking system.
   (E)   Safety restraint system. The carriage shall be equipped with a safety
device that shall help provide protection from sudden starts, stops and jolts
from the operation of the carriage. The restraint may be of the type used in a
motor vehicle or a devise that loops over the shoulders of the passengers.
   (F)   Fecal matter. Each carriage shall be quipped with a method of
collection of fecal matter of the animal drawing the carriage. The operator of
the carriage shall be responsible for the removal of any excrements that fall
upon the roadway. Accumulated fecal matter shall be removed from the village
upon the close of the operation for the day. The animals may remain within the
village only under the conditions of the zoning code.
(Prior Code, § 114A.04) (Ord. 1990-13, passed 5-8-1990) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.49 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   All licensee under this subchapter shall provide proof of, and maintain
proof of general liability insurance in the minimum amount of $500,000 by a
surety or insurance company approved by the village. The policy shall indemnify
the village and shall have a lost payable clause in favor of the village and
shall further provide that the surety or insurance company shall notify the
village, Office of Village Administration, 102 Willow Street, New Richmond,
Ohio, 45157, in writing, via certified mail, at least 30 days prior to any
reduction in limits or termination of the policy.
(Prior Code, § 114A.05) (Ord. 1990-13, passed 5-8-1990)
§ 111.50 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The Mayor, Chief of Police or any police officer may, upon the confirmation
of a violation of the provisions of this subchapter, take any of the following
actions:
   (A)   Temporarily revoke the license until the violation is corrected, but
the revocation shall be for not more than 14 days;
   (B)   Issue a citation to the village Mayor’s Court for a violation of this
subchapter; and/or
   (C)   Upon conviction of a violation of this subchapter, or any municipal or
state traffic law, resulting from the operation of the carriage licensed under
this subchapter, the Mayor may permanently revoke the license.
(Prior Code, § 114A.06) (Ord. 1990-13, passed 5-8-1990)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Whoever shall be convicted of a violation of §§
111.45 to
111.50 shall be fined not more than $100 and each day shall be deemed a
separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 114A.99) (Ord. 1990-13, passed 5-8-1990)
CHAPTER 112: PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   License requirement
   
112.03   Application procedure
   
112.04   Standards for issuance
   
112.05   Revocation procedure
   
112.06   Standards for revocation
   
112.07   Appeal procedure
   
112.08   Exhibition of identification
   
112.09   Municipal policy on soliciting
   
112.10   Notice regulating soliciting
   
112.11   Duty of solicitors
   
112.12   Uninvited soliciting prohibited
   
112.13   Time limit on soliciting
Statutory reference:
   Municipal power to regulate, see R.C. §§ 715.61, 715.63, and 715.64
   Revocation of licenses for conviction of certain fraud and theft offenses,
see R.C. § 2961.03
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. The business carried on by any person who is an itinerant
merchant, peddler, or solicitor as defined in this section.
   GOODS. Merchandise of any description, and includes but is not limited to
wares and foodstuffs.
   ITINERANT MERCHANT. Any person, whether as owner, agent, or consignee, who
engages in a temporary business of selling goods within the municipality and
who, in the furtherance of such business, uses any building, structure,
vehicle, or any place within the municipality.
   PEDDLER. Any person, not an itinerant merchant, who:
      (1)   Travels from place to place by any means carrying goods for sale,
or making sales, or making deliveries; or
      (2)   Without traveling from place to place, sells or offers goods for
sale from any public place within the municipality.
   SOLICITOR. Any person who travels by any means from place to place, taking
or attempting to take orders for sale of goods to be delivered in the future or
for services to be performed in the future. A person who is a solicitor is not
a peddler.
§ 112.02 LICENSE REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Any person who is an itinerant merchant, peddler, or solicitor shall
obtain a license before engaging in such activity within the municipality as
required by Chapter 110.
   (B)   The fee for the license required by this chapter shall be as set from
time to time by the Legislative Authority.
   (C)   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable.
   (D)   All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire 90 days after the
date of issuance thereof.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 112.03 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall file an
application with the Clerk or other authorized official. This application shall
be signed by the applicant if an individual, or by all partners if a
partnership, or by the president if a corporation. The applicant may be
requested to provide information concerning the following items:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   (a)   The name of the individual having management authority or
supervision of the applicant’s business during the time that it is proposed to
be carried on in the municipality;
         (b)   The local address of such individual;
         (c)   The permanent address of such individual;
         (d)   The capacity in which such individual will act;
      (3)   The name and address of the person, if any, for whose purpose the
business will be carried on, and, if a corporation, the state of incorporation;
      (4)   The time period or periods during which it is proposed to carry on
applicant’s business;
      (5)   (a)   The nature, character, and quality of the goods or services
to be offered for sale or delivered;
         (b)   If goods, their invoice value and whether they are to be sold by
sample as well as from stock, where and by whom such goods are manufactured or
grown, and where such goods are at the time of application;
      (6)   The nature of the advertising proposed to be done for the business;
      (7)   Whether or not the applicant, or the individual identified in
division (A)(2)(a) above, or the person identified in division (A)(3) has been
convicted of any crime or misdemeanor and, if so, the nature of each offense
and the penalty assessed for each offense.
   (B)   Applicants for peddler or solicitor licenses may be required to
provide further information concerning the following items, in addition to that
requested under division (A) above:
      (1)   A description or photograph of the applicant;
      (2)   A description of any vehicle proposed to be used in the business,
including its registration number, if any.
   (C)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall attach to
their application, if required by the municipality, credentials from the
person, if any, for which the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing
the applicant to act as such representative.
   (D)   Applicants who propose to handle foodstuffs shall also attach to their
application, in addition to any attachments required under division (C), a
statement from a licensed physician, dated not more than 14 days prior to the
date of application, certifying the applicant to be free of contagious or
communicable disease.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 112.04 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application, an investigation of the applicant’s
business reputation and character shall be made.
   (B)   The application shall be approved unless such investigation discloses
tangible evidence that the conduct of the applicant’s business would pose a
substantial threat to the public health, safety, or general welfare. In
particular, the following tangible evidence will constitute valid reasons for
disapproval of an application:
      (1)   The applicant has been convicted within the last three years of any
felony, or convicted within the last three year of any misdemeanor involving a
sex offense, a drug trafficking offense, or any offense of violence against
persons or property;
      (2)   The applicant has made willful misrepresentations in the
application;
      (3)   The applicant has committed prior violations of ordinances
pertaining to itinerant merchants, peddlers, solicitors, and the like;
      (4)   The applicant has committed prior fraudulent acts; or
      (5)   The applicant has a record of continual breaches of solicited
contracts.
§ 112.05 REVOCATION PROCEDURE.
   Any license or permit granted under this chapter may be revoked by the Clerk
or other designated official after notice and hearing, pursuant to the
standards in §
112.06. Notice of hearing for revocation shall be given in writing, setting
forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the
hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the licensee at his or her last known
address, at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing.
§ 112.06 STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION.
   A license granted under this chapter may be revoked for any of the following
reasons:
   (A)   Fraud or misrepresentation contained in the license application;
   (B)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in connection with
the business being conducted under the license;
   (C)   Violation of this chapter;
   (D)   Conviction of the licensee of any felony, or conviction of the
licensee of any misdemeanor involving a sex offense, a drug trafficking
offense, or any offense of violence against persons or property; or
   (E)   Conducting the business licensed in an unlawful manner or in such a
way as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the
public.
§ 112.07 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a decision under §
112.04 or
112.06 shall have the right to appeal to the Legislative Authority. The appeal
shall be taken by filing with the Legislative Authority, within 14 days after
notice of the decision has been mailed to such person’s last known address, a
written statement setting forth the grounds for appeal. The Legislative
Authority shall set the time and place for a hearing, and notice for such
hearing shall be given to such person in the same manner as provided in §
112.05.
   (B)   The order of the Legislative Authority after the hearing shall be
final.
§ 112.08 EXHIBITION OF IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   Any license issued to an itinerant merchant under this chapter shall
be posted conspicuously in or at the place named therein. In the event more
than one place within the municipality shall be used to conduct the business
licensed, separate licenses shall be issued for each place.
   (B)   The Clerk or other authorized official shall issue a license to each
peddler or solicitor licensed under this chapter. The license shall contain the
words “Licensed Peddler” or “Licensed Solicitor,” the expiration date of the
license, and the number of the license. The license shall be kept with the
licensee during such time as he or she is engaged in the business licensed.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 112.09 MUNICIPAL POLICY ON SOLICITING.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the municipality that the
residents in the municipality shall make the determination of whether
solicitors shall be, or shall not be, invited to their respective residences.
§ 112.10 NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING.
   (A)   Notice of the refusal of invitation to solicitors to any residence
shall be given on a weatherproof card, approximately three inches by four
inches in size, exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the residence,
indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the applicable words,
as follows:
         NO SOLICITORS INVITED
   (B)   The letters shall be at least one-third of an inch in height. For the
purpose of uniformity, the Police Chief may provide the cards to persons
requesting, at the cost thereof, if available.
   (C)   The card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon.
§ 112.11 DUTY OF SOLICITORS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any premises
in the municipality upon which a residence is located to first examine the
notice provided for in §
112.10 if any is attached, and be governed by the statement contained on the
notice. If the notice states “NO SOLICITORS INVITED,” then the solicitor,
whether registered or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the
premises.
   (B)   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether
invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 112.12 UNINVITED SOLICITING PROHIBITED.
   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or
create any sound in any manner calculated to attract the attention of the
occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the
occupant thereof and engage in soliciting in defiance of the notice exhibited
at the residence in accordance with the provisions of §
112.10 above.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 112.13 TIME LIMIT ON SOLICITING.
   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a
residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound
in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such
residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof
and engage in soliciting, prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.
Penalty, see §
110.99
CHAPTER 113: COMMERCIAL AMUSEMENTS
Section
   
113.01   Bowling; billiards and pool
   
113.02   Circuses, carnivals, shows and other such entertainment
   
113.03   Deposit required
   
113.04   License fee for public entertainment or exhibition
   
113.05   License fee may be waived for civic interest
   
113.06   Special events
   
113.07   Coin-operated amusement devices
 
   
113.99   Penalty
§ 113.01 BOWLING; BILLIARDS AND POOL.
   Each proprietor of a billiard or pool table or of a bowling alley, or a
combination of both, shall pay an annual license fee of $25 for one such table;
$25 for one such alley; and $10 for each additional table or each additional
alley.
Penalty, see §
113.99
Statutory reference:
   Power to regulate billiards and bowling alleys, see R.C. § 715.51
§ 113.02 CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS, SHOWS AND OTHER SUCH ENTERTAINMENT.
   (A)   (1)   Each person, desiring to conduct, stage or give a circus,
carnival, theatrical exhibition, public show, athletic game or other such
entertainment, for which money or reward is demanded or received, shall first
obtain a license and pay the license fee or fees provided herein.
      (2)   Public school entertainment, lecture courses, and lectures on
historic, literary, or scientific subjects are not subject to the provisions of
this chapter.
   (B)   In addition to the requirements of §
110.02, the applicant for a license to conduct, stage, or give such exhibition
shall give at least one week’s notice in writing to the Mayor or other
authorized official, stating the dates of the performances, and the location at
which the performances are to be presented. The Mayor or other chief
administrative officer shall give his or her consent to the issuance of such
license if he or she deems that the location is suitable for the purpose; that
it will properly accommodate the patrons; that the nature of the performance or
exhibition does not pose a threat to the health, safety or general welfare of
the public; and that the use of such location will not create too great a
burden upon the police department or the fire department.
   (C)   No circus, carnival, theatrical exhibition, public show, athletic game
or other such entertainment shall be given for more than two consecutive days,
except in cases where the Legislative Authority by special resolution shall
allow a longer period, or where such exhibition is to be conducted on municipal
property and the use thereof for a longer period shall have been approved by
the Legislative Authority.
Penalty, see §
113.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate shows and games, exceptions, see R.C. § 715.48
   Preservation of peace and protection of property, see R.C. § 715.49
§ 113.03 DEPOSIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   At the time application for a license is made, where use of municipal
grounds is contemplated, the applicant shall deposit with the Clerk or other
designated municipal official a cash bond in an amount to be determined by the
Legislative Authority, conditioned upon the restoration and cleaning up of the
grounds in a manner satisfactory to the Mayor or other chief administrative
officer. In the event the grounds are restored and cleaned up properly
following the exhibition, the deposit shall be returned; otherwise the same
shall be forfeited to the municipality to the extent of actual costs to the
municipality for restoration and cleaning up of the grounds.
   (B)   No licensee shall fail to restore or clean up the grounds upon which
such circus, carnival or other such entertainment has taken place.
Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.04 LICENSE FEE FOR PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT OR EXHIBITION.
   The fee for such license shall be established by the Legislative Authority,
and a schedule of such fees shall be available from the Clerk or other
designated official.
§ 113.05 LICENSE FEE MAY BE WAIVED FOR CIVIC INTEREST.
   The Mayor or other chief administrative officer may, in his or her
discretion, grant without cost a license for the holding of a circus, carnival,
theatrical exhibition, public show, athletic game or other such entertainment
where all of the performances are fostered and supervised by civic interests of
the municipality, and a substantial part of the funds derived therefrom is
expended for charitable or civic purposes.
§ 113.06 SPECIAL EVENTS.
   (A)   Short title. This section shall be known as and may be cited as the
“Special Events Ordinance”.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CHIEF OF POLICE. The Chief of Police, or his or her authorized
representative.
      PERMIT. A permit, as required by this section.
      PERMITTEE. Any person or organization who or that has been issued a
special events permit by the Chief of Police.
      PERSON or APPLICANT. Any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind. An APPLICANT must be 18 years
of age or older.
      SOUND-AMPLIFYING SYSTEM. Any system of electrical hook-up or connection,
loudspeaker system or equipment, sound-amplifying system, and any apparatus,
equipment, device, instrument or machine designed for or intended to be used
for the purpose of amplifying the sound or increasing the volume of the human
voice, musical tone, vibration or sound wave.
      SPECIAL EVENT. The temporary use, with a valid permit, of public
property, including streets, sidewalks, parks, and community centers for the
purposes of conducting certain short-term events such as art shows, music
concerts, fundraising events, sidewalk sales, amusements, attractions,
circuses, carnivals, sporting events, including, but not limited to,
walkathons, marathon runs, exhibitions or related activities. SPECIAL EVENTS
shall include parades and festivals. A SPECIAL EVENT includes events with an
anticipated attendance in excess of 500.
   (C)   Interference with special event prohibited. No person shall knowingly
join or participate in any special event in violation of any of the terms,
conditions or regulations of the permit issued therefor, or knowingly join or
participate in any special event without the consent and over the objection of
the permittee or in any manner interfere with the orderly conduct of such
event.
   (D)   Permit required; fee required.
      (1)   No person shall organize, produce, direct, conduct, manage,
institute or carry on any special event without a permit first had and obtained
from the village. An event permit is required if the applicant desires to
reserve and preempt public use of a portion of public property for a temporary
period. No person shall promote, advertise, encourage or solicit attendance or
otherwise participate in anyway in a special event for which such permit has
been suspended or revoked. The Village Community Development Office and the
Village Police Department will approve all permits. The fee for the event
permit shall be as determined by separate fee schedule as created and amended
from time to time by the Village Council.
      (2)   Upon receipt of an application for a special event permit, the
Chief of Police shall provide the applicant with a statement of the estimated
cost of providing police personnel for traffic and crowd control at the event.
The applicant/sponsor of the event shall be required to prepay the traffic and
crowd control fees prior to the issuance of a special event permit. Traffic and
crowd control by police personnel includes clearing the event route or site of
unauthorized vehicles, diversion of traffic around the event and directing
pedestrian and vehicular traffic along the route of an event.
      (3)   The traffic and crowd control fees will be computed by determining
the number of police personnel who will be required for traffic and crowd
control in addition to those who would otherwise be on duty at that time, the
number of hours the police personnel will be on duty for the event, and the
village’s full cost of providing the personnel on an hourly basis as
established by Police Department fee schedule. In determining traffic and crowd
control fees, the Chief of Police shall establish a fee based on the applicant/
sponsor’s use of monitors for the event.
      (4)   If the cost for traffic and crowd control on the date of the event
is less than the estimated cost pursuant to division (E)(1) above, the
applicant/sponsor will be promptly refunded the difference by the village.
      (5)   The applicant/sponsor of an event involving the sale or furnishing
of food or beverages, erection of structures, horses or other large animals, or
water aid stations shall be required to provide a cleanup deposit prior to the
issuance of a special event permit. The cleanup deposit shall be in the amount
established in a cleanup fee schedule adopted by Village Council resolution.
      (6)   The cleanup deposit shall be returned after the event if the area
used for the permitted event has been cleaned and restored to the same
condition as existed prior to the event.
      (7)   If the property used for the event has not been properly cleaned or
restored, the applicant/sponsor shall be billed for the actual cost by the
village for the cleanup and restoration, and the cleanup deposit (or a portion
thereof) shall be applied toward payment of the bill. If the applicant/sponsor
disputes the bill, he or she may appeal to the Director of Public Works within
five days after receipt of the bill. Should there be any unexpended balance on
deposit after completion of the work, this balance shall be refunded to the
applicant/sponsor. Should the amount of the bill exceed the cleanup deposit,
the difference shall become due and payable to the village upon the applicant’s
receipt of the bill.
   (E)   Submittal of application. An application for a permit for a special
event shall be filed with the village not less than ten or more than 120 days
before the date proposed for holding a special event. The applicant or his or
her authorized agent shall sign such application. Annual festivals will have
priority.
   (F)   Contents of application. Application for a permit to hold a special
event shall be made on forms provided by the village and approved by the Police
Department.
      (1)   The application shall contain the following:
         (a)   The name and address of the applicant and, if the same is a
corporation, the names of its principal officers or, if the same is a
partnership, association, organization or fictitious company, the names of the
partners or persons comprising the association, organization or company, the
names of the partners or persons comprising the association, organization or
company with the address and telephone number of each;
         (b)   A detailed description of the special event proposed to be held,
the number of persons participating in the event, number of spectators and
vehicles expected, the purpose of the event, the date hours and location where
the event is proposed to be held, and the participant entry fee, if any, to be
charged;
         (c)   A detailed description of the equipment to be used, if any,
including the number and types of vehicles the number of sounding-amplifying
systems whether mounted portable, or stationary, the time and area of operation
of the sound-amplifying systems, the number and type of special units such as
musical groups, animal zoos or shows and the like;
         (d)   An agreement that the village shall be compensated for any
damage to public property, and that the site shall be cleaned and restored to
the condition in which it found prior to the holding of the special event;
         (e)   A detailed list of items to be sold and/or given away;
         (f)   The application shall be signed by the applicant under penalty
of perjury;
         (g)   Roads, sidewalks and parking lanes to be closed;
         (h)   Proposed electrical outlet usage; and
         (i)   Such other information as the Special Events Committee may
require to adequately evaluating the application.
      (2)   Additional information required for parades, races and other events
occurring along a route.
         (a)   The assembly point for the event, the time at which units of the
parade or other event will begin to assembly;
         (b)   The route to be traveled;
         (c)   Whether the parade or other event will occupy all or only a
portion of the streets proposed to be traversed;
         (d)   The intervals of space to be maintained between units of a
parade or other event;
         (e)   The number, types and size of floats; and
         (f)   Material and maximum size of any signs or banners to be carried
along the route.
      (3)   Additional information required for an event at which beer or wine
will be sold or furnished and consumed:
         (a)   A diagram of the event location which shows the area to which
the sale or furnishing of beer or wine and its consumption shall be confined;
and
         (b)   A description of how the area will be segregated from other
event activities by means of fixed or portable barricades, walls, ropes or
other devices.
      (4)   Supplemental information. Any supplemental information which the
Chief of Police shall find reasonably necessary, under the particular
circumstances of the special event application, to determine whether to
approve, or conditionally approve, a special event permit.
   (G)   Procedure for processing special event permit applications. All
applications for permits to hold special events shall be filed with the Village
Community Development Department for investigation of the persons involved with
the activity proposed to be conducted, and other facts, circumstances and
information relating to such application; and the Village Community Development
Department shall, within seven days after the filing of a completed
application, grant or refuse to issue a permit unless additional information is
required. All permits proposed to be denied or granted by the Village Community
Development Department staff shall be submitted to the Village Administrator
for review and approval prior to issuance. If the Village Administrator objects
to the issuance of the permit, the application will be submitted to the Village
Council for action.
   (H)   Other permits. Prior to the issuance of a permit under this section,
the applicant for such permit shall obtain any state or county permits required
by law.
   (I)   Surety; insurance.
      (1)   Prior to the issuance of a special event permit, the permit
applicant and authorized officer of the sponsoring organization, if any, must
sign an agreement to reimburse the village for any costs incurred by it in
repairing damage to village property occurring in connection with the permitted
event proximately caused by the actions of the permittee/sponsoring
organization, its officers, employees or agents, or any person who was, under
the permittee’s sponsoring organization’s control insofar as permitted by law.
The agreement shall also provide that the permittee/sponsoring organization
shall defend the village against, and indemnify and hold the village harmless
from, any liability to any persons resulting from any damage or injury
occurring in connection with the permitted event proximately caused by the
actions of the permittee/sponsoring organization, its officers, employees or
agents, or any person who was under the permittee’s/sponsoring organization’s
control insofar as permitted by law. Persons who merely join in a parade or
event are not considered by that reason alone to be “under the control” of the
permittee/sponsoring organization.
      (2)   (a)   The applicant/sponsor of an event must possess or obtain
public liability insurance to protect against loss from liability imposed by
law for damages on account of bodily injury and property damage arising from
the event. Such insurance shall name, on the policy or by endorsement, as
additional insureds the village, its officers, employees and agents. Insurance
coverage must be maintained for the duration of the event.
         (b)   Coverage shall be a comprehensive general liability insurance
policy.
         (c)   Minimum limits required:
            1.   Five hundred thousand dollars each person bodily injury;
            2.   One million dollars each occurrence bodily injury;
            3.   One hundred thousand dollars each occurrence property damage;
or
            4.   One million dollars each occurrence combined single limit
bodily injury and property damage.
         (d)   If food or non-alcoholic beverages are sold or served at the
event, the policy must also include an endorsement for products liability in an
amount not less than $500,000. If wine or beer is sold or furnished at the
event, the policy must also include an endorsement for liquor liability in an
amount not less than $1,000,000. At any time when the insurance coverage
required under this section may be purchased by a permit applicant through a
village-held insurance policy, such coverage shall be made available to all
permit applicants at the rates stated in the policy premium schedule.
      (3)   A copy of the policy or a certificate of insurance along with all
necessary endorsements must be filed with the Chief of Police no less than five
days before the date of the event, unless the Chief of Police, for good cause,
waives the filing deadline. The special event permit shall not be issued by the
Chief of Police until after the insurance policy or certificate of insurance
along with necessary endorsements have been filed by the applicant/sponsor.
   (J)   Conditions for the granting of a permit.
      (1)   As a condition to granting a permit, the Village Manager or Council
may impose reasonable terms and regulations concerning the time and place of
such event, the area and manner of conducting such event; the maximum number of
persons participating therein; the regulation of traffic, if required,
including the number and type of vehicles, the number and type of signs and
barricades to be provided by applicant, if any, together with a plan of their
disposition attached to the application; permissible decibel levels; and such
other requirements as it may find reasonable and necessary for the protection
of persons and property.
      (2)   The Village Administrator may require the applicant to compensate
the village for incidental costs such as utility charges, increased, fire and/
or police protection and/or additional lifeguard services. The permittee, as a
condition to granting the permit, agrees to bear such costs.
      (3)   As an additional condition to granting such permit, the applicant
shall be required to ensure the participants and spectators of the special
event abide by the rules and regulations of this and all other applicable
local, state and federal laws.
      (4)   The applicant may request a waiver of any condition set forth
herein.
   (K)   Grounds for denial of permit.
      (1)   The village shall not issue any permit if it finds any of the
following:
         (a)   The application is not on the form provided or does not contain
the required information;
         (b)   The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or
fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a permit;
         (c)   The building, structure, equipment or location of such special
event does not comply with or fails to meet all of the health, zoning, fire and
safety requirements or standards of all of the ordinances of the village, the
county or the state applicable thereto;
         (d)   The activity or location of the activity is such as to interfere
with or unreasonably obstruct the free flow of vehicular traffic or other means
of travel on any public street, or with pedestrian traffic on the sidewalks;
         (e)   Proof of insurance, as may be required by this section as a
prerequisite to the holding of a special event, has not been filed with the
village;
         (f)   The conduct of the special event will be contrary to law;
         (g)   The conduct of the special event will unreasonably interfere
with the preservation of the public peace, health, safety or welfare of the
public;
         (h)   The applicant has had a similar special event permit denied for
good cause within one year prior to the application, and can show no material
change in circumstances since such denial;
         (i)   The applicant refuses to agree to, abide by or comply with all
conditions and regulations attendant upon such permit; and/or
         (j)   Such event will interfere or conflict with another event for
which a permit has already been issued, or will interfere or conflict with
another event for which no permit is required by this code.
      (2)   The village shall notify the applicant in writing specifically
stating all reasons for denial of the permit.
   (L)   Reconsideration of application. The Village Council may reconsider all
or part of an application for a permit, or any previously granted, either upon
request of the applicant or the Village Manager after five days’ written notice
thereof to the applicant. Such motion for reconsideration shall be a condition
precedent to judicial review.
   (M)   Contents of permit. A special event permit shall contain the
following:
      (1)   The name of the person or organization to whom issued;
      (2)   The address and telephone numbers of the person or organization
named on the permit;
      (3)   The type of activity for which the permit has been issued;
      (4)   The date, hour and location for the event;
      (5)   Expiration date; and
      (6)   Any conditions imposed on the holding of such special event.
   (N)   Permit conditions for sale or furnishing of beer or wine at special
events. The sale or furnishing of beer or wine at a special event shall be
authorized only under the following conditions.
      (1)   A license to sell alcoholic beverages is obtained from the state if
required by state law or regulation.
      (2)   The sale or furnishing of beer or wine is limited to those persons
who may lawfully consume alcoholic beverages.
      (3)   The sale or furnishing and consumption of beer or wine is confined
to a specific, predetermined location approved by the Chief of Police, such as
a beer garden or wine garden, which is segregated from other event activities
by means of fixed or portable barricades, walls, ropes or other devices.
      (4)   Beer or wine is not sold or furnished in metal or glass containers,
however, event souvenir containers of metal or glass may be approved if the
applicant demonstrates that their use will not constitute a safety hazard.
      (5)   The sale or furnishing of beer or wine can be accomplished without
jeopardizing the safety of event sponsors, event participants and the
surrounding community.
   (O)   Notice to village and other officials. Immediately upon the
application for a special event permit, the village shall send a copy thereof
to the following:
      (1)   The Village Manager;
      (2)   The Village Clerk;
      (3)   The Fire Chief; and
      (4)   The Chief of Police.
   (P)   Suspension or revocation of permit.
      (1)   A permit for an event issued hereunder shall be summarily suspended
or revoked by the Village Manager, Police Chief, or his or her designee, at any
time:
         (a)   When he or she has reasonable cause to believe that any of the
grounds exist for which the original application for permit would have been
denied; or
         (b)   When he or she has reason to believe that the health, safety and
welfare of persons or property would be endangered because of inclement
weather, real or threatened disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency.
      (2)   Notice of such suspension or revocation shall be made in writing to
applicant or permittee.
   (Q)   Exceptions for public entities. No permit shall be required under this
section for any event sponsored or cosponsored by the village or any department
thereof.
   (R)   Violation. Any person violating any provision of this section or
condition of the permit shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided
in the village code; and each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for
each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of
provisions of this section is committed, continued or permitted.
   (S)   Miscellaneous regulations. All permittees shall abide by the following
regulations.
      (1)   Sales outside the festival area. All participants within the
permitted festival area must have a permit from the festival sponsor. All other
outdoor sales within the village limits must secure a license from the village.
      (2)   Gas-powered generators. Gas-powered generators are prohibited in
the central business district during festivals. Permits for emergency
generators must be secured from the village.
      (3)   One permit per period.
         (a)   Parades. Only one parade permit may be issued for any festival
period. The festival promoter/sponsor must secure and guarantee any parade
permit.
         (b)   Parks. Public parks will be under the control of the festival
promoter/sponsor. Liability insurance secured for the festival must include
public parks. Public parks must be used for free activities. Promoter must
state intended use of public park on application.
      (4)   Sales from booths. All outdoor sales during festivals must meet
licensing requirements and must be made from booths or tables. Moving street
vendors are prohibited.
      (5)   Amplification. The volume from artificial or electronic
amplification may not exceed — db at 100 feet.
      (6)   Clean up. The festival promoter/sponsor is responsible for clean
up. Any extraordinary cleanup required will be charged to the festival promoter
sponsor. Failure to clean up may result in denial of the future festival
permits. Any extraordinary clean up caused by festival parades will be charged
to the festival sponsor. All horses used in parades must wear diapers. Any
village service which requires overtime will be an expense of the sponsor.
      (7)   Horses. Horses, mules, donkeys and bovine animals must be diapered
during parades and parade staging areas.
      (8)   Porta potties. Porta potties may be required during festivals.
Porta potties will be the responsibility of the festival promoter/sponsor.
      (9)   Tents. All tents erected in conjunction with a special event must
not include staking into a village street or sidewalk.
   (T)   Sales from outside vendors.
      (1)   This division (T) defines the requirements for the issuance of
permits for special events within the limits of the village.
      (2)   Special events include approved sales by vendors associated with
the event.
      (3)   The operation of sales of items by vendors or residents within the
core area of the village during the time period of an approved event is not
permitted.
      (4)   The CORE AREA OF THE VILLAGE is defined as that area of the village
bounded by U.S. 52, Augusta Street, Dickenson and the Ohio River.
(Prior Code, § 113.06) (Ord. 1986-19, passed 5-8-1986; Ord. 1991-15A, passed 6-
11-1991; Ord. 1992-13, passed 4-14-1992 ; Ord. 2004-48, passed 1-25-2005; Ord.
2005-20, passed 5-24-2005) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.07 COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
   (A)   There shall be annually levied within the municipal corporation of the
village, a tax on a calendar year basis to be paid not later than February 15
of each calendar year on any and all devices operated by coins for the purpose
of amusement or entertainment with the exception of coin-operated sound
reproducing equipment (juke boxes).
   (B)   A PINBALL MACHINE shall be any game, device or amusement facility
wherein one or more metal balls are propelled through a game surface with the
objective of striking targets resulting in an accumulation of points or
credits, or a type of device wherein metal balls are propelled through a
playing table and wherein the metal ball comes to rest in a numbered hole
corresponding to lighted numbers on a card (bingo card type machine).
   (C)   Any other machine wherein the operation of the game includes the
operation of a metal ball and a plunger shall be classified and taxed as a
PINBALL MACHINE.
   (D)   All other coin-operated amusement devices, including those simulating
the game of bowling, whether by means of simulated round balls, or metal discs
(shuffleboard type); or any shuffleboard type game and including coin-operated
video games or any device displaying play or scoring on a cathode ray tube or
similar device; together with any other game of any nature, kind or description
which is activated by insertion of coins and used solely for the purpose of
amusement.
   (E)   (1)   License fees for the foregoing machines shall be as follows:
         (a)   For all machines of the pinball type, a fee of $70 per annum or
part thereof; and
         (b)   For all other machines or devices not including juke boxes, $20
per annum or part thereof.
      (2)   These fees shall be payable on a per-machine basis and the
substitution of one licensed machine for another shall be permitted without the
payment of an additional fee.
      (3)   Any substitution of machine, one for the other shall be upon
application and issuance of a permit, without fee, by the Chief of Police, or
his or her designate.
(Prior Code, § 113.07) (Ord. 1977-5, passed 2-14-1977) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
110.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person violating any provisions of §
113.06 or condition of the permit shall, upon conviction hereof, be punished by
a fine of not more the $250 and imprisonment for not more than 30 days; and
each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or
portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of §
113.06 is committed, continued or permitted. In addition to the financial
penalty, future permits may be denied.
      (2)   Violation of the provisions of §
113.06(T) will be deemed a minor misdemeanor offense and each day or occurrence
treated as a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 113.06)
   (C)   It shall be a minor misdemeanor to be in possession of a coin-operated
amusement device in a location accessible to the public, including private
social clubs, upon which the licenses described in §
113.07 have not been paid. Each separate day of such possession shall
constitute a separate offense and upon conviction of violation of failure to
register, there shall be assessed a penalty of $100 plus court costs.
(Prior Code, § 113.07)
(Ord. 1977-5, passed 2-14-1977; Ord. 1986-19, passed 5-8-1986; Ord. 1991-15A,
passed 6-11-1991; Ord. 1992-13, passed 4-14-1992 ; Ord. 2004-48, passed 1-25-
2005; Ord. 2005-20, passed 5-24-2005)
CHAPTER 114: TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING SERVICES
Section
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   Prohibitions
   
114.03   Application for license; fees; issuance
   
114.04   Inspection of facilities
   
114.05   Suspension or revocation of license
   
114.06   Consent for performing procedures on persons under 18
   
114.07   Prohibitions relating to persons under 18
   
114.08   Defenses to violations
   
114.09   Training standards; records; safety and sanitation; equipment
   
114.10   Application of local regulation on chapter
 
   
114.99   Penalty
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD OF HEALTH. The Board of Health of the municipality or the authority
having the duties of a Board of Health in the municipality.
   BODY PIERCING. Includes ear piercing except when the ear piercing procedure
is performed with an ear piercing gun.
   BUSINESS. Any entity that provides services for compensation.
   CUSTODIAN. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.011.
   EAR PIERCING GUN. A mechanical device that pierces the ear by forcing a
disposable single-use stud or solid needle through the ear.
   GUARDIAN. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2111.01.
(R.C. § 3730.01)
§ 114.02 PROHIBITIONS.
   No person shall do any of the following:
   (A)   Operate a business that offers tattooing or body piercing services
unless the Board of Health has approved the business under §
114.03;
   (B)   Perform a tattooing or body piercing procedure in a manner that does
not meet the safety and sanitation standards established by this chapter and
the rules adopted under R.C. § 3730.10;
   (C)   Perform a tattooing procedure, body piercing procedure, or ear
piercing procedure with an ear piercing gun in a manner that does not meet the
standards for appropriate disinfection and sterilization of invasive equipment
or parts of equipment used in performing the procedures established by this
chapter and the rules adopted under R.C. § 3730.10.
(R.C. § 3730.02) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.03 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEES; ISSUANCE.
   (A)   A person seeking approval to operate a business that offers tattooing
or body piercing services shall apply to the Board of Health on forms the Board
shall prescribe and provide. The applicant shall submit all information the
Board of Health determines is necessary to process the application. The
applicant shall include the fee established under R.C. § 3709.09 with the
application.
   (B)   The Board of Health shall deposit all fees collected under this
section into the Health Fund of the district that the Board serves. The fees
shall be used solely for the purposes of implementing and enforcing this
chapter.
   (C)   To receive approval to offer tattooing or body piercing services, a
business must demonstrate to the Board of Health the ability to meet the
requirements established by this chapter and the rules adopted under R.C. §
3730.10 for safe performance of the tattooing or body piercing procedures,
training of the individuals who perform the procedures, and maintenance of
records.
   (D)   If the Board of Health determines, following an inspection conducted
under §
114.04, that a business meets the requirements for approval, it shall approve
the business. Approval remains valid for one year unless earlier suspended or
revoked under §
114.05. A business’s approval may be renewed. Approval is not transferable.
(R.C. § 3730.03) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.04 INSPECTION OF FACILITIES.
   The Board of Health shall conduct at least one inspection of a business
prior to approving the business under §
114.03 to offer tattooing or body piercing services. The Board may conduct
additional inspections as necessary for the approval process. The Board of
Health may inspect an approved business at any time the Board considers
necessary. In an inspection, the Board of Health shall be given access to the
business’s premises and to all records relevant to the inspection.
(R.C. § 3730.04) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.05 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The Board of Health may suspend or revoke the approval of a business to
offer tattooing or body piercing services at any time the Board determines that
the business is being operated in violation of this chapter or the rules
adopted under R.C. § 3730.10. Proceedings for suspensions and revocations shall
be conducted in accordance with rules adopted under R.C. § 3730.10.
(R.C. § 3730.05)
§ 114.06 CONSENT FOR PERFORMING PROCEDURES ON PERSONS UNDER 18.
   (A)   No person shall perform a tattooing procedure, body piercing
procedure, or ear piercing procedure with an ear piercing gun on an individual
who is under 18 years of age unless consent has been given by the individual’s
parent, guardian, or custodian in accordance with division (B) of this section.
   (B)   A parent, guardian, or custodian of an individual under age 18 who
desires to give consent to a business to perform on the individual under age 18
a tattooing procedure, body piercing procedure, or ear piercing procedure
performed with an ear piercing gun shall do both of the following:
      (1)   Appear in person at the business at the time the procedure is
performed;
      (2)   Sign a document provided by the business that explains the manner
in which the procedure will be performed and methods for proper care of the
affected body area following performance of the procedure.
(R.C. § 3730.06) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.07 PROHIBITIONS RELATING TO PERSONS UNDER 18.
   (A)   No individual shall knowingly show or give any false information as to
the name, age, or other identification of an individual who is under age 18 for
the purpose of obtaining for the individual under age 18 a tattooing service,
body piercing service, or ear piercing service performed with an ear piercing
gun.
   (B)   No individual shall impersonate the parent, guardian, or custodian of
an individual who is under age 18 for the purpose of obtaining for the
individual under age 18 a tattooing service, body piercing service, or ear
piercing service performed with an ear piercing gun.
(R.C. § 3730.07) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.08 DEFENSES TO VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   An operator or employee of a business that performs tattooing
services, body piercing services, or ear piercing services performed with an
ear piercing gun may not be found guilty of a violation of §
114.06(A) or any rule adopted under R.C. § 3730.10 in which age is an element
of the provisions of the rule, if the Board of Health or any court of record
finds all of the following:
      (1)   That the individual obtaining a tattooing service, body piercing
service, or ear piercing service performed with an ear piercing gun, at the
time of so doing, exhibited to the operator or employee of the tattooing, body
piercing, or ear piercing business a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
an identification card issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 through 4507.52 showing
that the individual was then at least age 18;
      (2)   That the operator or employee made a bona fide effort to ascertain
the true age of the individual obtaining a tattooing, body piercing, or ear
piercing service by checking the identification presented, at the time of the
service, to ascertain that the description on the identification compared with
the appearance of the individual and that the identification had not been
altered in any way;
      (3)   That the operator or employee had reason to believe that the
individual obtaining a tattooing, body piercing, or ear piercing service was at
least age 18.
   (B)   In any hearing before the Board of Health and in any action or
proceeding before a court of record in which a defense is raised under this
section, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or the Registrar’s deputy who issued a
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card under R.C. §§
4507.50 through 4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the
records, in the Registrar’s or deputy’s possession, of such issuance in lieu of
the testimony of the personnel of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles at such hearing,
action or proceeding.
(R.C. § 3730.08)
§ 114.09 TRAINING STANDARDS; RECORDS; SAFETY AND SANITATION; EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Each operator of a business that offers tattooing or body piercing
services shall do all of the following:
      (1)   Maintain procedures for ensuring that the individuals who perform
tattooing or body piercing procedures are adequately trained to perform the
procedures properly;
      (2)   With respect to tattooing services, maintain written records that
include the color, manufacturer and lot number of each pigment used for each
tattoo performed;
      (3)   Comply with the safety and sanitation requirements for preventing
transmission of infectious diseases, as established in rules adopted under R.C.
§ 3730.10;
      (4)   Ensure that all invasive equipment or parts of equipment used in
performing tattooing and body piercing procedures are disinfected and
sterilized by using methods that meet the disinfection and sterilization
requirements established in rules adopted under R.C. § 3730.10;
      (5)   Ensure that weekly tests of the business’s heat sterilization
devices are performed to determine whether the devices are functioning
properly. In having the devices tested, the operator of the business shall use
a biological monitoring system that indicates whether the devices are killing
microorganisms. If a test indicates that a device is not functioning properly,
the operator shall take immediate remedial action to ensure that heat
sterilization is being accomplished. The operator shall maintain documentation
that the weekly tests are being performed. To comply with the documentation
requirement, the documents must consist of a log that indicates the date on
which each test is performed and the name of the person who performed the test
or, if a test was conducted by an independent testing entity, a copy of the
entity’s testing report. The operator shall maintain records of each test
performed for at least two years.
   (B)   Each operator of a business that offers ear piercing services
performed with an ear piercing gun shall require the individuals who perform
the ear piercing services to disinfect and sterilize the ear piercing gun by
using chemical solutions that meet the disinfection and sterilization
requirements established in rules adopted under R.C. § 3730.10.
(R.C. § 3730.09) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.10 APPLICATION OF LOCAL REGULATION ON CHAPTER.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as prohibiting the municipality
from adopting ordinances or resolutions that prohibit the establishment of
businesses that offer tattooing or body piercing services. Such ordinances or
resolutions, to the extent that they conflict with this chapter, shall be
deemed to supersede the provisions of this chapter.
(R.C. § 3730.11)
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no other
penalty has already been established shall be punished as provided in §
10.99.
   (B)   Whoever violates §
114.02 or §
114.06(A) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (C)   Whoever violates §
114.07 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 3730.99)
CHAPTER 115: SPECIALIZED SALES AND SERVICES
Section
General Provisions
   
115.01   Lodging excise tax
Home Sales
   
115.15   Definition
   
115.16   Intent
   
115.17   Permit; application; display
   
115.18   Prohibitions
   
115.19   Exemption
   
115.20   Compliance with sign regulations
 
   
115.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 115.01 LODGING EXCISE TAX.
   (A)   Pursuant to R.C. § 5739.08(A), a lodging excise tax of 3% percent is
levied on all rent and/or transactions by which lodging is or is to be
furnished to transient guests located in the village.
   (B)   A new ordinance entitled “Village of New Richmond Lodging Excise Tax”
attached to the ordinance codified herein as Exhibit A be enacted as part of
the laws, resolutions and ordinances of the village and made effective at the
earliest date allowed by law.
   (C)   As used in this section, LODGING ESTABLISHMENT means every
establishment kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to the public to
be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered for a consideration to
guests, in which one or more rooms are used for the accommodation of such
guests, whether such rooms are in one or several structures. This includes, but
is not limited to, hotels, motels, bed and breakfasts, cabins, camping, camping
sites, RVs, condominiums, vacation homes, rooms in residences being rented to
guests for sleeping accommodations, owner-occupied residences, accessory
dwelling units and non-owner occupied residences. The definition of LODGING
ESTABLISHMENT used in this section is independent from, and has no effect upon,
other definitions of the term LODGING ESTABLISHMENT used elsewhere in village
documents and/or legislation, particularly the village’s zoning code.
   (D)   The tax levied hereunder shall be paid monthly for the preceding month
on or before the thirty-first day of each month. Along with remittance of the
amount of lodging excise tax due for the preceding month, the owner or person
in charge of each lodging establishment shall also remit a written return in
such form as the Village Council or village fiscal officer may prescribe,
showing the amount of rent and/or transactions in the preceding year and other
information necessary to accurately determine the amount of tax due.
   (E)   The Village Fiscal Officer shall audit each return and, in his or her
discretion, may conduct, or cause to be conducted, an audit of the books and
records of a taxpayer. The Village Fiscal Officer shall give the taxpayer 30
days’ written notice of the date, time and place of an audit of books and
records.
   (F)   Unless the determination is appealed to the Village Council as
provided in division (G) below, any additional tax determined by the Village
Fiscal Officer to be due, either by correcting errors in the return or as the
result of an audit, shall be paid within 30 days following written notice to
the taxpayer of the amount due.
   (G)   A taxpayer may appeal the Village Fiscal Officer’s determination of
tax due to the Village Council, by filing with the Village Fiscal Officer a
written notice of intention to appeal within 30 days after the date of notice
of the amount of tax due. The appeal shall be heard by the Village Council at
their next regular meeting or a mutually agreed regular Village Council
meeting.
   (H)   All money received pursuant to this section shall be deposited into
the village’s General Fund.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 3-13-2023)
HOME SALES
§ 115.15 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HOME SALE. The offering of a sale to the public of ten or more items of
tangible personal property within the village, other than by churches,
occupants of property holding current and valid vendor’s licenses and otherwise
permitted to conduct such sales from inventory in areas zoned for business
uses, and at public auction by an auctioneer licensed pursuant to R.C. Chapter
4704.
(Prior Code, § 115.01) (Ord. 1983-7, passed 3-22-1983)
§ 115.16 INTENT.
   The intent of this subchapter is to control and regulate garage sales, porch
sales, yard sales and the like in the village.
(Prior Code, § 115.02) (Ord. 1983-7, passed 3-22-1983)
§ 115.17 PERMIT; APPLICATION; DISPLAY.
   (A)   No person, firm, partnership, association or corporation shall conduct
a home sale without first obtaining a permit therefor as provided herein.
   (B)   Applicants for a permit to conduct a home sale shall file with the
Zoning Administrator an application in writing which shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   Name, address and telephone number, if any, of the applicants;
      (2)   The description of the merchandise to be offered for sale; and
      (3)   The date, hours and street address of the proposed home sale.
   (C)   The permit shall be displayed at a conspicuous place at the location
where the home sale is conducted. The permit may be revoked by the Zoning
Administrator at any time for conditions which, had they existed at the time of
issuance, would have been valid grounds for its denial; for any
misrepresentation of a material fact in the application discovered after
issuance of a permit; for violation of any provision of this subchapter or
other law or ordinance relating to the operation of the sale or enterprise for
which the permit has been issued. The revocation shall become effective upon
notice served upon the permit holder or any person engaging in the home sale
pursuant to the issuance of the permit. In case any applicant has been denied a
permit, or if his or her permit has been revoked or suspended, the applicant or
permit holder shall, within three days, have the right to appeal to the
Council. The Council, at its next regular session, may hear the appeal and
issue its judgment either to issue the permit or deny the permit.
(Prior Code, § 115.03) (Ord. 1983-7, passed 3-22-1983) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.18 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No person, firm, partnership, association or corporation shall conduct
more than two home sales within any 12-month period, nor may more than two home
sales be conducted at the same location within that period of time.
   (B)   Every home sale is subject to the following restrictions and
limitations:
      (1)   The duration shall not exceed three consecutive calendar days;
      (2)   The hours shall be between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.; and
      (3)   Violations of any of the foregoing restrictions and limitations
shall be cause for the immediate revocation of the home sale permit by the
Zoning Administrator of the village.
   (C)   No persons, firm, partnership, association or corporation shall
conduct a home sale without first obtaining a permit therefor, or fail to
remove their signs advertising the same within 24 hours of the conclusion of
the home sale. Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation
convicted of more than one violation of conducting a home sale without first
obtaining a permit thereof shall not be issued a permit to conduct a home sale
within three years following the date of each subsequent conviction.
(Prior Code, § 115.04) (Ord. 1983-7, passed 3-22-1983) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.19 EXEMPTION.
   In addition to the home sales allowed for in this subchapter, there shall be
one sale, not lasting more than three days, to be set by the Village Council,
which shall be exempt from the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 115.05) (Ord. 1983-7, passed 3-22-1983)
§ 115.20 COMPLIANCE WITH SIGN REGULATIONS.
   The posting of garage sale, porch sale and yard sale signs shall be in
compliance with the existing regulations of the village, except that no fee
shall be charged for a sale authorized hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 115.06) (Ord. 1983-7, passed 3-22-1983)
§ 115.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of §§
115.15 through
115.20 shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor, for a first offense, or a fourth
degree misdemeanor for a second offense within one year.
(Prior Code, § 115.99) (Ord. 1983-7, passed 3-22-1983)
CHAPTER 116: CELLULAR OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
Section
   
116.01   Purpose
   
116.02   Definitions
   
116.03   Application procedure
   
116.04   Use regulations
   
116.05   Standards of approval for cellular or wireless communications antennas
and towers
   
116.06   Standards of approval of all cellular or wireless communications
antennas and towers
   
116.07   Maintenance
   
116.08   Removal
   
116.09   Prohibitions
§ 116.01 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of these regulations as set out herein in this chapter,
and known as “cellular or wireless communications systems”, to:
   (A)   Accommodate the need for cellular or wireless communications towers
and facilities for the provision of personal wireless services while regulating
their location and number in the village;
   (B)   Minimize adverse visual effects of communications towers and support
structures through proper siting, design and screening;
   (C)   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from communications
towers and support structure failure; and
   (D)   Encourage the joint use of any new and existing communications towers
and support structures to reduce the number of such structures needed in the
future.
(Prior Code, § 116.01) (Ord. 1998-16, passed 9-8-1998; Ord. 2002-4, passed 2-
13-2002)
§ 116.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CELLULAR COMMUNICATION SERVICES. Personal communications accessed by means
of cellular equipment and services.
   CELLULAR OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA. Any structure or device used to
receive or transmit electromagnetic waves between cellular phones, pagers,
commercial mobile services, wireless services and ground-wired communications
systems including both directional antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes
and commercial satellite dishes, and omni-directional antennas such as whips
and other equipment utilized to serve personal communication services.
   CELLULAR OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SITE. A tract, lot or parcel of land
that contains the cellular or wireless communications tower, antenna, support,
structure(s), parking and any other uses associated with and ancillary to
cellular or wireless communications transmission.
   CELLULAR OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. Any building or
structure, including guy wire anchors, accessory to but necessary for the
proper functioning of the cellular or wireless communications antenna or tower.
   CELLULAR OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS TOWER. Any freestanding structure used
to support a cellular or wireless communications antenna.
   CELLULAR OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS TOWER, HEIGHT OF. The height from the
base of the structure, at grade, to its top; including any antenna located
thereon. Grade shall be determined as the elevation of the natural or existing
topography of the ground level prior to construction of the tower.
   MICRO ANTENNAS. Any cellular or wireless communication antennas which
consist solely of the antenna and which do not have any supporting structures
other than brackets. MICRO ANTENNAS shall be equal to or less than five feet in
height and with an area of not more than 580 square inches.
   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES. Commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless
services and common carrier wireless exchange access services, including
cellular services.
   USERS. Any individual or company who or which desires to place a
communication tower or antenna within the village. Such USERS may include
cellular or wireless communications company and any police, fire, ambulance or
other emergency departments.
(Prior Code, § 116.02) (Ord. 1998-16, passed 9-8-1998; Ord. 2002-4, passed 2-
13-2002)
§ 116.03 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any company or individual intending to apply for the placement or
operation of a cellular or wireless communications antenna, tower or site
within the village shall first schedule a pre-application conference with the
Village Administrator, or his or her assignee. At this conference, the
prospective applicant must present to the Village Administrator any proposed
locations for the equipment or site. This information shall identify the area
within which the tower may be located, the minimum height of the proposed tower
and identify any possible users that may co-locate at the site.
   (B)   Upon completion of the pre-application conference, an application may
be filed with the office of the Village Administrator. The application shall be
in compliance with the requirements of this section and in such form as
approved by the Village Administrator. If the application does not conform with
the requirements of this section, the applicant shall be notified by the
Village Administrator, and no further consideration of the application shall
occur until it is in compliance with the terms of this chapter.
   (C)   The application fee for a cellular or wireless communication system,
tower, antenna or site shall be $1,000 for each proposed location and $500 for
each new user proposing to co-locate.
   (D)   The village may hire any consultant and/or expert necessary to assist
the village in reviewing and evaluating the application, including the
construction and modification of the site, once permitted, and any requests for
re-certification.
   (E)   An applicant shall deposit with the village funds sufficient to
reimburse the village for all reasonable costs of the consultant and expert
evaluation and consultation to the village in connection with the review of any
application including the construction and modification of the site, once
permitted. The initial deposit shall be $8,500. The placement of the $8,500
with the village shall precede the pre-application meeting. The village will
maintain a separate escrow account for all such funds. The village’s
consultants/experts shall invoice the village for its services in reviewing the
application, including the construction and modification of the site, once
permitted. If, at any time during the process, this escrow account has a
balance less than $5,000, the applicant shall immediately, upon notification by
the village, replenish the escrow account so that it has a balance of at least
$5,000. Such additional escrow funds shall be deposited with the village before
any further action or consideration is taken on the application. In the event
that the amount held in escrow by the village is more than the amount of the
actual invoicing at the conclusion of the project, the remaining balance shall
be promptly refunded to the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 116.03) (Ord. 1998-16, passed 9-8-1998; Ord. 2002-4, passed 2-
13-2002)
§ 116.04 USE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The following use regulations shall apply to cellular or wireless
communication antennas and towers.
      (1)   A cellular or wireless communications site may be permitted in I-
1 industrial zoning districts subject to the requirements set forth herein.
      (2)   Cellular or wireless communications sites in an I-1 zoning district
shall not be located any closer to any residential zoning district than as
follows.
         (a)   Cellular or wireless communication towers less than 100 feet in
height shall be located no closer than 100 feet to any residential zoning
district.
         (b)   For any cellular or wireless communication tower exceeding 100
feet in height, the tower may not be located closer to any residential zoning
district than a distance equal to 100 feet plus one foot for each foot of
height that the tower exceeds 100 feet.
   (C)   If a cellular or wireless communications company can demonstrate that
there are no suitable sites under industry or engineering standards for its
cellular or wireless communications site within the I-1 industrial zoning
districts, the company may apply for a permit to place the tower or antenna in
a residential district. To apply for such a permit, the communications company
must submit an application, a preliminary site plan and a rendering of the
proposed tower to the Village Administrator or a designated representative. A
permit to place a tower or antenna within a residential district shall only be
granted if the proposed site meets each of the following conditions:
      (1)   The lot size of the proposed site is no less than three acres; and
      (2)   The proposed tower will have a minimum setback of 200 feet from the
base of the tower or any guy wire anchors to the property line. However, if one
of the property lines of the proposed site abuts an I-1 industrial district,
the minimal setback from the property line which abuts the I-1 industrial
district shall be determined in accordance with §
116.06(B); and
      (3)   The proposed site is on a lot which is currently used for an
institutional purpose such as a school, church, playfield, park, golf course or
other similar use.
   (D)   A cellular or wireless communications antenna may be mounted to an
existing structure, such as a communications tower (whether said tower is for
cellular or wireless purposes or not), smoke stack, water tower or other tall
structures in any I-1 industrial zoning district or in a residential district
if a permit has been granted as provided in §
116.03(C). Cellular or wireless communication antenna may only be placed on the
top of buildings that are no less than 35 feet in height.
   (E)   Micro antennas not exceeding five feet in height may be placed on any
buildings in a B-2 zoning district or on certain lots in a residential district
which meets the conditions in division (C) above.
   (F)   All other uses accessory to the cellular or wireless communications
antenna and towers, including, but not limited to, business offices,
maintenance depots and materials and vehicle storage, are prohibited from the
site unless otherwise permitted in the zoning district in which the cellular or
wireless communications antenna and/or tower is located.
(Prior Code, § 116.04) (Ord. 1998-16, passed 9-8-1998; Ord. 2002-4, passed 2-
13-2002)
§ 116.05 STANDARDS OF APPROVAL FOR CELLULAR OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS
AND TOWERS.
   The following standards shall apply to all cellular or wireless
communications antennas and towers.
   (A)   The cellular or wireless communications company shall be required to
demonstrate, using the latest technological evidence, that the antenna or tower
must be placed where it is proposed in order to satisfy its necessary function
in the company’s grid system. Part of this demonstration shall include a
drawing showing the boundaries of the area around the proposed location which
would also properly permit the antenna to function properly in the company’s
grid system. This area shall be considered the ALLOWABLE ZONE.
   (B)   (1)   If the communications company proposes to build a cellular or
wireless communications tower (as opposed to mounting the antenna on an
existing structure), it is required to demonstrate that it has contacted the
owners of nearby tall structures within the allowable zone, asked for
permission to install the cellular communications antenna on those structures
and was denied for reasons other than economic ones. TALL STRUCTURES shall
include, but not be limited to: smoke stacks, water towers, buildings over 35
feet in height, antenna support structures or other cellular or wireless
communication companies on other communication towers.
      (2)   The village may deny the application to construct a new cellular or
wireless communications tower if the applicant has not made a good faith effort
to mount the antenna on existing structures.
(Prior Code, § 116.05) (Ord. 1998-16, passed 9-8-1998; Ord. 2002-4, passed 2-
13-2002)
§ 116.06 STANDARDS OF APPROVAL OF ALL CELLULAR OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
ANTENNAS AND TOWERS.
   (A)   Antenna/tower height. The applicant shall demonstrate that the
antenna/tower is the minimum height required to function satisfactorily and to
accommodate the collocation requirements as set out in division (F) below. No
antenna that is taller than the minimum height shall be approved. Cellular or
wireless communication towers shall be exempt from the maximum height
requirements contained in the § 802 of the Zoning Code. Cellular towers shall
be monopole construction unless it is demonstrated that another type of tower
is required for safety purposes.
   (B)   Setbacks from the base of the tower. If a new cellular or wireless
communications tower is to be constructed, the minimum distance between the
base of the tower or any guy wire anchors and any property line which abuts a
zoning district other than a residential district shall be no closer than the
greater of the following:
      (1)   Forty percent of the tower height;
      (2)   The minimum setback in the underlying zoning district; or
      (3)   Fifty feet.
   (C)   Cellular or wireless communications tower safety.
      (1)   All cellular or wireless communications towers shall be fitted with
anti-climbing devices as approved by the manufacturers. Furthermore, the
applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed cellular or wireless
communications tower and its antenna are safe and that the surrounding
properties will not be negatively affected by tower failure, falling ice or
other debris, electromagnetic fields or radio frequency interference. However,
if a specific safety issue in question is determined to be regulated by either
FCC Regulations or applicable Building Code Regulations, and the operation or
construction is in compliance with such regulations, then this requirement for
safety shall be deemed to have been met.
      (2)   Subsequent to the installation of a cellular or wireless
communications tower site, if it is determined by the Village Council, after a
public hearing, that the operation of a cellular or wireless communications
tower is inherently dangerous or is a demonstrable health hazard, the cellular
or wireless shall be declared to be a nuisance and all operation shall cease.
The tower or antenna shall also be removed as provided under §
116.08.
   (D)   Fencing. A fence shall be required around the cellular or wireless
communications tower and its support structure(s), unless the antenna is
mounted on an existing structure. The fence shall be minimum of eight feet in
height and shall be erected to prevent access to non-authorized personnel.
   (E)   Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided to screen as much of the
support structure and ground level features as is possible. In addition,
existing vegetation on and around the site shall be preserved to the greatest
extent possible.
   (F)   Limiting the number of cellular or wireless, communications towers.
      (1)   In order to reduce the number of antenna support structures needed
in the village in the future, the proposed cellular or wireless communications
tower shall be required to accommodate other uses, including other cellular or
wireless communications companies, and the local police, fire and ambulance
departments.
      (2)   Each tower must be designed to carry as many carriers as
structurally feasible for its proposed height. Design standards detailing the
structural analysis and capability for carriers shall be submitted with the
application for review by the Planning Commission.
      (3)   For the purposes of encouraging collocation of cellular or wireless
antenna and other uses, cellular or wireless communication towers shall be
designed, engineered and constructed as follows.
         (a)   Towers less than 75 feet tall shall be designed, engineered and
constructed to support antennas installed by one or more cellular or wireless
communication service providers.
         (b)   Towers more than 75 feet in height but less than 150 feet shall
be designed, engineered and constructed to support antennas installed by two or
more wireless communication service providers.
         (c)   Towers 150 feet in height or taller shall be designed,
engineered and constructed to support antennas installed by three or more
cellular or wireless communication service providers.
      (4)   As used in §§
116.01 through
116.03, the term USERS shall include the antennas of police, fire and ambulance
departments. In addition, an applicant must demonstrate that the area acquired
by lease or otherwise acquired for the use and construction of the cellular
tower and accessory structures is sufficient in size to accommodate any
additional structures that may be required if additional users are added to the
tower.
   (G)   Licensing. The communications company must demonstrate to the village
that it is licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). The owner
of the tower must also annually provide to the village on January 1 of each
year, a list of all users of the tower and provide the village with a copy of
each user’s license with the FCC.
   (H)   Required parking. If the cellular or wireless communications site is
fully automated, adequate parking shall be required for maintenance workers. If
the site is not fully automated, the number of required parking spaces shall
equal the number of employees working on the largest shift. All parking
specifications and requirements shall be consistent with the applicable parking
requirements as established in the zoning code.
   (I)   Appearance. Cellular or wireless communications towers under 200 feet
in height shall be painted silver or have a galvanized finish retained in order
to reduce visual impact. Cellular or wireless communications towers shall meet
all Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations. No cellular or wireless
communications towers may be artificially lighted except when required by the
FAA. Furthermore, no cellular or wireless communication tower or antenna shall
contain any signage.
   (J)   Site plan required. A full site plan shall be required for all
proposed cellular or wireless communications sites, except antenna to be placed
on existing structures, at a scale of one inch to 100 feet (1”=100”)
indicating, as a minimum, the following:
      (1)   The total area of the site;
      (2)   The existing zoning of the property in question and of all adjacent
properties;
      (3)   All public and private right-of-way and easement lines located on
or adjacent to the property which is proposed to be continued, created,
relocated or abandoned;
      (4)   Existing topography with a maximum of five-foot contour intervals;
      (5)   The proposed finished grade of the development shown by contours
not exceeding five-foot intervals;
      (6)   The location of all existing buildings and structures and the
proposed location of the cellular or wireless communications tower and all
cellular or wireless communications support structures including dimensions,
heights and, where applicable, the gross floor area of the buildings;
      (7)   The locations and dimensions of all curb cuts, driving lanes, off-
street parking and loading areas including the number of spaces, grades,
surfacing materials, drainage plans and illumination of the facility;
      (8)   All existing and proposed sidewalks and open areas on the site;
      (9)   The location of all proposed fences, screening and walls;
      (10)   Location of all existing and proposed streets;
      (11)   Existing and proposed utilities including types and grades;
      (12)   Schedule of any phasing of the project;
      (13)   Written statement by the cellular or wireless communications
company as to the visual and aesthetic impacts of the proposed cellular
communications tower on all adjacent residential zoning districts; and
      (14)   Other information as may be required to determine the conformance
with the zoning code.
   (K)   Submission. For cellular or wireless communications antennae to be
placed on an existing structure, the applicant shall submit such information as
required by the Zoning Inspector to ensure compliance with the applicable
provisions of this section.
(Prior Code, § 116.06) (Ord. 1998-16, passed 9-8-1998; Ord. 2002-4, passed 2-
13-2002) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.07 MAINTENANCE.
   Any owner of property used as a cellular or wireless communications site
shall maintain such property and all structures in good condition and free from
trash, outdoor storage, weeds and other debris. Any owner of a cellular or
wireless communications tower shall be required to notify the Village
Administrator of its intent in writing within 30 days of its cessation of
business, its discontinuance of service or transfer of ownership.
(Prior Code, § 116.07) (Ord. 1998-16, passed 9-8-1998; Ord. 2002-4, passed 2-
13-2002) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.08 REMOVAL.
   (A)   Any cellular or wireless communications tower that has discontinued
its service for a period of 12 continuous months or more is determined to be a
nuisance. A tower declared to be a nuisance must be removed, along with all
accessory structures related thereto. DISCONTINUED shall mean that the
structure has not been properly maintained, has been abandoned, become
obsolete, is unused or has ceased the daily activities or operations which had
occurred.
   (B)   Whenever, upon inspection, it shall appear that a cellular or wireless
communications tower has been abandoned or its use discontinued, the Village
Administrator, or a designated representative, shall notify, either by personal
delivery or by certified mail, the owner of the property on which the tower is
located that the tower must be taken down and removed. The Village
Administrator, or a designated representative, in addition to any other
citations, notices, penalties or remedies provided by law or ordinance, is
authorized to proceed in a manner consistent with and pursuant to R.C. §§
715.26 and 715.261 to maintain the public health, safety and welfare and to
recover costs as appropriate.
(Prior Code, § 116.08) (Ord. 1998-16, passed 9-8-1998; Ord. 2002-4, passed 2-
13-2002)
§ 116.09 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No cellular or wireless communications tower shall be permitted on any
lot on which any nonconforming building or structure is located nor on which
any nonconforming use or activity is occurring without first obtaining a
variance.
   (B)   No cellular or wireless communications tower shall be constructed,
replaced or altered without first obtaining the applicable building permit.
(Prior Code, § 116.09) (Ord. 1998-16, passed 9-8-1998; Ord. 2002-4, passed 2-
13-2002) Penalty, see §
110.99
CHAPTER 117: MOBILE FOOD UNITS
Section
   
117.01   Definition
   
117.02   Permit; fee
   
117.03   Submittal of license
   
117.04   Location of mobile food units
   
117.05   Permission required
   
117.06   Operation in residential district
   
117.07   Limit on number of units allowed per parcel
   
117.08   Dining areas
   
117.09   Trash receptacles
   
117.10   Noise
   
117.11   Fire extinguisher required
   
117.12   Smoking prohibited
   
117.13   Food carts
 
   
117.99   Penalty
§ 117.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOBILE FOOD UNIT. Any mobile trailer or motorized or un-motorized vehicle
that moves about the village and is designed to be a self-contained, portable
and not permanently attached to the ground from which the food within the
confines of the mobile unit is then peddled, vended, sold or given away
including food trucks and food carts. This definition does not apply to “meals
on wheels” program vehicles or food delivery services.
(Ord. 2021-05, passed 4-27-2021)
§ 117.02 PERMIT; FEE.
   The village requires an annual permit for each mobile food vending unit. The
permit will be for one calendar year and will cost a fee of $100.
(Ord. 2021-05, passed 4-27-2021)
§ 117.03 SUBMITTAL OF LICENSE.
   A current food license must be submitted to the village prior to the
issuance of the annual village permit described in this chapter. All county,
state and federal requirements for food vendors must be met prior to issuance
of an annual village permit. Failure to continue to meet those requirements is
grounds for immediate revocation of the village permit.
(Ord. 2021-05, passed 4-27-2021)
§ 117.04 LOCATION OF MOBILE FOOD UNITS.
   Mobile food vending units must not block the entrance or exits to public or
private property, fire lanes or drive aisles.
(Ord. 2021-05, passed 4-27-2021) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.05 PERMISSION REQUIRED.
   Mobile food vending operators must have permission from property owners
(public or private) or in the case of village owned property, written
permission from the Village Council, or its designee, to operate a mobile food
vending unit on the property.
(Ord. 2021-05, passed 4-27-2021) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.06 OPERATION IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   Mobile food vending is not permitted to operate in a residential district
unless the village provides a temporary permit not exceeding 48 hours.
(Ord. 2021-05, passed 4-27-2021) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.07 LIMIT ON NUMBER OF UNITS ALLOWED PER PARCEL.
   No more than two mobile food vendor units are permitted per parcel of
property at any one time, unless express written permission is received from
the Village Council.
(Ord. 2021-05, passed 4-27-2021) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.08 DINING AREAS.
   Mobile food vendors shall not provide or allow dining areas, including, but
not limited to, tables and chairs, booths, bar stools, benches and stand-up
counters on public property and only with permission from private property
owners.
(Ord. 2021-05, passed 4-27-2021) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.09 TRASH RECEPTACLES.
   Mobile food vendors must supply, in a prominent location, trash containers
sufficient in size to collect all waste generated by customers and staff on the
mobile vending operation. Mobile food vendors are expressly prohibited from
using village trash receptacles to dispose of any and all waste related to food
production.
(Ord. 2021-05, passed 4-27-2021) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.10 NOISE.
   The use of PA systems, bells or music is prohibited.
(Ord. 2021-05, passed 4-27-2021) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.11 FIRE EXTINGUISHER REQUIRED.
   All mobile food vendors are required to have at least one portable fire
extinguisher. The fire extinguisher must be located in the unit and must be
readily accessible by the operator of the unit.
(Ord. 2021-05, passed 4-27-2021)
§ 117.12 SMOKING PROHIBITED.
   Smoking is prohibited inside all mobile food units. If a mobile food unit
has a fuel source other than the vehicle fuel tank, smoking is also prohibited
within ten feet of the unit.
(Ord. 2021-05, passed 4-27-2021)
§ 117.13 FOOD CARTS.
   (A)   A FOOD CART is defined as a mobile food vendor that sells food, such
as hot dogs or boiled peanuts, from a movable, non-motorized cart or trailer.
   (B)   No food cart shall be placed upon any sidewalk unless said sidewalk
has at least a five-foot clear pedestrian path to be measured from the boundary
of any private property to any obstruction in or on the sidewalk, or if there
are no obstructions, to the curb. In no event shall any pushcart be placed on
any part of a sidewalk other than that which abuts the curb.
   (C)   No vending vehicle or food cart or any other item related to the
operation of a food vendor’s business shall touch, lean against or be affixed
permanently or temporarily in any building or structure including, but not
limited to, lamp posts, parking meters, sign-posts, mail boxes, traffic signal
stanchions, fire hydrants, tree boxes, benches, bus shelters, taxi stands,
refuse baskets or traffic barriers.
   (D)   All items relating to the operation of a food vending business shall
be kept in or under the vending vehicle or food cart, except that samples of
the nonperishable items sold may be displayed on the vending vehicle or food
cart. No items relating to the operation of a food vending business other than
an adjoining acceptable waste container shall be placed upon any public space
adjacent to the vending vehicle or food cart, and no food shall be sold except
from an authorized vehicle or food cart.
   (E)   No vending food cart shall be located against display windows of fixed
location businesses, nor shall they be within 30 feet of any entranceway to any
restaurant, bar, store, theater, movie house, sports arena or other place of
public assembly, or within 20 feet from exits, including service exits, to
buildings that are exclusively residential at the street level without written
permission from the property and/or business owner.
   (F)   No food vendor shall vend, within any bus stop, taxi stand, within the
portion of the sidewalk abutting any no standing zone. Each food vendor who
vends from a food cart or vehicle in the roadway shall obey all traffic and
parking laws, rules and regulations as now exist or as may be promulgated, but
in no case shall a food vendor vend so as to restrict the continued maintenance
of a clear passageway for vehicles.
   (G)   No food vendor shall vend on the median strip of a divided roadway
unless such strip is intended for use as a pedestrian mall or plaza.
   (H)   No vendor shall vend within areas under the jurisdiction of the
village including parks, utilities and administration and other village owned
properties unless written authorization has been obtained from Village Council,
or its designee.
   (J)   No mobile food vendor shall vend within 300 feet of the boundaries of
a village permitted event or festival without written permission from the
applicant for said event or festival.
   (K)   Where exigent circumstances exist and a police officer or other
authorized officer or employee of the city gives notice to a food vendor to
temporarily move from a location, such vendor shall not vend from such
location. For the purpose of this division (K), EXIGENT CIRCUMSTANCES shall
include, but not be limited to, unusually heavy pedestrian or vehicular
traffic, existence of any obstructions in the public space at or near such
location, an accident, fire or other emergency situation at or near such
location, or a parade, demonstration or other such event or occurrence at or
near such location.
(Ord. 2021-05, passed 4-27-2021) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the
first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on
each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(Ord. 2021-05, passed 4-27-2021)
CHAPTER 118: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
General Provisions
   
118.01   Purpose
   
118.02   Definitions
   
118.03   Establishment and classification of regulated businesses
   
118.04   Measurements of distance
   
118.05   Nonconforming uses
   
118.06   Permit required
   
118.07   Application investigation process
   
118.08   Issuance of permit
   
118.09   Annual permit fee
   
118.10   Inspection
   
118.11   Expiration of permit
   
118.12   Suspension of permit
   
118.13   Revocation of permit
   
118.14   Judicial review of permit denial, suspension or revocation
   
118.15   Transfer of permit
   
118.16   Sexually oriented business employee license
Criminal Offenses
   
118.30   Location of sexually oriented businesses
   
118.31   Minors prohibited
   
118.32   Advertising and lighting regulations
   
118.33   Hours of operation
   
118.34   Nudity prohibited
   
118.35   Operation of a sexually oriented business without a valid permit
   
118.36   Exemptions
   
118.37   Immunity from prosecution
 
   
118.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 118.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the chapter is to regulate sexually oriented businesses
through the application of uniform zoning requirements to promote the health,
safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the village and establish
reasonable and uniform regulations for the operation of sexually oriented
businesses with the goal of reducing or eliminating the adverse secondary
effects associated with sexually oriented businesses. It is not the intent of
this chapter to limit or restrict the content of communicative materials,
including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor
effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to materials
protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and
exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market.
(Prior Code, § 118.01) (Ord. 1996-24, passed 2-11-1997)
§ 118.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EMPLOYEE. A person who works or performs in and/or for a sexually oriented
business, regardless of whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or
other compensation by the operator of said business.
   ESCORT. A person who, for any form of consideration, agrees or offers to act
as a companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Includes any of the following:
      (1)   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a
new business;
      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this
chapter;
      (3)   The addition of any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in
this chapter to any other existing sexually oriented business; or
      (4)   The relocation of any such sexually oriented business.
   NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY.
      (1)   The appearance of human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female
genitals or the areola or nipple of the female breast; or
      (2)   A state of dress which fails to opaquely and fully cover a human
buttocks, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region or areola or nipple of
the female breast.
   OPERATOR. Includes the owner, permit holder, custodian, manager, operator or
person in charge of any permitted or licensed premises.
   PERMITTED OR LICENSED PREMISES. Any premises that requires a license and/or
permit and that is classified as a sexually oriented business.
   PERMITTEE and/or LICENSEE. A person in whose name a permit and/or license to
operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual
listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or license.
   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association
or other legal entity.
   PROTECTED USES. The following uses.
      PUBLIC BUILDING. Any building owned, leased or held by the United States,
the state, the county, the city, any special district, school district or any
other agency or political subdivision of the state or the United States, which
building is used for governmental purposes.
      PUBLIC PARKS or RECREATION AREA. Public land which has been designated
for park or recreational activities including, but not limited to, a park,
playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball
or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, open space, wilderness areas or
similar public land within the city which is under the control, operation or
management of the city park and recreation authorities.
      RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. Any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building
which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities.
      RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT OR USE. A single-family, duplex, townhouse,
multiple- family or mobile park or subdivision and campground, as defined in
the zoning code.
      SCHOOL. Any public or private educational facility including, but not
limited to, child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools,
kindergartens, elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate schools,
junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools,
secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior
colleges and universities. SCHOOLS includes the school grounds, but does not
include any facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally
as a SCHOOL.
   PUBLIC USE A use designed for the benefit and/or accommodation of the
general public which is available to all persons without restriction,
regardless of whether or not a fee for admittance is charged.
   SEMI-NUDE. A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region and areolae of the female breast, as well as portions of
the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES. Businesses defined as:
      ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE. A commercial
establishment which has a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-
trade or derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues or
devotes a significant or substantial portion or its interior business or
advertising to the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of any one
more of the following:
         (a)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other visual
representations which are characterized by the depiction or description of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”;
         (b)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use
or marked primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse.
      ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant, “bottle club” or similar
commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which
regularly features:
         (a)   Persons who appear nude or in a state of nudity or semi-nude;
         (b)   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
“specified anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual activities”; or
         (c)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of “specified anatomical areas”.
      ADULT MOTEL. A motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment which
offers public accommodations for any form of consideration, which provides
patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures,
video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities”
or “specified anatomical areas” and which advertises the availability of this
sexually oriented type of material by means of a sign visible from the public
right-of-way, or by means of any off-premises advertising including, but not
limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or television.
      ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions
which are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas” are regularly shown for any form of
consideration.
      ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial
establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly features persons
who appear in a state of nudity or exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or
by “specified sexual activities”.
      ESCORT AGENCY. A person or business associated who furnishes, offers to
furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
      MASSAGE PARLOR. Any place where, for any form of consideration or
gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or
magnetic treatments, or any other treatment manipulation of the human body
which occurs as a part of or in connection with “specified sexual activities”,
or where any person providing such treatment, manipulation or service related
thereto, exposes his or her “specified anatomical areas”. The definition of
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES shall not include the practice of massage in any
licensed hospital, nor by a licensed hospital, nor by a licensed physician,
surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath, nor by any nurse or technician working
under the supervision of a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor or
osteopath, nor by trainers for any amateur, semiprofessional or professional
athlete or athletic team or school athletic program.
      NUDE MODEL STUDIO. Any place where a person, who regularly appears in a
state of nudity or displays “specified anatomical areas”, is provided, for
money or any form of consideration, to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons.
      SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT. A business or commercial establishment
that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration, a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate or
consort for the purpose of “specified sexual activities” or the exposure of
“specified anatomical areas” or activities when one or more of the persons is
in a state of nudity or semi-nudity. The definition of SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESSES shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner,
psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the state
engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Includes any of the following:
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the
top of the areola; or
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Includes any of the following:
      (1)   The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;
      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;
      (3)   Masturbation, actual or simulated;
      (4)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or
tumescence; or
      (5)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in divisions (1) through (4) above.
   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTS. Sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape,
gross sexual imposition and other crimes connected with sexually oriented
businesses including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity or other
material harmful to minors, pandering, prostitution or tax violations in
connection with a sexually oriented business.
   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Increase in the
floor areas occupied by the business by more than 15%, as the floor areas exist
on December 10, 1996.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Includes
any of the following:
      (1)   The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
      (2)   The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest
in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; and/or
      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal devise
which transfers ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the
ownership or control.
(Prior Code, § 118.02) (Ord. 1996-24, passed 2-11-1997)
§ 118.03 ESTABLISHMENT AND CLASSIFICATION OF REGULATED BUSINESSES.
   (A)   Sexually oriented businesses shall be established only in select
industrial zones and shall be subject to the restrictions of this chapter.
Specifically, sexually oriented businesses shall be allowed to locate in areas
zoned B-2 or I-1; provided, the other requirements of this chapter are met. No
person shall establish a sexually oriented business within 750 feet of another
such business or within 750 feet of any protected uses defined as any religious
institution, school, park or other public use, or within 750 feet of any
property zoned or used, for residential purposes. Sexually oriented businesses,
as defined in §
118.02, are classified as follows:
      (1)   Adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store;
      (2)   Adult cabaret;
      (3)   Adult motel;
      (4)   Adult motion picture theater;
      (5)   Adult theater;
      (6)   Massage parlor;
      (7)   Sexual encounter establishment;
      (8)   Escort agency; or
      (9)   Nude model studio.
   (B)   Nothing in this section prohibits the location of sexually oriented
businesses within retail shopping centers in I-1 industrial zones where such
activities will have their only frontage upon enclosed malls or malls isolated
from direct view from public streets, religious institutions, schools, parks or
other public facilities and residential areas without regard to the distance
requirements of division (A) above, except where a protected use, such as a day
care facility, located within an enclosed or isolated mall.
(Prior Code, § 118.03) (Ord. 1996-24, passed 2-11-1997) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.04 MEASUREMENTS OF DISTANCE.
   For the purpose of this chapter, distance between any two sexually oriented
businesses and any sexually oriented business and any establishment where
alcohol is served shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures, from the closest exterior structural wall of each
business. The distance between any sexually oriented business and any protected
use, as defined in this chapter, shall be measured in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures from the nearest part of the sexually oriented
business to the nearest property line of the protected use.
(Prior Code, § 118.04) (Ord. 1996-24, passed 2-11-1997)
§ 118.05 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating at the time of the
enactment of this chapter that is in violation of §
118.03 shall be deemed a nonconforming use. A nonconforming use may continue
for one year, and may be extended by the Planning Commission upon a showing of
extreme financial hardship, unless voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30
days or more. Such nonconforming uses may not be increased, enlarged, extended
or altered unless to a conforming use. Where two or more sexually oriented
businesses are operating in a permissible area, the first business to have been
established and continually operating is the conforming use.
   (B)   Sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is
not rendered nonconforming by the subsequent location of a protected use within
750 feet of the sexually oriented business. This division (B) does not apply to
a business whose permit and/or license has expired or been revoked.
   (C)   Any establishment subject to the provisions of this chapter shall
apply for a permit as provided under §
118.06 within 30 days of the effective date of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 118.05) (Ord. 1996-24, passed 2-11-1997)
§ 118.06 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No sexually oriented business shall be permitted to operate without a
valid sexually oriented business permit issued by the village. Operation of
such a business without a permit is a misdemeanor.
   (B)   The Village Administrator, or his or her designee, is responsible for
granting, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending and canceling permits for
proposed or existing sexually oriented businesses. To be approved, applications
must comply with all locational and zoning requirements of this chapter and the
Zoning, Building and Floodplain Codes of the village.
   (C)   Applications must be made on a form provided by the village.
Applicants must provide an original and two copies of a sworn application which
contain the following information and documents:
      (1)   If the applicant is:
         (a)   An individual: the individual’s legal name, aliases and proof of
age over 18;
         (b)   A partnership: the complete name, all partners’ names, and a
copy of any partnership agreement; and
         (c)   A corporation: its complete name; date of incorporation; names
of all officers, directors and principal stockholders, name and address of its
registered agent and evidence of good standing under state law.
      (2)   The name of the sexually oriented business, if different from the
applicant’s, and any required registration documents;
      (3)   Whether the applicant or any individual listed in division (C)(1)
above has been convicted of a specified criminal act as defined under §
118.01 within either two years for misdemeanor offenses, or five years for
felony offenses or two or more misdemeanor offenses, immediately preceding the
application date, and, if so, the act involved and the date and place of the
conviction;
      (4)   Whether the applicant or other listed individuals has had a
sexually oriented business permit revoked, suspended or denied and the name of
the business, the city or county of occurrence and the date on which the permit
was suspended, revoked or denied;
      (5)   Whether the applicant or other listed individuals hold any other
sexually oriented business permits and the names and locations of all other
such businesses;
      (6)   The proposed location of the business including a legal description
of the property, street addresses and telephone number;
      (7)   The applicant’s business and residential addresses and telephone
numbers;
      (8)   The applicant’s driver’s license number, Social Security number,
tax identification number and recent photograph;
      (9)   A sketch or diagram showing the configuration and total floor space
of the premises. The sketch need not be professional, but must be drawn to
scale and accurate to plus or minus six inches;
      (10)   Current certificate and straight line drawing prepared within 30
days prior to application by a registered land surveyor depicting property
lines and structures and the property lines of any existing protected use
within 750 feet of the proposed business. A protected use is established if it
is in existence at the time the application is submitted; and
      (11)   Application must be signed by the individual applicant, and each
person who has at least 10% interest in the business. If a corporation is the
applicant, then each person owning at least 10% of the corporation must sign
the application.
   (D)   Applicants are under a continuing duty to promptly update their
application information. Failure to do so within 30 days of the date of a
change in application information shall be grounds for permit suspension.
   (E)   If the Village Administrator learns that an applicant improperly
completed the permit application, the Village Administrator shall promptly
notify the applicant and allow ten days for correction.
   (F)   A $100 non-refundable application fee is due at the time the applicant
files an application under this section.
   (G)   Prior to obtaining a permit to operate a sexually oriented business,
the applicant shall obtain a certification that the proposed location complies
with the locational requirements of this chapter.
   (H)   The possession of other types of state or city permits and/or
licenses, including a liquor license, does not exempt an applicant from the
requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business permit.
   (I)   By filing an application under this section, the applicant shall be
deemed to have consented to the provisions of this chapter and to the
investigation of the application by the Village Administrator and his or her
designees.
   (J)   The applicant is required to provide the village with the names of all
employees required to be licensed under §
118.15. This obligation continues even after a permit is granted or renewed.
   (K)   A sexually oriented business permit may be renewed annually upon
written application, subject to the payment of a $30 renewal fee, and a finding
that the permit holder is still in conformance with the permit requirements.
(Prior Code, § 118.06) (Ord. 1996-24, passed 2-11-1997) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.07 APPLICATION INVESTIGATION PROCESS.
   Upon receipt of an application, the village shall send photocopies of the
application to all city agencies responsible for the enforcement of health,
fire, building and zoning codes and laws. Each agency shall investigate the
application for compliance with its respective code and approve or disapprove
the application within 20 days of the receipt of the application by the
village. An agency shall disapprove an application if it finds that the
business would be in violation of any provision of any statute, code,
ordinance, regulation or other law in effect in the village and the reason(s)
for disapproval must be stated.
(Prior Code, § 118.07) (Ord. 1996-24, passed 2-11-1997)
§ 118.08 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Generally. An application shall be granted or denied within 30 days
from the date of its proper filing.
   (B)   Grant of application for permits.
      (1)   An application shall be granted unless one of the criteria of
division (C) below is met.
      (2)   The permit states, on its face, the name of the persons to whom it
is granted and the address of the sexually oriented business and the permit
expiration date. The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near
the entrance to the sexually oriented business so it can be read at any time.
   (C)   Denial of application for permit.
      (1)   An application may be denied for any of the following reasons:
         (a)   An applicant is under 18 years of age;
         (b)   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse is overdue on the payment
of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed by the city in relation to a
sexually oriented business;
         (c)   An applicant is residing with a person whose permit to operate a
sexually oriented business has been denied or revoked within the preceding 12
months;
         (d)   An applicant has failed to provide information as requested in
the application or has supplied false information;
         (e)   The premises to be used are not in compliance with city health,
fire and/or building codes as determined by the city agency responsible for
determining such compliance;
         (f)   The $110 application fee has not been paid;
         (g)   The proposed business does not comply with the 750 feet location
requirement of §
118.03(A);
         (h)   To grant the application would violate a statute, ordinance or
court order;
         (i)   The applicant has a permit under this chapter which has been
suspended or revoked;
         (j)   The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act
within the time limitation of §
118.06(C)(3); and/or
         (k)   An applicant knowingly has, in his or her employ, an employee
who does not have a valid license as required in §
118.15.
      (2)   Applicants shall be promptly notified of an application denial and
the reasons for denial.
(Prior Code, § 118.08) (Ord. 1996-24, passed 2-11-1997)
§ 118.09 ANNUAL PERMIT FEE.
   The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit is $850.
(Prior Code, § 118.09) (Ord. 1996-24, passed 2-11-1997)
§ 118.10 INSPECTION.
   Representatives of the city enforcement agencies, County Health Department
and the Fire Department shall be permitted to inspect a sexually oriented
business to determine compliance with their respective departments, at any time
it is occupied or open for business. The failure to allow inspection is
unlawful and is a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 118.10) (Ord. 1996-24, passed 2-11-1997) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.11 EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.
   Each permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may not be
renewed by making an application under §
118.06 at least 30 days before the expiration date. If a renewal is denied, a
new permit shall not be issued for one year from the date of denial. If the
basis for denial has been corrected and at least 90 days have elapsed from the
date the denial became final, a new permit may be granted.
(Prior Code, § 118.11) (Ord. 1996-24, passed 2-11-1997)
§ 118.12 SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.
   A permit to operate a sexually oriented business may be suspended until the
violation causing the suspension has been corrected; provided, that the period
is not to exceed 30 days, if a permittee or an employee of a permittee:
   (A)   Violates or is not in compliance with this chapter;
   (B)   Works at the sexually oriented business while under the influence of
alcohol;
   (C)   Refuses to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business in
accord with this chapter;
   (D)   Knowingly permits gambling on the premises of the sexually oriented
business;
   (E)   Fails to correct a violation of a building, fire, health or zoning
code within seven days of notification of such violation;
   (F)   Transfers the sexually oriented business permit to another in
violation of this chapter; or
   (G)   Knowingly employs a person without a valid license as required in §
118.15.
(Prior Code, § 118.12) (Ord. 1996-24, passed 2-11-1997) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.13 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   A permit to operate a sexually oriented business shall be revoked upon
a determination that either a permit is to be suspended for a second time
within a 12-month period or that a permittee or employee of a permittee:
      (1)   Gave false or misleading information on the permit application
which enhanced the permittee’s opportunity to obtain a permit;
      (2)   Knowingly allowed the possession, sale or use of a controlled
substance on the premises;
      (3)   Knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
      (4)   Knowingly operated the business while under permit suspension;
      (5)   Has been convicted of a “specified criminal act” for which the time
period required in §
118.06(C)(3) has not elapsed;
      (6)   Committed a specified criminal act on the permitted premises on two
or more occasions within a 12 month period while employed by the permit holder;
      (7)   Has been convicted of tax violations for taxes or fees related to a
sexually oriented business;
      (8)   Allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sexual conduct or any other
specified sexual activities to occur in or on the permitted premises; or
      (9)   Operated more than one sexually oriented business under a single
roof.
   (B)   A permit shall be revoked for one year and a permittee shall not
receive any other permits for any other sexually oriented businesses during the
one-year revocation period. If the basis for revocation is corrected, the
applicant may be granted a new permit if at least 90 days have elapsed since
the date the revocation became effective.
(Prior Code, § 118.13) (Ord. 1996-24, passed 2-11-1997)
§ 118.14 JUDICIAL REVIEW OF PERMIT DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   An applicant or permittee may seek review of a denial of an application,
denial of a renewal of an application, suspension or revocation of a permit
through the Village Council or special review board if one is established. If
the denial, suspension or revocation is affirmed on review, the applicant or
permittee may seek review of the administration decisions in County Court of
Common Pleas.
(Prior Code, § 118.14) (Ord. 1996-24, passed 2-11-1997)
§ 118.15 TRANSFER OF PERMIT.
   (A)   A permittee shall not operate a sexually oriented business at any
place other than the address designated in the application for permit.
   (B)   A permittee shall not transfer a permit to another person unless that
person:
      (1)   Obtains an amendment to the permit upon the satisfactory completion
of an application; and
      (2)   Pays a transfer fee of 20% of the annual permit fee.
   (C)   A permit may not be transferred when the permittee has been notified
that suspension or revocation proceedings have been or will be brought against
the permittee.
   (D)   A permit shall not be transferred to another location.
   (E)   Any transfer attempted in violation of this section is void and will
revoke the permit.
(Prior Code, § 118.15) (Ord. 1996-24, passed 2-11-1997)
§ 118.16 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE.
   (A)   All employees of a sexually oriented business who engage in the
services rendered by a nude model studio, escort or escort agency, sexual
encounter establishment, massage parlor, or a live performer or entertainer are
required to obtain a sexually oriented business employee license. Each
applicant shall pay a permit fee of $25 to cover reasonable administrative
costs.
   (B)   On a form provided by the village, the applicant shall provide his or
her:
      (1)   Name, including any “stage” names or aliases;
      (2)   Age, birth date and birthplace;
      (3)   Current resident and business addresses and phone numbers;
      (4)   Height, weight, hair and eye color;
      (5)   State driver’s license or identification number and Social Security
number;
      (6)   Proof of minimum age of 18;
      (7)   A color photograph and fingerprints on a form provided by the
Police Department;
      (8)   A statement detailing the license or permit history of the
applicant for the previous five years, including information as to whether a
permit has ever been denied, revoked or suspended, the reason for such action,
the date of such action and the jurisdiction in which such action occurred; and
      (9)   Information as to whether the applicant has been convicted of a
“specified criminal act”, as defined in §
118.02, and the date, place jurisdiction and nature of such conviction.
   (C)   The application review shall be completed within ten days of filing.
The employee license shall be issued unless the village finds that:
      (1)   The applicant knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent
statement of material fact;
      (2)   The application is under 18 years of age;
      (3)   The applicant has been convicted of a “specified criminal act”, as
defined in §
118.02.
      (4)   The license is to be used in a business prohibited by this chapter
or other local or state law; or
      (5)   The applicant has had an employee license revoked within two years
of the date of the current application.
   (D)   An employee license may be renewed annually upon written application
subject to the payment of a $10 renewal fee and a finding that the applicant is
still in conformance with the application requirements.
(Prior Code, § 118.16) (Ord. 1996-24, passed 2-11-1997)
CRIMINAL OFFENSES
§ 118.30 LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates or causes to be
operated a sexually oriented business:
   (A)   In any manner except as provided under this chapter;
   (B)   Within 750 feet of any religious institution, school, boundary of a
residential district, public park or other similar public property;
   (C)   Within 750 feet of any other sexually oriented business or
establishment that primarily operates for the service of alcohol;
   (D)   In the same building as an existing sexually oriented business, or
causes the substantial enlargement of any sexually oriented business; and/or
   (E)   Without a valid permit as required under §
118.06.
(Prior Code, § 118.25) (Ord. 1996-24, passed 2-11-1997) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.31 MINORS PROHIBITED.
   A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates, or causes to be
operated, a sexually oriented business and knowingly or with reasonable cause
to know, permits, suffers or allows:
   (A)   A person under 18 years of age to be admitted, remain or purchase
goods or services at the business premises without the specific consent of a
parent or guardian; or
   (B)   A person under 18 years of age to be employed at the premises.
(Prior Code, § 118.26) (Ord. 1996-24, passed 2-11-1997) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.32 ADVERTISING AND LIGHTING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates, or causes to be
operated, a sexually oriented business and:
      (1)   Advertises the presentation of any activity prohibited by this
chapter or other local or state regulation;
      (2)   Displays or exhibits the materials and performances in advertising
which is visible outside the premises except for advertising showing the
existence or location of a sexually oriented business;
      (3)   Allows any portion of the interior premises to be visible from
outside the establishment; or
      (4)   Fails to illuminate the premises’ entries and off-street parking
areas from dusk until closing with a lighting system which provides an average
maintained horizontal illumination of one foot candle of light on the parking
surface and walkways.
   (B)   Nothing in this section relieves the permittee from compliance with
any other provision of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 118.27) (Ord. 1996-24, passed 2-11-1997) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.33 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates or causes to be
operated a sexually oriented business and allows the business to remain open,
or to permit any employee to engage in a performance, solicit a performance,
make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service or solicit a service between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any particular day.
   (B)   Any employee who engages in the above activity also commits a
misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 118.28) (Ord. 1996-24, passed 2-11-1997) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.34 NUDITY PROHIBITED.
   Public nudity, as defined under §
118.02 and R.C. § 2907.01(H), is prohibited in sexually oriented businesses.
Any sexually oriented business which is found in violation of this section
shall have its permit suspended pursuant to the provisions of §
118.11.
(Prior Code, § 118.29) (Ord. 1996-24, passed 2-11-1997) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.35 OPERATION OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS WITHOUT A VALID PERMIT.
   In addition to the criminal penalties found in other sections of this
chapter, it shall be unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he or she
operates, or causes to be operated, a sexually oriented business and knows, or
should know, that the business does not have a sexually oriented business
permit or has a permit which has expired or which has been suspended or
revoked.
(Prior Code, § 118.30) (Ord. 1996-24, passed 2-11-1997) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.36 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   It is a defense to prosecution for violation of this chapter that a
person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
      (1)   By a college, junior college or university supported, in whole or
in part, by taxation; or
      (2)   By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college or university supported, entirely or partly, by taxation.
   (B)   In a structure:
      (1)   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no
other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing;
      (2)   Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at
least three days in advance of class; and
      (3)   Where no more than one nude model is permitted at a time.
   (C)   It is a defense to prosecution for violation of this chapter that an
employee of a sexually oriented business exposed any specified anatomical area
during the bona fide use of a restroom or dressing room accessible only to
employees.
(Prior Code, § 118.31) (Ord. 1996-24, passed 2-11-1997)
§ 118.37 IMMUNITY FROM PROSECUTION.
   The village, the Police Department and all other city officers, agents and
employees, charged with enforcement of state and local laws and codes shall be
immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith trespass
upon a sexually oriented business while acting within the scope of authority
conferred by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 118.33) (Ord. 1996-24, passed 2-11-1997)
§ 118.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   In addition to any applicable penalties under state or county law, any
person convicted of a criminal offense under this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment not
to exceed 60 days, or both. Each violation or noncompliance shall be considered
as a separate offense as will each day of continued violation or noncompliance.
   (B)   The village may take any such lawful action to prevent or remedy any
violation or noncompliance including but not limited to an equitable action for
injunctive relief or an action at law for damages.
(Prior Code, § 118.32) (Ord. 1996-24, passed 2-11-1997)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
      
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
      
133.   SEX OFFENSES
      
134.   GAMBLING OFFENSES
      
135.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
      
136.   OFFENSES AGAINST JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
      
137.   WEAPONS CONTROL
      
138.   DRUG OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
130.01   Application of Title XIII
   
130.02   Definitions
   
130.03   Classification of offenses
   
130.04   Common law offenses abrogated
   
130.05   Rules of construction
   
130.06   Limitation of criminal prosecutions
   
130.07   Requirements for criminal liability; voluntary intoxication
   
130.08   Culpable mental states
   
130.09   Organizational criminal liability
   
130.10   Personal accountability for organizational conduct
   
130.11   Attempt
   
130.12   Complicity
   
130.13   Presumption of innocence; proof of offense; affirmative defense
   
130.14   Battered woman syndrome
   
130.15   Delinquency adjudications deemed convictions
   
130.16   Criminal law jurisdiction
   
130.17   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police
Department
   
130.18   Imposing sentence for misdemeanor
   
130.19   Multiple sentences
   
130.20   Apprehension, detention, or arrest of persons on bond
   
130.21   Self defense: limitations on duty to retreat prior to using force
   
130.22   Registration of felons
 
   
130.99   Penalty for Title XIII
Statutory reference:
   Mayor’s Court generally, see R.C. Chapter 1905
   Municipal Court generally, see R.C. Chapter 1901
   Trials, Magistrate Courts, see R.C. Chapter 2938
§ 130.01 APPLICATION OF TITLE XIII.
   (A)   Title XIII of this code of ordinances embodies and prescribes
penalties for offenses against the municipality not classifiable in previous
titles and chapters. The word “misdemeanors”, as used in this title, is not
exhaustive and does not imply that offenses found elsewhere in this code of
ordinances are not also misdemeanors and punishable as such.
   (B)   Each act or omission for which a fine, imprisonment, or both is
provided under this Title or elsewhere in this code, or each act or omission
which is declared a violation of this code, is unlawful and is hereby made a
misdemeanor. Upon conviction, the penalty or penalties so provided shall be
imposed by the court.
§ 130.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTRABAND. Any property that is illegal for a person to acquire or possess
under a statute, ordinance, or rule, or that a trier of fact lawfully
determines to be illegal to possess by reason of the property’s involvement in
an offense. The term includes but is not limited to all of the following:
      (1)   Any controlled substance, as defined in R.C. § 3719.01, or any
device or paraphernalia related thereto;
      (2)   Any unlawful gambling device or paraphernalia;
      (3)   Any dangerous ordnance or obscene material.
   DANGEROUS OFFENDER. A person who has committed an offense, whose history,
character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or she will be a
danger to others, and whose conduct has been characterized by a pattern of
repetitive, compulsive or aggressive behavior with heedless indifference to the
consequences.
   DEADLY FORCE. Any force that carries a substantial risk that it will
proximately result in the death of any person.
   FORCE. Any violence, compulsion, or constraint physically exerted by any
means upon or against a person or thing.
   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any of the following:
      (1)   A Sheriff, deputy sheriff, constable, police officer of a township
or joint police district, Marshal, deputy marshal, municipal police officer,
member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under
R.C. § 3735.31(D) or state highway patrol trooper.
      (2)   An officer, agent, or employee of the state or any of its agencies,
instrumentalities, or political subdivisions, upon whom, by statute, a duty to
conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is imposed and the
authority to arrest violators is conferred, within the limits of such statutory
duty and authority.
      (3)   The Mayor, in a capacity as chief conservator of the peace within
the municipality.
      (4)   A member of an auxiliary police force organized by the county,
township, or municipal law enforcement authorities, within the scope of the
member’s appointment or commission.
      (5)   A person lawfully called pursuant to R.C. § 311.07 to aid a sheriff
in keeping the peace, for the purposes and during the time when the person is
called.
      (6)   A person appointed by a Mayor pursuant to R.C.§ 737.10 as a special
patrolling officer during a riot or emergency, for the purposes and during the
time when the person is appointed.
      (7)   A member of the organized militia of this state or the armed forces
of the United States, lawfully called to duty to aid civil authorities in
keeping the peace or protect against domestic violence.
      (8)   A prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, secret
service officer, or municipal prosecutor.
      (9)   A veterans’ home police officer appointed under R.C. § 5907.02.
      (10)   A member of a police force employed by a regional transit
authority under R.C. § 306.35(Y).
      (11)   A special police officer employed by a port authority under R.C. §
4582.04 or 4582.28.
      (12)   The House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms if the House of
Representatives Sergeant at Arms has arrest authority pursuant to R.C. §
101.311(E)(1) and an Assistant House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms.
      (13)   The Senate Sergeant at Arms and an Assistant Senate Sergeant at
Arms;
      (14)   A special police officer employed by a municipal corporation at a
municipal airport, or other municipal air navigation facility, that has
scheduled operations, as defined in 14 C.F.R. § 119.3, as amended, and that is
required to be under a security program and is governed by aviation security
rules of the Transportation Security Administration of the United States
Department of Transportation as provided in 49 C.F.R. parts 1542 and 1544, as
amended.
   NOT GUILTY BY REASON OF INSANITY. A person is “not guilty by reason of
insanity” relative to a charge of an offense only if the person proves, in the
manner specified in R.C. § 2901.05, that at the time of the commission of the
offense, he or she did not know, as a result of a severe mental disease or
defect, the wrongfulness of his or her acts.
   OFFENSE OF VIOLENCE.
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.11,
2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.15, 2903.18, 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22, 2905.01,
2905.02, 2905.11, 2905.32, 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.05, 2909.02, 2909.03,
2909.24, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2917.01, 2917.02, 2917.03, 2917.31,
2917.321, 2919.25, 2921.03, 2921.04, 2921.34, or 2923.161, of division (A)(1)
of R.C. § 2903.34, of division (A)(1), (A)(2) or (A)(3) of R.C. § 2911.12, or
of division (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3) or (B)(4) of R.C. § 2919.22, or felonious
sexual penetration in violation of former R.C. § 2907.12;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States, substantially equivalent to
any section, division or offense listed in division (1) of this definition;
      (3)   An offense, other than a traffic offense, under an existing or
former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or of the United
States, committed purposely or knowingly, and involving physical harm to
persons or a risk of serious physical harm to persons;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing, any
offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition;
      (5)   A violation of division (C) of R.C. § 959.131.
   PERSON.
      (1)   (a)   Subject to division (2) of this definition, as used in any
section contained in Title XIII of this code that sets forth a criminal
offense, the term includes all of the following:
            1.   An individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership and association.
            2.   An unborn human who is viable.
         (b)   As used in any section contained in Title XIII of this code that
does not set forth a criminal offense, the term includes an individual,
corporation, business trust, estate, partnership and association.
         (c)   As used in division (1)(a)2. of this definition, “unborn human”
means an individual organism of the species Homo sapiens from fertilization
until live birth. “Viable” means the stage of development of a human fetus at
which there is a realistic probability of maintaining and nourishing of a life
outside the womb with or without temporary artificial life-sustaining support.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (1)(a) of this definition, in no case
shall the portion of the definition of the term “person” that is set forth in
division (1)(a)2. of this definition be applied or construed in any section
contained in Title XIII of this code that sets forth a criminal offense in any
of the following manners:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (2)(a) of this
definition, in a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as
prohibiting any pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion
with the consent of the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant woman
implied by law in a medical emergency, or with the approval of one otherwise
authorized by law to consent to medical treatment on behalf of the pregnant
woman. An abortion that violates the conditions described in the immediately
preceding sentence may be punished as a violation of R.C. § 2903.01, 2903.02,
2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13,
2903.14, 2903.21 or 2903.22, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, as applicable. An abortion that does not violate the conditions
described in the second immediately preceding sentence but that does violate
R.C. § 2919.12, 2919.13(B), 2919.15, 2919.151, 2919.17 or 2919.18, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, may be punished as a violation of
such section, as applicable. Consent is sufficient under this division if it is
of the type otherwise adequate to permit medical treatment to the pregnant
woman, even if it does not comply with R.C. § 2919.12.
         (b)   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as
applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman that occurs while
she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the following:
            1.   Her delivery of a stillborn baby;
            2.   Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a
viable, unborn human that she is carrying;
            3.   Her causing the death of her child who is born alive but who
dies from one or more injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable,
unborn human;
            4.   Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more
injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human;
            5.   Her causing, threatening to cause, or attempting to cause, in
any other manner, an injury, illness, or other psychological illness or
condition, regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable, unborn human
that she is carrying.
   PHYSICAL HARM TO PERSONS. Any injury, illness, or other physiological
impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.
   PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY. Any tangible or intangible damage to property
that, in any degree, results in loss to its value or interferes with its use or
enjoyment. The term does not include wear and tear occasioned by normal use.
   PRIVILEGE. An immunity, license, or right conferred by law, or bestowed by
express or implied grant, or arising out of status, position, office, or
relationship, or growing out of necessity.
   PROPERTY.
      (1)   Any property, real or personal, tangible or intangible, and any
interest or license in that property. The term includes but is not limited to
cable television service, other telecommunications service, telecommunications
devices, information service, computers, data, computer software, financial
instruments associated with computers, other documents associated with
computers, or copies of the documents, whether in machine or human-readable
form, trade secrets, trademarks, copyrights, patents, and property protected by
a trademark, copyright or patent. “Financial instruments associated with
computers” include but are not limited to checks, drafts, warrants, money
orders, notes of indebtedness, certificates of deposit, letters of credit,
bills of credit or debit cards, financial transaction authorization mechanisms,
marketable securities, or any computer system representations of any of them.
      (2)   As used in this definition, “trade secret” has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 1333.61, and “telecommunications service” and “information service”
have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (3)   As used in this definition and in the definition of “contraband” in
this section, “cable television service”, “computer”, “computer network”,
“computer software”, “computer system”, “data”, and “telecommunications device”
have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   REPEAT OFFENDER. A person who has a history of persistent criminal activity
and whose character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or she will
commit another offense. It is prima facie evidence that a person is a repeat
offender if any of the following applies:
      (1)   Having been convicted of one or more offenses of violence, as
defined in R.C. § 2901.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent offense of
violence;
      (2)   Having been convicted of one or more sexually oriented offenses, as
defined in R.C. § 2950.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent sexually oriented
offense;
      (3)   Having been convicted of one or more theft offenses, as defined in
R.C. § 2913.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for one or more
of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent theft offense;
      (4)   Having been convicted of one or more felony drug abuse offenses, as
defined in R.C. § 2925.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent felony drug abuse
offense;
      (5)   Having been convicted of two or more felonies, and having been
imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such offense, he or she commits a
subsequent offense;
      (6)   Having been convicted of three or more offenses of any type or
degree other than traffic offenses, alcoholic intoxication offenses, or minor
misdemeanors, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such
offense, he or she commits a subsequent offense.
   RISK. A significant possibility, as contrasted with a remote possibility,
that a certain result may occur or that certain circumstances may exist.
   SCHOOL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
   SCHOOL ACTIVITY. Any activity held under the auspices of a board of
education of a city, local, exempted village, joint vocational, or cooperative
education school district; a governing authority of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314; a governing board of an educational
service center; or the governing body of a nonpublic school for which the
Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum standards under R.C. §
3301.07.
   SCHOOL BUILDING. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
   SCHOOL BUS. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   SCHOOL PREMISES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
   SCHOOL SAFETY ZONE. Consists of a school, school building, school premises,
school activity, and school bus.
   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO PERSONS. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any mental illness or condition of such gravity as would normally
require hospitalization or prolonged psychiatric treatment;
      (2)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death;
      (3)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent incapacity, whether
partial or total, or that involves some temporary, substantial incapacity;
      (4)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent disfigurement, or
that involves some temporary, serious disfigurement;
      (5)   Any physical harm that involves acute pain of such duration as to
result in substantial suffering, or that involves any degree of prolonged or
intractable pain.
   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY. Any physical harm to property that does
either of the following:
      (1)   Results in substantial loss to the value of the property, or
requires a substantial amount of time, effort, or money to repair or replace;
      (2)   Temporarily prevents the use or enjoyment of the property, or
substantially interferes with its use or enjoyment for an extended period of
time.
   SUBSTANTIAL RISK. A strong possibility, as contrasted with a remote or
significant possibility, that a certain result may occur or that certain
circumstances may exist.
(R.C. §§ 2901.01, 2935.36(E))
§ 130.03 CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENSES.
   As used in this Title:
   (A)   Offenses include misdemeanors of the first, second, third, and fourth
degree, minor misdemeanors, and offenses not specifically classified.
   (B)   Regardless of the penalty that may be imposed, any offense
specifically classified as a misdemeanor is a misdemeanor.
   (C)   Any offense not specifically classified is a misdemeanor if
imprisonment for not more than one year may be imposed as a penalty.
   (D)   Any offense not specifically classified is a minor misdemeanor if the
only penalty that may be imposed is one of the following:
      (1)   For an offense committed prior to January 1, 2004, a fine not
exceeding $100;
      (2)   For an offense committed on or after January 1, 2004, a fine not
exceeding $150, community service under R.C. § 2929.27(D), or a financial
sanction other than a fine under R.C. § 2929.28.
(R.C. § 2901.02)
§ 130.04 COMMON LAW OFFENSES ABROGATED.
   (A)   No conduct constitutes a criminal offense against the municipality
unless it is defined as an offense in this code.
   (B)   An offense is defined when one or more sections of this code state a
positive prohibition or enjoin a specific duty, and provide a penalty for
violation of such prohibition or failure to meet such duty.
   (C)   This section does not affect the power of a court to punish for
contempt or to employ any sanction authorized by law to enforce an order, civil
judgment or decree.
(R.C. § 2901.03)
§ 130.05 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C) or (D) of this section,
sections of this code defining offenses or penalties shall be strictly
construed against the municipality and liberally construed in favor of the
accused.
   (B)   Rules of criminal procedure and sections of this code providing for
criminal procedure shall be construed so as to effect the fair, impartial,
speedy, and sure administration of justice.
   (C)   Any provision of a section of this code that refers to a previous
conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of a section of this code, the
Ohio Revised Code or a division of a section of this code or the Ohio Revised
Code shall be construed to also refer to a previous conviction of or plea of
guilty to a substantially equivalent offense under an existing or former law of
this municipality, state, another state, or the United States or under an
existing or former municipal ordinance.
   (D)   Any provision of this code that refers to a section, or to a division
of a section, of this code that defines or specifies a criminal offense shall
be construed to also refer to an existing or former law of this state, another
state, or the United States, to an existing or former municipal ordinance, or
to an existing or former division of any such existing or former law or
ordinance that defines or specifies, or that defined or specified, a
substantially equivalent offense.
(R.C. § 2901.04)
§ 130.06 LIMITATION OF CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5)
of this section or as otherwise provided in this section, a prosecution shall
be barred unless it is commenced within the following periods after an offense
is committed:
         (a)   For a felony, six years;
         (b)   For a misdemeanor other than a minor misdemeanor, two years;
         (c)   For a minor misdemeanor, six months.
      (2)   There is no period of limitation for the prosecution of a violation
of R.C. § 2903.01 or R.C. § 2903.02 or for the prosecution of a conspiracy to
commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in committing a violation of R.C. §
2903.01 or R.C. § 2903.02.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (B) through (J) of this
section, a prosecution of any of the following offenses shall be barred unless
it is commenced within 20 years after the offense is committed:
         (a)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.03, 2903.04, 2905.01, 2905.32,
2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.21, 2909.02, 2909.22, 2909.23, 2909.24, 2909.26,
2909.27, 2909.28, 2909.29, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2911.12, or 2917.02, a
violation of R.C. § 2903.11 or 2903.12 if the victim is a peace officer, a
violation of R.C. § 2903.13 that is a felony, or a violation of former R.C. §
2907.12.
         (b)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing a violation set forth in division (A)(3)(a) of this section.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (D) to (L) of this
section, a prosecution of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 or a
conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in committing a
violation of either section shall be barred unless it is commenced within 25
years after the offense is committed.
      (5)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (A)(5)(b) and (E)
to (I) of this section, a prosecution of a violation of R.C. § 2907.13 shall be
barred unless it is commenced within five years after the offense is committed.
         (b)   Prosecution that would otherwise be barred under division (A)(5)
(a) of this section may be commenced within five years after the date of the
discovery of the offense by either an aggrieved person or the aggrieved
person’s legal representative who is not a party to the offense.
         (c)   As used in division (A)(5)(b) of this section, “aggrieved
person” includes any of the following individuals with regard to a violation of
R.C. § 2907.13:
            1.   A patient who was the victim of the violation;
            2.   The spouse or surviving spouse of a patient who was the victim
of the violation;
            3.   Any child born as a result of the violation.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2) of this section,
if the period of limitation provided in division (A)(1) or (A)(3) of this
section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for an offense of which an
element is fraud or breach of fiduciary duty within one year after discovery of
the offense either by an aggrieved person or by the aggrieved person’s legal
representative who is not a party to the offense.
      (2)   If the period of limitation provided in division (A)(1) or (A)(3)
of this section has expired, prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 2913.49
shall be commenced within five years after discovery of the offense either by
an aggrieved person or the aggrieved person’s legal representative who is not a
party to the offense.
   (C)   (1)   If the period of limitation provided in division (A)(1) or (A)
(3) of this section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for the
following offenses during the following specified periods of time:
         (a)   For an offense involving misconduct in office by a public
servant at any time while the accused remains a public servant, or within two
years thereafter;
         (b)   For an offense by a person who is not a public servant but whose
offense is directly related to the misconduct in office of a public servant, at
any time while that public servant remains a public servant, or within two
years thereafter.
      (2)   As used in this division:
         OFFENSE IS DIRECTLY RELATED TO THE MISCONDUCT IN OFFICE OF A PUBLIC
SERVANT. The phrase includes but is not limited to a violation of R.C. §
101.71, 101.91, 121.61 or 2921.13, 102.03(F) or (H), 2921.02(A), 2921.43(A) or
(B), or 3517.13(F) or (G), that is directly related to an offense involving
misconduct in office of a public servant, or a violation of any municipal
ordinance substantially equivalent to those Ohio Revised Code sections listed
in this division (C)(2).
         PUBLIC SERVANT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.01.
   (D)   (1)   If a DNA record made in connection with the criminal
investigation of the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 is
determined to match another DNA record that is of an identifiable person and if
the time of the determination is later than 25 years after the offense is
committed, prosecution of that person for a violation of the section may be
commenced within five years after the determination is complete.
      (2)   If a DNA record made in connection with the criminal investigation
of the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 is determined to
match another DNA record that is of an identifiable person and if the time of
the determination is within 25 years after the offense is committed,
prosecution of that person for a violation of the section may be commenced
within the longer of 25 years after the offense is committed or five years
after the determination is complete.
      (3)   As used in this division, DNA RECORD has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 109.573.
   (E)   An offense is committed when every element of the offense occurs. In
the case of an offense of which an element is a continuing course of conduct,
the period of limitation does not begin to run until such course of conduct or
the accused’s accountability for it terminates, whichever occurs first.
   (F)   A prosecution is commenced on the date an indictment is returned or an
information filed, or on the date a lawful arrest without a warrant is made, or
on the date a warrant, summons, citation, or other process is issued, whichever
occurs first. A prosecution is not commenced by the return of an indictment or
the filing of an information unless reasonable diligence is exercised to issue
and execute process on the same. A prosecution is not commenced upon issuance
of a warrant, summons, citation, or other process unless reasonable diligence
is exercised to execute the same.
   (G)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the corpus
delicti remains undiscovered.
   (H)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the
accused purposely avoids prosecution. Proof that the accused departed this
municipality or conceals the accused’s identity or whereabouts is prima facie
evidence of the accused’s purpose to avoid prosecution.
   (I)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time a prosecution
against the accused based on the same conduct is pending in this state, even
though the indictment, information, or process that commenced the prosecution
is quashed or the proceedings on the indictment, information, or process are
set aside or reversed on appeal.
   (J)   The period of limitation for a violation of this Title XIII or Title
XXIX of the Ohio Revised Code that involves a physical or mental wound, injury,
disability, or condition of a nature that reasonably indicates abuse or neglect
of a child under 18 years of age or of a child with a developmental disability
or physical impairment under 21 years of age shall not begin to run until
either of the following occurs:
      (1)   The victim of the offense reaches the age of majority.
      (2)   A public children services agency, or a municipal or county peace
officer that is not the parent or guardian of the child, in the county in which
the child resides or in which the abuse or neglect is occurring or has occurred
has been notified that abuse or neglect is known, suspected, or believed to
have occurred.
   (K)   As used in this section, PEACE OFFICER has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2935.01.
   (L)   (1)   The amendments to divisions (A) and (D) of this section that
took effect on July 16, 2015, apply to a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03
committed on and after July 16, 2015, and apply to a violation of either of
those sections committed prior to July 16, 2015, if prosecution for that
violation was not barred under this section as it existed on July 16, 2015.
      (2)   The amendment to division (A)(2) of this section that took effect
on April 4, 2023, applies to a conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or
complicity in committing a violation of R.C. § 2903.01 or R.C. § 2903.02 if the
conspiracy, attempt, or complicity is committed on or after April 4, 2023, and
applies to a conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing a violation of either of those sections if the conspiracy, attempt,
or complicity was committed prior to April 4, 2023, and prosecution for that
conspiracy, attempt, or complicity was not barred under this section as it
existed on the day prior to April 4, 2023.
(R.C. § 2901.13)
Statutory reference:
   Limitation for income tax violations, see R.C. § 718.12
§ 130.07 REQUIREMENTS FOR CRIMINAL LIABILITY; VOLUNTARY INTOXICATION.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, a person is not
guilty of an offense unless both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person’s liability is based on conduct that includes either a
voluntary act, or an omission to per-form an act or duty that the person is
capable of performing;
      (2)   The person has the requisite degree of culpability for each element
as to which a culpable mental state is specified by the language defining the
offense.
   (B)   When the language defining an offense does not specify any degree of
culpability, and plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict criminal
liability for the conduct described in the section, then culpability is not
required for a person to be guilty of the offense. The fact that one division
of a section plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict liability for an
offense defined in that division does not by itself plainly indicate a purpose
to impose strict criminal liability for an offense defined in other divisions
of the section that do not specify a degree of culpability.
   (C)   (1)   When language defining an element of an offense that is related
to knowledge or intent or to which mens rea could fairly be applied neither
specifies culpability nor plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict
liability, the element of the offense is established only if a person acts
recklessly.
      (2)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to offenses defined
in R.C. Title XLV.
      (3)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not relieve the prosecution of
the burden of proving the culpable mental state required by any definition
incorporated into the offense.
   (D)   Voluntary intoxication may not be taken into consideration in
determining the existence of a mental state that is an element of a criminal
offense. Voluntary intoxication does not relieve a person of a duty to act if
failure to act constitutes a criminal offense. Evidence that a person was
voluntarily intoxicated may be admissible to show whether or not the person was
physically capable of performing the act with which the person is charged.
   (E)   As used in this section:
      CULPABILITY. Means purpose, knowledge, recklessness, or negligence, as
defined in R.C. § 2901.22.
      INTOXICATION. Includes but is not limited to intoxication resulting from
the ingestion of alcohol, a drug, or alcohol and a drug.
      INVOLUNTARY ACTS. Means reflexes, convulsions, body movements during
unconsciousness or sleep, and body movements that are not otherwise a product
of the actor’s volition are involuntary acts.
      POSSESSION. Means a voluntary act if the possessor knowingly procured or
received the thing possessed, or was aware of the possessor’s control of the
thing possessed for a sufficient time to have ended possession.
(R.C. § 2901.21)
§ 130.08 CULPABLE MENTAL STATES.
   (A)   A person acts purposely when it is the person’s specific intention to
cause a certain result, or, when the gist of the offense is a prohibition
against conduct of a certain nature, regardless of what the offender intends to
accomplish thereby, it is the offender’s specific intention to engage in
conduct of that nature.
   (B)   A person acts knowingly, regardless of purpose, when the person is
aware that the person’s conduct will probably cause a certain result or will
probably be of a certain nature. A person has knowledge of circumstances when
the person is aware that such circumstances probably exist. When knowledge of
the existence of a particular fact is an element of an offense, such knowledge
is established if a person subjectively believes that there is a high
probability of its existence and fails to make inquiry or acts with a conscious
purpose to avoid learning the fact.
   (C)   A person acts recklessly when, with heedless indifference to the
consequences, the person disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that
the person’s conduct is likely to cause a certain result or is likely to be of
a certain nature. A person is reckless with respect to circumstances when, with
heedless indifference to the consequences, the person disregards a substantial
and unjustifiable risk that such circumstances are likely to exist.
   (D)   A person acts negligently when, because of a substantial lapse from
due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that the person’s
conduct may cause a certain result or may be of a certain nature. A person is
negligent with respect to circumstances when, because of a substantial lapse
from due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that such
circumstances may exist.
   (E)   When the section defining an offense provides that negligence suffices
to establish an element thereof, then recklessness, knowledge, or purpose is
also sufficient culpability for such element. When recklessness suffices to
establish an element of an offense, then knowledge or purpose is also
sufficient culpability for such element. When knowledge suffices to establish
an element of an offense, then purpose is also sufficient culpability for such
element.
(R.C. § 2901.22)
§ 130.09 ORGANIZATIONAL CRIMINAL LIABILITY.
   (A)   An organization may be convicted of an offense under any of the
following circumstances:
      (1)   The offense is a minor misdemeanor committed by an officer, agent,
or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s office or employment, except that if the
section defining the offense designates the officers, agents, or employees for
whose conduct the organization is accountable or the circumstances under which
it is accountable, those provisions shall apply.
      (2)   A purpose to impose organizational liability plainly appears in the
section defining the offense, and the offense is committed by an officer,
agent, or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the
scope of the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s office or employment, except
that if the section defining the offense designates the officers, agents, or
employees for whose conduct the organization is accountable or the
circumstances under which it is accountable, those provisions shall apply.
      (3)   The offense consists of an omission to discharge a specific duty
imposed by law on the organization.
      (4)   If, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise required for the
commission of the offense, its commission was authorized, requested, commanded,
tolerated, or performed by the board of directors, trustees, partners, or by a
high managerial officer, agent, or employee acting in behalf of the
organization and within the scope of such a board’s or person’s office or
employment.
   (B)   If strict liability is imposed for the commission of an offense, a
purpose to impose organizational liability shall be presumed, unless the
contrary plainly appears.
   (C)   In a prosecution of an organization for an offense other than one for
which strict liability is imposed, it is a defense that the high managerial
officer, agent, or employee having supervisory responsibility over the subject
matter of the offense exercised due diligence to prevent its commission. This
defense is not available if it plainly appears inconsistent with the purpose of
the section defining the offense.
   (D)   As used in this section, ORGANIZATION means a corporation for profit
or not for profit, partnership, limited partnership, joint venture,
unincorporated nonprofit association, estate, trust, or other commercial or
legal entity. The term does not include an entity organized as or by a
governmental agency for the execution of a governmental program.
(R.C. § 2901.23)
§ 130.10 PERSONAL ACCOUNTABILITY FOR ORGANIZATIONAL CONDUCT.
   (A)   An officer, agent, or employee of an organization, as defined in R.C.
§ 2901.23, may be prosecuted for an offense committed by such organization, if
he or she acts with the kind of culpability required for the commission of the
offense, and any of the following apply:
      (1)   In the name of the organization or in its behalf, he or she engages
in conduct constituting the offense, or causes another to engage in such
conduct, or tolerates such conduct when it is of a type for which he or she has
direct responsibility;
      (2)   He or she has primary responsibility to discharge a duty imposed on
the organization by law, and such duty is not discharged.
   (B)   When a person is convicted of an offense by reason of this section, he
or she is subject to the same penalty as if he or she had acted in his or her
own behalf.
(R.C. § 2901.24)
 
§ 130.11 ATTEMPT.
   (A)   No person, purposely or knowingly, and when purpose or knowledge is
sufficient culpability for the commission of an offense, shall engage in
conduct that, if successful, would constitute or result in the offense.
   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that, in retrospect,
commission of the offense that was the object of the attempt was either
factually or legally impossible under the attendant circumstances, if that
offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been as the
actor believed them to be.
   (C)   No person who is convicted of committing a specific offense, of
complicity in the commission of an offense, or of conspiracy to commit an
offense, shall be convicted of an attempt to commit the same offense in
violation of this section.
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
actor abandoned his or her effort to commit the offense or otherwise prevented
its commission, under circumstances manifesting a complete and voluntary
renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an attempt to commit an
offense. An attempt to commit aggravated murder, murder, or an offense for
which the maximum penalty is imprisonment for life is a felony of the first
degree, to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. An attempt to commit a
drug abuse offense for which the penalty is determined by the amount or number
of unit doses of the controlled substance involved in the drug abuse offense is
an offense of the same degree as the drug abuse offense attempted would be if
that drug abuse offense had been committed and had involved an amount or number
of unit doses of the controlled substance that is within the next lower range
of controlled substance amounts than was involved in the attempt. An attempt to
commit any other offense is an offense of the next lesser degree than the
offense attempted. In the case of an attempt to commit an offense other than a
violation of R.C. Chapter 3734 that is not specifically classified, an attempt
is a misdemeanor of the first degree if the offense attempted is a felony, and
a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the offense attempted is a misdemeanor.
In the case of an attempt to commit a violation of any provision of R.C.
Chapter 3734, other than R.C. § 3734.18, that relates to hazardous wastes, an
attempt is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. An attempt to
commit a minor misdemeanor, or to engage in conspiracy, is not an offense under
this section.
   (F)   As used in this section:
      DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
(R.C. § 2923.02)
Statutory reference:
   Conspiracy, see R.C. § 2923.01
   Solid and hazardous wastes, see R.C. Chapter 3734
§ 130.12 COMPLICITY.
   (A)   No person, acting with the kind of culpability required for the
commission of an offense, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Solicit or procure another to commit the offense;
      (2)   Aid or abet another in committing the offense;
      (3)   Conspire with another to commit the offense in violation of R.C. §
2923.01;
      (4)   Cause an innocent or irresponsible person to commit the offense.
   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that no person with
whom the accused was in complicity has been convicted as a principal offender.
   (C)   No person shall be convicted of complicity under this section unless
an offense is actually committed, but a person may be convicted of complicity
in an attempt to commit an offense in violation of R.C. § 2923.02 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (D)   If an alleged accomplice of the defendant testifies against the
defendant in a case in which the defendant is charged with complicity in the
commission of or an attempt to commit an offense, an attempt to commit an
offense, or an offense, the court shall charge the jury in accordance with R.C.
§ 2923.03(D).
   (E)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that,
prior to the commission of or attempt to commit the offense, the actor
terminated his or her complicity, under circumstances manifesting a complete
and voluntary renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of complicity in the
commission of an offense, and shall be prosecuted and punished as if he or she
were a principal offender. A charge of complicity may be stated in terms of
this section, or in terms of the principal offense.
(R.C. § 2923.03)
Statutory reference:
   Conspiracy, see R.C. § 2923.01
§ 130.13 PRESUMPTION OF INNOCENCE; PROOF OF OFFENSE; AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE.
   (A)   Every person accused of an offense is presumed innocent until proven
guilty beyond a reasonable doubt, and the burden of proof for all elements of
the offense is upon the prosecution. The burden of going forward with the
evidence of an affirmative defense, and the burden of proof by a preponderance
of the evidence, for an affirmative defense other than self-defense, defense of
another, or defense of the accused’s residence presented as described in
division (B)(1) of this section, is upon the accused.
   (B)   (1)   A person is allowed to act in self-defense, defense of another,
or defense of that person’s residence. If, at the trial of a person who is
accused of an offense that involved the person’s use of force against another,
there is evidence presented that tends to support that the accused person used
the force in self-defense, defense of another, or defense of that person’s
residence, the prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the
accused person did not use the force in self-defense, defense of another, or
defense of that person’s residence, as the case may be.
      (2)   Subject to division (B)(3) of this section, a person is presumed to
have acted in self-defense or defense of another when using defensive force
that is intended or likely to cause death or great bodily harm to another if
the person against whom the defensive force is used is in the process of
unlawfully and without privilege to do so entering, or has unlawfully and
without privilege to do so entered, the residence or vehicle occupied by the
person using the defensive force.
      (3)   The presumption set forth in division (B)(2) of this section does
not apply if either of the following is true:
         (a)   The person against whom the defensive force is used has a right
to be in, or is a lawful resident of, the residence or vehicle.
         (b)   The person who uses the defensive force uses it while in a
residence or vehicle and the person is unlawfully, and without privilege to be,
in that residence or vehicle.
      (4)   The presumption set forth in division (B)(2) of this section is a
rebuttable presumption and may be rebutted by a preponderance of the evidence,
provided that the prosecution’s burden of proof remains proof beyond a
reasonable doubt as described in divisions (A) and (B)(1) of this section.
   (C)   As part of its charge to the jury in a criminal case, the court shall
read the definitions of “reasonable doubt” and “proof beyond a reasonable
doubt”, contained in division (E) of this section.
   (D)   As used in this section:
      AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE. An affirmative defense is either of the following:
         (a)   A defense expressly designated as affirmative;
         (b)   A defense involving an excuse or justification peculiarly within
the knowledge of the accused, on which the accused can fairly be required to
adduce supporting evidence.
      DWELLING. Means a building or conveyance of any kind that has a roof over
it and that is designed to be occupied by people lodging in the building or
conveyance at night, regardless of whether the building or conveyance is
temporary or permanent or is mobile or immobile. As used in this division, a
building or conveyance includes but is not limited to an attached porch, and a
building or conveyance with a roof over it includes but is not limited to a
tent.
      RESIDENCE. Means a dwelling in which a person resides either temporarily
or permanently or is visiting as a guest.
      VEHICLE. Means a conveyance of any kind, whether or not motorized, that
is designed to transport people or property.
   (E)   “Reasonable doubt” is present when the jurors, after they have
carefully considered and compared all the evidence, cannot say they are firmly
convinced of the truth of the charge. It is a doubt based on reasonable and
common sense. Reasonable doubt is not mere possible doubt, because everything
relating to human affairs or depending on moral evidence is open to some
possible or imaginary doubt. “Proof beyond a reasonable doubt” is proof of such
character that an ordinary person would be willing to rely and act upon it in
the most important of the person’s own affairs.
(R.C. § 2901.05)
§ 130.14 BATTERED WOMAN SYNDROME.
   (A)   The municipality hereby declares that it recognizes both of the
following, in relation to the “battered woman syndrome”: that the syndrome
currently is a matter of commonly accepted scientific knowledge, and that the
subject matter and details of the syndrome are not within the general
understanding or experience of a person who is a member of the general populace
and are not within the field of common knowledge.
   (B)   If a person is charged with an offense involving the use of force
against another and the person, as a defense to the offense charged, raises the
affirmative defense of self defense, the person may introduce expert testimony
of the “battered woman syndrome” and expert testimony that the person suffered
from that syndrome as evidence to establish the requisite belief of an imminent
danger of death or great bodily harm that is necessary, as an element of the
affirmative defense, to justify the person’s use of force in question. The
introduction of any expert testimony under this division shall be in accordance
with the Ohio Rules of Evidence.
(R.C. § 2901.06)
§ 130.15 DELINQUENCY ADJUDICATIONS DEEMED CONVICTIONS.
   (A)   If a person is alleged to have committed an offense and if the person
previously has been adjudicated a delinquent child or juvenile traffic offender
for a violation of a law or ordinance, except as provided in division (B) of
this section, the adjudication as a delinquent child or as a juvenile traffic
offender is a conviction for a violation of the law for purposes of determining
the offense with which the person should be charged and, if the person is
convicted of or pleads guilty to an offense, the sentence to be imposed upon
the person relative to the conviction or guilty plea.
   (B)   A previous adjudication of a person as a delinquent child or juvenile
traffic offender for a violation of a law or ordinance is not a conviction for
a violation of the law or ordinance for purposes of determining any of the
following:
      (1)   Whether the person is a repeat violent offender, as defined in R.C.
§ 2929.01, or whether the person should be sentenced as a repeat violent
offender under R.C. § 2929.14(B)(2) and R.C. § 2941.149;
      (2)    Whether the person is a violent career criminal as defined in R.C.
§ 2923.132, whether the person has committed unlawful use of a weapon by a
violent career criminal in violation of R.C. § 2923.132 or should be sentenced
for that offense under that section, or whether the person should be sentenced
under R.C. § 2929.14(K) as a violent career criminal who had a firearm on or
about the person’s person or under the person’s control while committing a
violent felony offense and displayed or brandished the firearm, indicated that
the offender possessed a firearm, or used the firearm to facilitate the
offense.
(R.C. § 2901.08)
§ 130.16 CRIMINAL LAW JURISDICTION.
   (A)   A person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in this
municipality if any of the following occur:
      (1)   The person commits an offense under the laws of this municipality,
any element of which takes place in this municipality;
      (2)   While in this municipality, the person attempts to commit, or is
guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in another jurisdiction,
which offense is an offense under both the laws of this municipality and the
other jurisdiction, or, while in this municipality, the person conspires to
commit an offense in another jurisdiction, which offense is an offense under
both the laws of this municipality and the other jurisdiction, and a
substantial overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy is undertaken in this
municipality by the person or another person involved in the conspiracy,
subsequent to the person’s entrance into the conspiracy. In any case in which a
person attempts to commit, is guilty of complicity in the commission of, or
conspires to commit an offense in another jurisdiction as described in this
division, the person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in this
municipality for the attempt, complicity, or conspiracy, and for any resulting
offense that is committed or completed in the other jurisdiction;
      (3)   While out of this municipality, the person conspires or attempts to
commit, or is guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in this
municipality;
      (4)   While out of this municipality, the person omits to perform a legal
duty imposed by the laws of this municipality, which omission affects a
legitimate interest of the municipality in protecting, governing or regulating
any person, property, thing, transaction, or activity in this municipality;
      (5)   While out of this municipality, the person unlawfully takes or
retains property and subsequently brings any of the unlawfully taken or
retained property into this municipality;
      (6)   While out of this municipality, the person unlawfully takes or
entices another person and subsequently brings the other person into this
municipality;
      (7)   The person, by means of a computer, computer system, computer
network, telecommunication, telecommunications device, telecommunications
service, or information service, causes or knowingly permits any writing, data,
image or other telecommunication to be disseminated or transmitted into this
municipality in violation of the law of this state or municipality.
   (B)   In homicide, the element referred to in division (A)(1) of this
section includes the act that causes death, the physical contact that causes
death, the death itself, or any other element that is set forth in the offense
in question. If any part of the body of a homicide victim is found in this
municipality, the death is presumed to have occurred within this municipality.
   (C)   (1)   This municipality includes the land and water within its
boundaries and the air space above that land and water, with respect to which
this municipality has either exclusive or concurrent legislative jurisdiction.
Where the boundary between this municipality and another jurisdiction is
disputed, the disputed territory is conclusively presumed to be within this
municipality for purposes of this section.
      (2)   The courts of common pleas of Adams, Athens, Belmont, Brown,
Clermont, Columbiana, Gallia, Hamilton, Jefferson, Lawrence, Meigs, Monroe,
Scioto, and Washington counties have jurisdiction beyond the north or northwest
shore of the Ohio River extending to the opposite shore line, between the
extended boundary lines of any adjacent counties or adjacent state. Each of
those courts of common pleas has concurrent jurisdiction on the Ohio River with
any adjacent court of common pleas that borders on that river and with any
court of Kentucky or of West Virginia that borders on the Ohio River and that
has jurisdiction on the Ohio River under the law of Kentucky or the law of West
Virginia, whichever is applicable, or under federal law.
   (D)   When an offense is committed under the laws of this municipality, and
it appears beyond a reasonable doubt that the offense or any element of the
offense took place either in this municipality or in another jurisdiction or
jurisdictions, but it cannot reasonably be determined in which it took place,
the offense or element is conclusively presumed to have taken place in this
municipality for purposes of this section.
   (E)   When a person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in
this municipality for an offense committed or completed outside this
municipality, the person is subject to all specifications for that offense that
would be applicable if the offense had been committed within this municipality.
   (F)   Any act, conduct, or element that is a basis of a person being subject
under this section to criminal prosecution and punishment in this municipality
need not be committed personally by the person as long as it is committed by
another person who is in complicity or conspiracy with the person.
   (G)   This section shall be liberally construed, consistent with
constitutional limitations, to allow this municipality the broadest possible
jurisdiction over offenses and persons committing offenses in, or affecting,
this municipality.
   (H)   For purposes of division (A)(2) of this section, an overt act is
substantial when it is of a character that manifests a purpose on the part of
the actor that the object of the conspiracy should be completed.
   (I)   As used in this section, COMPUTER, COMPUTER SYSTEM, COMPUTER NETWORK,
INFORMATION SERVICE, TELECOMMUNICATION, TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE,
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE, DATA and WRITING have the same meanings as in R.C.
§ 2913.01.
(R.C. § 2901.11)
Statutory reference:
   State criminal law jurisdiction, see R.C. § 2901.11
§ 130.17 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED OR FORFEITED PROPERTY HELD BY POLICE
DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Safekeeping of property in custody.
      (1)   (a)   Any property that has been lost, abandoned, stolen, seized
pursuant to a search warrant, or otherwise lawfully seized or forfeited and
that is in the custody of the Police Department shall be kept safely by the
Police Department, pending the time it no longer is needed as evidence or for
another lawful purpose, and shall be disposed of pursuant to this section or
R.C. §§ 2981.12 and 2981.13.
         (b)   This section does not apply to the custody and disposal of any
of the following:
            1.   Vehicles subject to forfeiture under R.C. Title 45, except as
provided in division (B)(1)(f) of this section;
            2.   Abandoned junk motor vehicles or other property of negligible
value;
            3.   Property held by a department of rehabilitation and correction
institution that is unclaimed, that does not have an identified owner, that the
owner agrees to dispose of, or that is identified by the department as having
little value;
            4.   Animals taken, and devices used in unlawfully taking animals,
under R.C. § 1531.20;
            5.   Controlled substances sold by a peace officer in the
performance of the officer’s official duties under R.C. § 3719.141;
            6.   Property recovered by a township law enforcement agency under
R.C. §§ 505.105 to 505.109;
            7.   Property held and disposed of under an ordinance of the
municipality or under R.C. §§ 737.29 to 737.33, except that if the municipality
has received notice of a citizens’ reward program as provided in division (B)
(5) of this section and disposes of property under an ordinance shall pay 25%
of any moneys acquired from any sale or auction to the citizens’ reward
program.
      (2)   (a)   The Police Department shall adopt and comply with a written
internal control policy that does all of the following:
            1.   Provides for keeping detailed records as to the amount of
property acquired by the Police Department and the date property was acquired;
            2.   Provides for keeping detailed records of the disposition of
the property, which shall include but not be limited to both of the following:
               a.   The manner in which it was disposed, the date of
disposition, detailed financial records concerning any property sold, and the
name of any person who received the property. The record shall not identify or
enable identification of the individual officer who seized any item of
property.
               b.   An itemized list of the specific expenditures made with
amounts that are gained from the sale of the property and that are retained by
the agency, including the specific amount expended on each expenditure, except
that the policy shall not provide for or permit the identification of any
specific expenditure that is made in an ongoing investigation.
            3.   Complies with R.C. § 2981.13 if the Police Department has a
Law Enforcement Trust Fund or similar fund created under that section.
         (b)   The records kept under the internal control policy shall be open
to public inspection during the Police Department’s regular business hours. The
policy adopted under this section is a public record open for inspection under
R.C. § 149.43.
      (3)   The Police Department, with custody of property to be disposed of
under this section or R.C. §§ 2981.12 or 2981.13, shall make a reasonable
effort to locate persons entitled to possession of the property, to notify them
of when and where it may be claimed, and to return the property to them at the
earliest possible time. In the absence of evidence identifying persons entitled
to possession, it is sufficient notice to advertise in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county and to briefly describe the nature of the property in
custody and inviting persons to view and establish their right to it.
      (4)   As used in this section:
         CITIZENS’ REWARD PROGRAM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 9.92.
         LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Includes correctional institutions.
         TOWNSHIP LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Means an organized police department
of a township, a township police district, a joint police district, or the
office of a township constable.
(R.C. § 2981.11)
   (B)   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property.
      (1)   Unclaimed or forfeited property in the custody of the Police
Department, other than property described in division (A)(1)(b) of this
section, shall be disposed of by order of any court of record that has
territorial jurisdiction over the municipality, as follows:
         (a)   Drugs shall be disposed of pursuant to R.C. § 3719.11 or placed
in the custody of the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States for
disposal or use for medical or scientific purposes under applicable federal
law.
         (b)   Firearms and dangerous ordnance suitable for police work may be
given to a law enforcement agency for that purpose. Firearms suitable for
sporting use or as museum pieces or collectors’ items may be sold at public
auction pursuant to division (B)(2) of this section. The Police Department may
sell other firearms and dangerous ordnance to a federally licensed firearms
dealer in a manner that the court considers proper. The Police Department shall
destroy any firearms or dangerous ordnance not given to a law enforcement
agency or sold or shall send them to the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation for destruction by the Bureau.
         (c)   Obscene materials shall be destroyed.
         (d)   Beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol seized from a person who
does not hold a permit issued under R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303 or otherwise
forfeited to the state for an offense under R.C. § 4301.45 or R.C. § 4301.53
shall be sold by the Division of Liquor Control if the Division determines that
it is fit for sale or shall be placed in the custody of the Investigations Unit
in the Ohio Department of Public Safety and be used for training relating to
law enforcement activities. The Ohio Department of Public Safety, with the
assistance of the Division of Liquor Control, shall adopt rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 to provide for the distribution to state or local law
enforcement agencies upon their request. If any tax imposed under R.C. Title 43
has not been paid in relation to the beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol, any
moneys acquired from the sale shall first be used to pay the tax. All other
money collected under this division (B)(1)(d) shall be paid into the State
Treasury. Any beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol that the Division
determines to be unfit for sale shall be destroyed.
         (e)   Money received by an inmate of a correctional institution from
an unauthorized source or in an unauthorized manner shall be returned to the
sender, if known, or deposited in the Inmates’ Industrial and Entertainment
Fund of the institution if the sender is not known.
         (f)   1.   Any mobile instrumentality forfeited under R.C. Chapter
2981 may be given to the law enforcement agency that initially seized the
mobile instrumentality for use in performing its duties, if the agency wants
the mobile instrumentality. The agency shall take the mobile instrumentality
subject to any security interest or lien on the mobile instrumentality.
            2.   Vehicles and vehicle parts forfeited under R.C. §§ 4549.61 to
4549.63 may be given to a law enforcement agency for use in performing its
duties. Those parts may be incorporated into any other official vehicle. Parts
that do not bear vehicle identification numbers or derivatives of them may be
sold or disposed of as provided by rules of the Director of Public Safety.
Parts from which a vehicle identification number or derivative of it has been
removed, defaced, covered, altered, or destroyed and that are not suitable for
police work or incorporation into an official vehicle shall be destroyed and
sold as junk or scrap.
         (g)   Computers, computer networks, computer systems, and computer
software suitable for police work may be given to a law enforcement agency for
that purpose or disposed of under division (B)(2) of this section.
         (h)   Money seized in connection with a violation of R.C. § 2905.32,
2907.21, or 2907.22 shall be deposited in the Victims of Human Trafficking Fund
created by R.C. § 5101.87.
      (2)   Unclaimed or forfeited property that is not described in division
(B)(1) of this section or division (A)(1)(b) of this section, with court
approval, may be used by the law enforcement agency in possession of it. If it
is not used by the agency, it may be sold without appraisal at a public auction
to the highest bidder for cash or disposed of in another manner that the court
considers proper.
      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (B)(1) and (B)(5) of this section
and after compliance with division (B)(4) of this section when applicable, any
moneys acquired from the sale of property disposed of pursuant to this section
shall be placed in the General Revenue Fund of the state, or the General Fund
of the municipality.
      (4)   If the property was in the possession of the Police Department in
relation to a delinquent child proceeding in a juvenile court, 10% of any
moneys acquired from the sale of property disposed of under this section shall
be applied to one or more community addiction services providers, as defined in
R.C. § 5119.01. A juvenile court shall not specify a services provider, except
as provided in this division, unless the services provider is in the same
county as the court or in a contiguous county. If no services provider is
located in any of those counties, the juvenile court may specify a services
provider anywhere in Ohio. The remaining 90% of the proceeds or cash shall be
applied as provided in division (B)(3) of this section.
      (5)   (a)   If the Board of County Commissioners recognizes a citizens’
reward program under R.C. § 9.92, the Board shall notify the Police Department
of the recognition by filing a copy of its resolution conferring that
recognition with the Police Department. When the Board recognizes a citizens’
reward program and the county includes a part, but not all, of the territory of
the municipality, the Board shall so notify the Police Department of the
recognition of the citizens’ reward program only if the county contains the
highest percentage of the municipality’s population.
         (b)   Upon being so notified, the Police Department shall pay 25% of
any forfeited proceeds or cash derived from each sale of property disposed of
pursuant to this section to the citizens’ reward program for use exclusively to
pay rewards. No part of the funds may be used to pay expenses associated with
the program. If a citizens’ reward program that operates in more than one
county or in another state in addition to this state receives funds under this
section, the funds shall be used to pay rewards only for tips and information
to law enforcement agencies concerning offenses committed in the county from
which the funds were received.
      (6)   Any property forfeited under R.C. Chapter 2981 not be used to pay
any fine imposed upon a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to an
underlying criminal offense or a different offense arising out of the same
facts and circumstances.
      (7)   Any moneys acquired from the sale of personal effects, tools, or
other property seized because the personal effects, tools, or other property
were used in the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2905.32, 2907.21, or
2907.22 or derived from the proceeds of the commission of a violation of R.C. §
2905.32, 2907.21, or 2907.22 and disposed of pursuant to this division (B)
shall be placed in the Victims of Human Trafficking Fund created by R.C. §
5101.87.
(R.C. § 2981.12)
   (C)   Disposition of contraband, proceeds, or instrumentalities. Except as
otherwise provided in R.C. § 2981.13, property ordered forfeited as contraband,
proceeds, or an instrumentality pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2981 shall be disposed
of, used, or sold pursuant to division (B) of this section or R.C. § 2981.12.
If the property is to be sold under division (B) of this section or R.C. §
2981.12, the prosecutor shall cause notice of the proposed sale to be given in
accordance with law.
(R.C. § 2981.13(A))
Statutory reference:
   Forfeiture of property generally, see R.C. Chapter 2981
§ 130.18 IMPOSING SENTENCE FOR MISDEMEANOR.
   (A)   (1)   Unless a mandatory jail term is required to be imposed by R.C. §
1547.99(G), 4510.14(B), or 4511.19(G), or any other provision of the Ohio
Revised Code, or any municipal ordinance, a court that imposes a sentence under
this chapter upon an offender for a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor has
discretion to determine the most effective way to achieve the purposes and
principles of sentencing set forth in §
130.99(B).
      (2)   Unless a specific sanction is required to be imposed or is
precluded from being imposed by the section setting forth an offense or the
penalty for an offense or by any provision of §
130.99 or 133.99 of this code or R.C. §§ 2929.23 through 2929.28, a court that
imposes a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor may impose on the
offender any sanction or combination of sanctions under §
130.99(C) through (G). The court shall not impose a sentence that imposes an
unnecessary burden on local government resources.
   (B)   (1)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, the
court shall consider all of the following factors:
         (a)   The nature and circumstances of the offense or offenses;
         (b)   Whether the circumstances regarding the offender and the offense
or offenses indicate that the offender has a history of persistent criminal
activity and that the offender’s character and condition reveal a substantial
risk that the offender will commit another offense;
         (c)   Whether the circumstances regarding the offender and the offense
or offenses indicate that the offender’s history, character, and condition
reveal a substantial risk that the offender will be a danger to others and that
the offender’s conduct has been characterized by a pattern of repetitive,
compulsive, or aggressive behavior with heedless indifference to the
consequences;
         (d)   Whether the victim’s youth, age, disability, or other factor
made the victim particularly vulnerable to the offense or made the impact of
the offense more serious;
         (e)   Whether the offender is likely to commit future crimes in
general, in addition to the circumstances described in divisions (B)(1)(b) and
(B)(1)(c) of this section;
         (f)   Whether the offender has an emotional, mental, or physical
condition that is traceable to the offender’s service in the armed forces of
the United States and that was a contributing factor in the offender’s
commission of the offense or offenses;
         (g)   The offender’s military service record.
      (2)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, in
addition to complying with division (B)(1) of this section, the court may
consider any other factors that are relevant to achieving the purposes and
principles of sentencing set forth in §
130.99(B).
   (C)   Before imposing a jail term as a sentence for a misdemeanor, a court
shall consider the appropriateness of imposing a community control sanction or
a combination of community control sanctions under §
130.99(D), (E), (F), and (G). A court may impose the longest jail term
authorized under §
130.99(C) only upon offenders who commit the worst forms of the offense or upon
offenders whose conduct and response to prior sanctions for prior offenses
demonstrate that the imposition of the longest jail term is necessary to deter
the offender from committing a future criminal offense.
   (D)   (1)   A sentencing court shall consider any relevant oral and written
statement made by the victim, the victim’s representative, the victim’s
attorney, if applicable, the defendant, the defense attorney, and the
prosecuting authority regarding sentencing for a misdemeanor. This division
does not create any rights to notice other than those rights authorized by R.C.
Chapter 2930.
      (2)   At the time of sentencing for a misdemeanor or as soon as possible
after sentencing, the court shall notify the victim of the offense of the
victim’s right to file an application for an award of reparations pursuant to
R.C. §§ 2743.51 through 2743.72.
(R.C. § 2929.22)
§ 130.19 MULTIPLE SENTENCES.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, R.C. § 2929.14(C),
or R.C. § 2971.03(D) or (E), a prison term, jail term, or sentence of
imprisonment shall be served concurrently with any other prison term, jail
term, or sentence of imprisonment imposed by a court of this municipality, this
state, another state, or the United States. Except as provided in division (B)
(2) of this section, a jail term or sentence of imprisonment for misdemeanor
shall be served concurrently with a prison term or sentence of imprisonment for
felony served in a state or federal correctional institution.
   (B)   (1)   A jail term or sentence of imprisonment for a misdemeanor shall
be served consecutively to any other prison term, jail term, or sentence of
imprisonment when the trial court specifies that it is to be served
consecutively or when it is imposed for a misdemeanor violation of R.C. §
2907.322, 2921.34 or 2923.131. When consecutive sentences are imposed for
misdemeanors under this division, the term to be served is the aggregate of the
consecutive terms imposed, except that the aggregate term to be served shall
not exceed 18 months.
      (2)   A jail term or sentence of imprisonment imposed for a misdemeanor
violation of R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.14, 4510.16, 4510.21, or 4511.19, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be served consecutively to
a prison term that is imposed for a felony violation of R.C. § 2903.06, 2903.08
or 4511.19 or a felony violation of R.C. § 2903.04 involving the operation of a
vehicle by the offender and that is served in a state correctional institution
when the trial court specifies that it is to be served consecutively. When
consecutive jail terms or sentences of imprisonment and prison terms are
imposed for one or more misdemeanors and one or more felonies under this
division, the term to be served is the aggregate of the consecutive terms
imposed, and the offender shall serve all terms imposed for a felony before
serving any term imposed for a misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2929.41)
§ 130.20 APPREHENSION, DETENTION, OR ARREST OF PERSON ON BOND.
   (A)   No person, other than a law enforcement officer, shall apprehend,
detain, or arrest a principal on bond, wherever issued, unless that person
meets all of the following criteria:
      (1)   The person is any of the following:
         (a)   Qualified, licensed, and appointed as a surety bail bond agent
under R.C. §§ 3905.83 through 3905.95;
         (b)   Licensed as a surety bail bond agent by the state where the bond
was written;
         (c)   Licensed as a private investigator under R.C. Chapter 4749;
         (d)   Licensed as a private investigator by the state where the bond
was written;
         (e)   An off-duty peace officer, as defined in R.C. § 2921.51.
      (2)   The person, prior to apprehending, detaining, or arresting the
principal, has entered into a written contract with the surety or with a
licensed surety bail bond agent appointed by the surety, which contract sets
forth the name of the principal who is to be apprehended, detained, or
arrested. For purposes of this division (A)(2), SURETY has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 3905.83.
      (3)   The person, prior to apprehending, detaining, or arresting the
principal, has notified the local law enforcement agency having jurisdiction
over the area in which such activities will be performed and has provided any
form or identification or other information requested by the law enforcement
agency.
   (B)   No person shall represent the person’s self to be a bail enforcement
agent or bounty hunter, or claim any similar title, in this municipality.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal bail bond agent
practices.
      (1)   A violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of division (A) of this section, or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of division (B) of this section, or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2927.27)
 
§ 130.21 SELF DEFENSE: LIMITATIONS ON DUTY TO RETREAT PRIOR TO USING FORCE.
   (A)   As used in this section, RESIDENCE has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2901.05.
   (B)   For purposes of any section of this code that sets forth a criminal
offense, a person has no duty to retreat before using force in self-defense,
defense of another, or defense of that person’s residence if that person is in
a place in which the person lawfully has a right to be.
   (C)   A trier of fact shall not consider the possibility of retreat as a
factor in determining whether or not a person who used force in self-defense,
defense of another, or defense of that person’s residence reasonably believed
that the force was necessary to prevent injury, loss, or risk to life or
safety.
(R.C. § 2901.09)
§ 130.22 REGISTRATION OF FELONS.
   (A)   Every person, who resides or intends to reside or engages in
employment within the village, who has been convicted one or more times in any
Federal Court or the court of this or any other state which conviction or term
of imprisonment has taken place in a preceding five-year period of time, of a
crime which is a felony under the laws of the United States Government of
which, if committed in this or any other state would have been a felony under
the laws of the state, shall report as required in division (B) below.
   (B)   Every person described in division (A) above shall report to the
Police Department within 48 hours after arrival within the boundaries of the
village. He or she shall furnish to the Police Department, in a written
statement signed by such person, the following information:
      (1)   The true name of such person and each other name or alias by which
such person is or has been known;
      (2)   A full and complete description of himself or herself; the name of
each crime defined in division (A) of which he or she has been convicted,
together with the name of the place where such crime was committed, the name
under which he or she was convicted, the date of the conviction, and the name,
if any, and the location of each prison, reformatory, or other penal
institution in which he or she has been confined as punishment therefor;
      (3)   The location or address of his or her residence or intended
residence, stopping place or living quarters in the village, and each one
thereof, if any, with a description of the character of such place, whether a
hotel, apartment house and a description of the address or location which will
so identify the same as to make it possible to locate;
      (4)   The length of time for which he or she expects or intends to reside
within the territory or boundaries of the village; and
      (5)   The occupation or employment in which such person is now engaged,
the name of the employer, the business engaged in by the employer and the
nature and character thereof.
   (C)   At the time of furnishing the information required by this section,
such person shall be photographed and fingerprinted by the Police Department,
and such photograph and fingerprints shall be made a part of the permanent
records of the Police Department.
   (D)   In the event any person required to register under the provisions of
this section intends to leave the village such person shall, before leaving the
village, report to the Police Department and, in a written and signed
statement, state the address of the place where such person expects to reside.
   (E)   No person required by any provision of this section to furnish any
report or information shall fail, neglect or refuse to make such report, or
furnish such information, photograph or fingerprints, or fail, neglect or
refuse to render or furnish the same within the time prescribed in this
section, or fail, neglect or refuse to furnish to the Police Department within
such time, any information, photograph or fingerprints required to be furnished
by any provision of this section, or furnish any false, untrue or misleading
information on or statement relating to any information required by any
provisions of this section to be made or furnished.
   (F)   Whoever knowingly violates any provisions of this chapter is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(Prior Code, § 130.50) (Ord. 1981-7, passed 7-28-1981)
§ 130.99 PENALTY FOR TITLE XIII.
   (A)   Generally. Except where otherwise specifically classified within the
body of the section of a chapter of this title, a violation of such section
shall be deemed a misdemeanor punishable upon conviction by a fine of not more
than $500, imprisonment of not more than six months, or both.
(R.C. § 715.67)
   (B)   Considerations in misdemeanor sentencing.
      (1)   A court that sentences an offender for a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor violation of any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, or of any
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised Code, shall be guided
by the overriding purposes of misdemeanor sentencing. The overriding purposes
of misdemeanor sentencing are to protect the public from future crime by the
offender and others and to punish the offender. To achieve those purposes, the
sentencing court shall consider the impact of the offense upon the victim and
the need for changing the offender’s behavior, rehabilitating the defender, and
making restitution to the victim of the offense, the public, or the victim and
the public.
      (2)   A sentence imposed for a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation
of an Ohio Revised Code provision or for a violation of a municipal ordinance
that is subject to division (B)(1) of this section shall be reasonably
calculated to achieve the two overriding purposes of misdemeanor sentencing set
forth in division (B)(1) of this section, commensurate with and not demeaning
to the seriousness of the offender’s conduct and its impact upon the victim,
and consistent with sentences imposed for similar offenses committed by similar
offenders.
      (3)   A court that imposes a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor
or minor misdemeanor violation of an Ohio Revised Code provision or for a
violation of a municipal ordinance that is subject to division (B)(1) of this
section shall not base the sentence upon the race, ethnic background, gender,
or religion of the offender.
      (4)   Divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) of this section shall not apply to any
offense that is disposed of by a traffic violations bureau of any court
pursuant to Traffic Rule 13 and shall not apply to any violation of any
provision of the Ohio Revised Code that is a minor misdemeanor and that is
disposed of without a court appearance. Divisions (B)(1) through (B)(3) of this
section do not affect any penalties established by the municipality for a
violation of its ordinances that are not substantially equivalent to a
misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised
Code.
(R.C. § 2929.21)
   (C)   Misdemeanor jail terms.
      (1)   Except as provided in §
130.18 or
133.99 of this code or R.C. § 2929.22 or 2929.23 or division (C)(5) of this
section and unless another term is required or authorized pursuant to law, if
the sentencing court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor
elects or is required to impose a jail term on the offender pursuant to this
chapter, the court shall impose a definite jail term that shall be one of the
following:
         (a)   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than 180 days;
         (b)   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than 90 days;
         (c)   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than 60 days;
         (d)   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than 30 days.
      (2)   (a)   A court that sentences an offender to a jail term under
division (C) of this section may permit the offender to serve the sentence in
intermittent confinement or may authorize a limited release of the offender as
provided in division (E)(2) of this section. The court retains jurisdiction
over every offender sentenced to jail to modify the jail sentence imposed at
any time, but the court shall not reduce any mandatory jail term.
         (b)   1.   If a prosecutor, as defined in R.C. § 2935.01, has filed a
notice with the court that the prosecutor wants to be notified about a
particular case and if the court is considering modifying the jail sentence of
the offender in that case, the court shall notify the prosecutor that the court
is considering modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case. The
prosecutor may request a hearing regarding the court’s consideration of
modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, and, if the
prosecutor requests a hearing, the court shall notify the eligible offender of
the hearing.
            2.   If the prosecutor requests a hearing regarding the court’s
consideration of modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, the
court shall hold the hearing before considering whether or not to release the
offender from the offender’s jail sentence.
      (3)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under division (C)
of this section and the court assigns the offender to a county jail that has
established a county jail industry program pursuant to R.C. § 5147.30, the
court shall specify, as part of the sentence, whether the offender may be
considered for participation in the program. During the offender’s term in the
county jail, the court retains jurisdiction to modify its specification
regarding the offender’s participation in the county jail industry program.
      (4)   If a person sentenced to a jail term pursuant to division (C) of
this section, the court may impose as part of the sentence pursuant to R.C. §
2929.28 a reimbursement sanction, and, if the local detention facility in which
the term is to be served is covered by a policy adopted pursuant to R.C. §
307.93, 341.14, 341.19, 341.21, 341.23, 753.02, 753.04, 753.16, 2301.56, or
2947.19 and R.C. § 2929.37, both of the following apply:
         (a)   The court shall specify both of the following as part of the
sentence:
            1.   If the person is presented with an itemized bill pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.37 for payment of the costs of confinement, the person is required
to pay the bill in accordance with that section.
            2.   If the person does not dispute the bill described in division
(C)(4)(a)1. of this section and does not pay the bill by the times specified in
R.C. § 2929.37, the clerk of the court may issue a certificate of judgment
against the person as described in that section.
         (b)   The sentence automatically includes any certificate of judgment
issued as described in division (C)(4)(a)2. of this section.
      (5)   (a)   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
misdemeanor violation of R.C. § 2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241, or 2907.25, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and to a specification of the
type described in R.C. § 2941.1421 and if the court imposes a jail term on the
offender for the misdemeanor violation, the court may impose upon the offender
an additional definite jail term as follows:
            1.   Subject to division (C)(5)(a)2. of this section, an additional
definite jail term of not more than 60 days;
            2.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one or more misdemeanor or felony violations of R.C. § 2907.22,
2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241, or 2907.25, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and also was convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1421 regarding one or more
of those violations, an additional definite jail term of not more than 120
days.
         (b)   In lieu of imposing an additional definite jail term under
division (C)(5)(a) of this section, the court may directly impose on the
offender a sanction that requires the offender to wear a real-time processing,
continual tracking electronic monitoring device during the period of time
specified by the court. The period of time specified by the court shall equal
the duration of an additional jail term that the court could have imposed upon
the offender under division (C)(5)(a) of this section. A sanction imposed under
this division shall commence on the date specified by the court, provided that
the sanction shall not commence until after the offender has served the jail
term imposed for the misdemeanor violation of R.C. § 2907.23, 2907.24,
2907.241, or 2907.25, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and
any residential sanction imposed for the violation under division (E) of this
section or R.C. § 2929.26. A sanction imposed under this division shall be
considered to be a community control sanction for purposes of division (D) of
this section or R.C. § 2929.25, and all provisions of this code and the Ohio
Revised Code that pertain to community control sanctions shall apply to a
sanction imposed under this division, except to the extent that they would by
their nature be clearly inapplicable. The offender shall pay all costs
associated with a sanction imposed under this division, including the cost of
the use of the monitoring device.
      (6)   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor
violation of R.C. § 2903.13 and also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1423 that charges that the
victim of the violation was a woman whom the offender knew was pregnant at the
time of the violation, the court shall impose on the offender a mandatory jail
term that is a definite term of at least 30 days.
      (7)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under this division
(C), the sentencing court retains jurisdiction over the offender and the jail
term. Upon motion of either party or upon the court’s own motion, the court, in
the court’s sole discretion and as the circumstances warrant, may substitute
one or more community control sanctions under division (E) or (F) of this
section for any jail days that are not mandatory jail days.
(R.C. § 2929.24)
   (D)   Misdemeanor community control sanctions.
      (1)   (a)   Except as provided in §§
130.18 and
133.99 of this code or R.C. §§ 2929.22 and 2929.23 or when a jail term is
required by law, in sentencing an offender for a misdemeanor, other than a
minor misdemeanor, the sentencing court may do either of the following:
            1.   Directly impose a sentence that consists of one or more
community control sanctions authorized by divisions (E), (F), or (G) of this
section. The court may impose any other conditions of release under a community
control sanction that the court considers appropriate. If the court imposes a
jail term upon the offender, the court may impose any community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions in addition to the jail
term.
            2.   Impose a jail term under division (C) of this section from the
range of jail terms authorized under that division for the offense, suspend all
or a portion of the jail term imposed, and place the offender under a community
control sanction or combination of community control sanctions authorized under
divisions (E), (F), or (G) of this section.
         (b)   The duration of all community control sanctions imposed upon an
offender and in effect for an offender at any time shall not exceed five years.
         (c)   At sentencing, if a court directly imposes a community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions pursuant to division (D)
(1)(a)1. of this section, the court shall state the duration of the community
control sanctions imposed and shall notify the offender that if any of the
conditions of the community control sanctions are violated the court may do any
of the following:
            1.   Impose a longer time under the same community control sanction
if the total time under all of the offender’s community control sanctions does
not exceed the five-year limit specified in division (D)(1)(b) of this section;
            2.   Impose a more restrictive community control sanction under
division (E), (F), or (G) of this section, but the court is not required to
impose any particular sanction or sanctions;
            3.   Impose a definite jail term from the range of jail terms
authorized for the offense under division (C) of this section.
      (2)   If a court sentences an offender to any community control sanction
or combination of community control sanctions pursuant to division (D)(1)(a)1.
of this section, the sentencing court retains jurisdiction over the offender
and the period of community control for the duration of the period of community
control. Upon the motion of either party or on the court’s own motion, the
court, in the court’s sole discretion and as the circumstances warrant, may
modify the community control sanctions or conditions of release previously
imposed, substitute a community control sanction or condition of release for
another community control sanction or condition of release previously imposed,
or impose an additional community control sanction or condition of release.
      (3)   (a)   If a court sentences an offender to any community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions authorized under
division (E), (F), or (G) of this section, the court shall place the offender
under the general control and supervision of the court or of a department of
probation in the jurisdiction that serves the court for purposes of reporting
to the court a violation of any of the conditions of the sanctions imposed. If
the offender resides in another jurisdiction and a department of probation has
been established to serve the municipal court or county court in that
jurisdiction, the sentencing court may request the municipal court or the
county court to receive the offender into the general control and supervision
of that department of probation for purposes of reporting to the sentencing
court a violation of any of the conditions of the sanctions imposed. The
sentencing court retains jurisdiction over any offender whom it sentences for
the duration of the sanction or sanctions imposed.
         (b)   The sentencing court shall require as a condition of any
community control sanction that the offender abide by the law and not leave the
state without the permission of the court or the offender’s probation officer.
In the interests of doing justice, rehabilitating the offender, and ensuring
the offender’s good behavior, the court may impose additional requirements on
the offender. The offender’s compliance with the additional requirements also
shall be a condition of the community control sanction imposed upon the
offender.
      (4)   (a)   If the court imposing sentence upon an offender sentences the
offender to any community control sanction or combination of community control
sanctions authorized under division (E), (F), or (G) of this section, and the
offender violates any of the conditions of the sanctions, the public or private
person or entity that supervises or administers the program or activity that
comprises the sanction shall report the violation directly to the sentencing
court or to the department of probation or probation officer with general
control and supervision over the offender. If the public or private person or
entity reports the violation to the department of probation or probation
officer, the department or officer shall report the violation to the sentencing
court.
         (b)   Except as provided in division (D)(4)(c) of this section, if an
offender violates any condition of a community control sanction, the sentencing
court may impose upon the violator one or more of the following penalties:
            1.   A longer time under the same community control sanction if the
total time under all of the community control sanctions imposed on the violator
does not exceed the five-year limit specified in division (D)(1)(b) of this
section;
            2.   A more restrictive community control sanction;
            3.   A combination of community control sanctions, including a jail
term.
         (c)   If an offender was acting pursuant to R.C. § 2925.11(B)(2)(b),
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a related provision
under R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14, or R.C. § 2925.141, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and in so doing violated the conditions of a
community control sanction based on a minor drug possession offense, as defined
in R.C. § 2925.11, or violated R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. §
2925.141, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the sentencing
court shall not impose any of the penalties described in division (D)(4)(b) of
this section based on the violation.
         (d)   If the court imposes a jail term upon a violator pursuant to
division (D)(4)(b) of this section, the total time spent in jail for the
misdemeanor offense and the violation of a condition of the community control
sanction shall not exceed the maximum jail term available for the offense for
which the sanction that was violated was imposed. The court may reduce the
longer period of time that the violator is required to spend under the longer
sanction or the more restrictive sanction imposed under division (D)(4)(b) of
this section by all or part of the time the violator successfully spent under
the sanction that was initially imposed.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if an offender, for
a significant period of time, fulfills the conditions of a community control
sanction imposed pursuant to division (E), (F), or (G) of this section in an
exemplary manner, the court may reduce the period of time under the community
control sanction or impose a less restrictive community control sanction.
Fulfilling the conditions of a community control sanction does not relieve the
offender of a duty to make restitution under division (G) of this section.
(R.C. § 2929.25)
   (E)   Community residential sanction.
      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law, the court
imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor misdemeanor, may
impose upon the offender any community residential sanction or combination of
community residential sanctions under this division (E). Community residential
sanctions include but are not limited to the following:
         (a)   A term of up to 180 days in a halfway house or a term in a
halfway house not to exceed the longest jail term available for the offense,
whichever is shorter, if the political subdivision that would have
responsibility for paying the costs of confining the offender in a jail has
entered into a contract with the halfway house for use of the facility for
misdemeanor offenders;
         (b)   If the offender is an eligible offender, as defined in R.C. §
307.932, a term in a community alternative sentencing center or district
community alternative sentencing center established and operated in accordance
with that section, in the circumstances specified in that section, with one of
the conditions of the sanction being that the offender successfully complete
the portion of the sentence to be served in the center.
      (2)   A sentence to a community residential sanction under division (E)
(1)(b) of this section shall be in accordance with R.C. § 307.932. In all other
cases, the court that sentences an offender to a community residential sanction
under this division (E) may do either or both of the following:
         (a)   Permit the offender to serve the offender’s sentence in
intermittent confinement, overnight, on weekends or at any other time or times
that will allow the offender to continue at the offender’s occupation or care
for the offender’s family;
         (b)   Authorize the offender to be released so that the offender may
seek or maintain employment, receive education or training, receive treatment,
perform community service, or otherwise fulfill an obligation imposed by law or
by the court. A release pursuant to this division shall be only for the
duration of time that is needed to fulfill the purpose of the release and for
travel that reasonably is necessary to fulfill the purposes of release.
      (3)   The court may order that a reasonable portion of the income earned
by the offender upon a release pursuant to division (E)(2) of this section be
applied to any financial sanction imposed under division (G) of this section.
      (4)   No court shall sentence any person to a prison term for a
misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor or to a jail term for a minor misdemeanor.
      (5)   If a court sentences a person who has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a misdemeanor to a community residential sanction as described in
division (E)(1) of this section, at the time of reception and at other times
the person in charge of the operation of the halfway house, community
alternative sentencing center, district community alternative sentencing
center, or other place at which the offender will serve the residential
sanction determines to be appropriate, the person in charge of the operation of
the halfway house, community alternative sentencing center, district community
alternative sentencing center, or other place may cause the convicted offender
to be examined and tested for tuberculosis, HIV infection, hepatitis, including
but not limited to hepatitis A, B, and C, and other contagious diseases. The
person in charge of the operation of the halfway house, community alternative
sentencing center, district community alternative sentencing center, or other
place at which the offender will serve the residential sanction may cause a
convicted offender in the halfway house, community alternative sentencing
center, district community alternative sentencing center, or other place who
refuses to be tested or treated for tuberculosis, HIV infection, hepatitis,
including but not limited to hepatitis A, B, and C, or another contagious
disease to be tested and treated involuntarily.
      (6)   The municipality may enter into a contract with a halfway house for
use of the halfway house to house misdemeanor offenders under a sanction
imposed under division (E)(1)(a) of this section.
(R.C. § 2929.26)
   (F)   Nonresidential sanction where jail term is not mandatory.
      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law, the court
imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor misdemeanor, may
impose upon the offender any nonresidential sanction or combination of
nonresidential sanctions authorized under this division. Nonresidential
sanctions include but are not limited to the following:
         (a)   A term of day reporting;
         (b)   A term of house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous
alcohol monitoring or both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol
monitoring, a term of electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring
without house arrest, or a term of house arrest without electronic monitoring
or continuous alcohol monitoring;
         (c)   A term of community service of up to 500 hours for misdemeanor
of the first degree or 200 hours for a misdemeanor of the second, third, or
fourth degree;
         (d)   A term in a drug treatment program with a level of security for
the offender as determined necessary by the court;
         (e)   A term of intensive probation supervision;
         (f)   A term of basic probation supervision;
         (g)   A term of monitored time;
         (h)   A term of drug and alcohol use monitoring, including random drug
testing;
         (i)   A curfew term;
         (j)   A requirement that the offender obtain employment;
         (k)   A requirement that the offender obtain education or training;
         (l)   Provided the court obtains the prior approval of the victim, a
requirement that the offender participate in victim-offender mediation;
         (m)   If authorized by law, suspension of the offender’s privilege to
operate a motor vehicle, immobilization or forfeiture of the offender’s motor
vehicle, a requirement that the offender obtain a valid motor vehicle
operator’s license, or any other related sanction;
         (n)   A requirement that the offender obtain counseling if the offense
is a violation of R.C. § 2919.25 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance or a violation of R.C. § 2903.13 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance involving a person who was a family or household member at
the time of the violation, if the offender committed the offense in the
vicinity of one or more children who are not victims of the offense, and if the
offender or the victim of the offense is a parent, guardian, custodian, or
person in loco parentis of one or more of those children. This division does
not limit the court in requiring that the offender obtain counseling for any
offense or in any circumstance not specified in this division.
      (2)   If the court imposes a term of community service pursuant to
division (F)(1)(c) of this section, the offender may request that the court
modify the sentence to authorize the offender to make a reasonable
contribution, as determined by the court, to the general fund of the county,
municipality, or other local entity that provides funding to the court. The
court may grant the request if the offender demonstrates a change in
circumstances from the date the court imposes the sentence or that the
modification would otherwise be in the interests of justice. If the court
grants the request, the offender shall make a reasonable contribution to the
court, and the clerk of the court shall deposit that contribution into the
general fund of the county, municipality, or other local entity that provides
funding to the court. If more than one entity provides funding to the court,
the clerk shall deposit a percentage of the reasonable contribution equal to
the percentage of funding the entity provides to the court in that entity’s
general fund.
      (3)   In addition to the sanctions authorized under division (F)(1) of
this section, the court imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a
minor misdemeanor, upon an offender who is not required to serve a mandatory
jail term may impose any other sanction that is intended to discourage the
offender or other persons from committing a similar offense if the sanction is
reasonably related to the overriding purposes and principles of misdemeanor
sentencing.
      (4)   The court imposing a sentence for a minor misdemeanor may impose a
term of community service in lieu of all or part of a fine. The term of
community service imposed for a minor misdemeanor shall not exceed 30 hours.
After imposing a term of community service, the court may modify the sentence
to authorize a reasonable contribution, as determined by the court, to the
appropriate general fund as provided in division (F)(2) of this section.
(R.C. § 2929.27)
   (G)   Financial sanctions.
      (1)   In addition to imposing court costs pursuant to R.C. § 2947.23, the
court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor, including a minor
misdemeanor, may sentence the offender to any financial sanction or combination
of financial sanctions authorized under this division (G) and, if the offender
is being sentenced for a criminal offense as defined in R.C. § 2930.01, shall
sentence the offender to make restitution pursuant to this division (G) and
R.C. § 2929.281. If the court, in its discretion or as required by this
division (G), imposes one or more financial sanctions, the financial sanctions
that may be imposed pursuant to this division (G) include, but are not limited
to, the following:
         (a)   Restitution.
            1.   Unless the misdemeanor offense could be disposed of by the
traffic violations bureau serving the court under Traffic Rule 13, restitution
by the offender to the victim of the offender’s crime or the victim’s estate,
in an amount based on the victim’s economic loss. The court may not impose
restitution as a sanction pursuant to this division if the offense could be
disposed of by the traffic violations bureau serving the court under Traffic
Rule 13. If the court requires restitution, the court shall order that the
restitution be made to the victim in open court or to the adult probation
department that serves the jurisdiction or the clerk of the court on behalf of
the victim.
            2.   The court shall determine the amount of restitution to be paid
by the offender. The victim, victim’s representative, victim’s attorney, if
applicable, the prosecutor or the prosecutor’s designee, and the offender may
provide information relevant to the determination of the amount of restitution.
The amount the court orders as restitution shall not exceed the amount of the
economic loss suffered by the victim as a direct and proximate result of the
commission of the offense. If the court imposes restitution for the cost of
accounting or auditing done to determine the extent of economic loss, the court
may order restitution for any amount of the victim’s costs of accounting or
auditing provided that the amount of restitution is reasonable and does not
exceed the value of property or services stolen or damaged as a result of the
offense. If the court decides to or is required to impose restitution, the
court shall hold an evidentiary hearing on restitution if the offender, victim,
victim’s representative, victim’s attorney, if applicable, or victim’s estate
disputes the amount of restitution. The court shall determine the amount of
full restitution by a preponderance of the evidence.
            3.   All restitution payments shall be credited against any
recovery of economic loss in a civil action brought by the victim or the
victim’s estate against the offender. No person may introduce evidence of an
award of restitution under this division (G) in a civil action for purposes of
imposing liability against an insurer under R.C. § 3937.18.
            4.   The court may order that the offender pay a surcharge, of not
more than 5% of the amount of the restitution otherwise ordered, to the entity
responsible for collecting and processing restitution payments.
            5.   The victim, victim’s attorney, if applicable, or the attorney
for the victim’s estate may request that the prosecutor in the case file a
motion, or the offender may file a motion, for modification of the payment
terms of any restitution ordered. If the court grants the motion, it may modify
the payment terms as it determines appropriate but shall not reduce the amount
of restitution ordered, except as provided in R.C. § 2929.281(A).
         (b)   Fines. A fine of the type described in divisions (G)(1)(b)1. and
(G)(1)(b)2. of this section payable to the appropriate entity as required by
law:
            1.   A fine in the following amount:
               a.   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than
$1,000;
               b.   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than $750;
               c.   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than $500;
               d.   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than $250;
               e.   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than $150.
            2.   A state fine or cost as defined in R.C. § 2949.111.
         (c)   Reimbursement.
            1.   Reimbursement by the offender of any or all of the costs of
sanctions incurred by the government, including but not limited to the
following:
               a.   All or part of the costs of implementing any community
control sanction, including a supervision fee under R.C. § 2951.021 and the
costs of global positioning system device monitoring;
               b.   All or part of the costs of confinement in a jail or other
residential facility, including but not limited to a per diem fee for room and
board, the costs of medical and dental treatment, and the costs of repairing
property damaged by the offender while confined;
               c.   All or part of the cost of purchasing and using an
immobilizing or disabling device, including a certified ignition interlock
device, or a remote alcohol monitoring device that a court orders an offender
to use under R.C. § 4510.13.
            2.   The amount of reimbursement under division (G)(1)(c)1. of this
section shall not exceed the total amount of reimbursement the offender is able
to pay and shall not exceed the actual cost of the sanctions. The court may
collect any amount of reimbursement the offender is required to pay under that
division. If the court does not order reimbursement under that division,
confinement costs may be assessed pursuant to a repayment policy adopted under
R.C. § 2929.37. In addition, the offender may be required to pay the fees
specified in R.C. § 2929.38 in accordance with that section.   
      (2)   (a)   If the court determines a hearing is necessary, the court may
hold a hearing to determine whether the offender is able to pay the financial
sanction imposed pursuant to this division (G) or court costs or is likely in
the future to be able to pay the sanction or costs.
         (b)   If the court determines that the offender is indigent and unable
to pay the financial sanction or court costs, the court shall consider imposing
and may impose a term of community service under division (F)(1) of this
section in lieu of imposing a financial sanction or court costs. If the court
does not determine that the offender is indigent, the court may impose a term
of community service under division (F)(1) of this section in lieu of or in
addition to imposing a financial sanction under this division (G) and in
addition to imposing court costs. The court may order community service for a
minor misdemeanor pursuant to division (F)(4) of this section in lieu of or in
addition to imposing a financial sanction under this section and in addition to
imposing court costs. If a person fails to pay a financial sanction or court
costs, the court may order community service in lieu of the financial sanction
or court costs.
      (3)   (a)   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon the
offender pursuant to division (G)(1)(c) of this section to pay the costs
incurred by a county pursuant to any sanction imposed under division (E), (F),
or (G) of this section or in operating a facility used to confine offenders
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E) of this section to the county
treasurer. The county treasurer shall deposit the reimbursements in the
county’s General Fund. The county shall use the amounts deposited in the fund
to pay the costs incurred by the county pursuant to any sanction imposed under
division (E), (F), or (G) of this section or in operating a facility used to
confine offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E) of this
section.
         (b)   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon the offender
pursuant to division (G)(1)(c) of this section to pay the costs incurred by a
municipal corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed under division (E), (F),
or (G) of this section or in operating a facility used to confine offenders
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E) of this section to the
treasurer of the municipal corporation. The treasurer shall deposit the
reimbursements in the municipal corporation’s General Fund. The municipal
corporation shall use the amounts deposited in the fund to pay the costs
incurred by the municipal corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed under
division (E), (F), or (G) of this section or in operating a facility used to
confine offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E) of this
section.
         (c)   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed pursuant to
division (G)(1)(c) of this section for the costs incurred by a private provider
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E), (F), or (G) of this section
to the provider.
      (4)   (a)   In addition to any other fine that is or may be imposed under
this section, the court imposing sentence upon an offender for misdemeanor
domestic violence or menacing by stalking may impose a fine of not less than
$70 nor more than $500, which shall, except as provided in divisions (G)(4)(b)
and (G)(4)(c) of this section, be transmitted to the Treasurer of Ohio to be
credited to the address confidentiality program fund created by R.C. § 111.48.
         (b)   A court that imposes a fine under division (G)(4)(a) of this
section may retain up to 25% of amounts collected in satisfaction of the fine
to cover administrative costs.
         (c)   A court that imposes a fine under division (G)(4)(a) of this
section may assign up to 25% of amounts collected in satisfaction of the fine
to reimburse the prosecuting attorney for costs associated with prosecution of
the offense.
      (5)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (G)(5), a
financial sanction imposed under division (G)(1) of this section is a judgment
in favor of the state or the political subdivision that operates the court that
imposed the financial sanction, and the offender subject to the financial
sanction is the judgment debtor. A financial sanction of reimbursement imposed
pursuant to division (G)(1)(c)1.a. of this section upon an offender is a
judgment in favor of the entity administering the community control sanction,
and the offender subject to the financial sanction is the judgment debtor. A
financial sanction of reimbursement imposed pursuant to division (G)(1)(c)1.b.
of this section upon an offender confined in a jail or other residential
facility is a judgment in favor of the entity operating the jail or other
residential facility, and the offender subject to the financial sanction is the
judgment debtor. A financial sanction of restitution imposed pursuant to
division (G)(1)(a) of this section is an order in favor of the victim of the
offender’s criminal act that can be collected through a certificate of judgment
as described in division (G)(5)(b)1. of this section, through execution as
described in division (G)(5)(b)2. of this section or through an order as
described in division (G)(5)(b)3. of this section and the offender shall be
considered for purposes of the collection as a judgment debtor.
         (b)   Once a financial sanction is imposed as a judgment or order
under this division, the victim, private provider, state, or political
subdivision may do any of the following:
            1.   Obtain from the clerk of the court in which the judgment was
entered, at no charge, a certificate of judgment that shall be in the same
manner and form as a certificate of judgment issued in a civil action;
            2.   Obtain execution of the judgment or order through any
available procedure, including any of the procedures identified in R.C. §
2929.18(D)(1) and (D)(2) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
            3.   Obtain an order for the assignment of wages of the judgment
debtor under R.C. § 1321.33 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (6)   The civil remedies authorized under division (G)(5) of this section
for the collection of the financial sanction supplement, but do not preclude,
enforcement of the criminal sentence.
      (7)   Each court imposing a financial sanction upon an offender under
this division (G) may designate the clerk of the court or another person to
collect the financial sanction. The clerk, or another person authorized by law
or the court to collect the financial sanction may do the following:
         (a)   Enter into contracts with one or more public agencies or private
vendors for the collection of amounts due under the sanction. Before entering
into a contract for the collection of amounts due from an offender pursuant to
any financial sanction imposed pursuant to this division (G), a court shall
comply with R.C. §§ 307.86 through 307.92.
         (b)   Permit payment of all or any portion of the sanction in
installments, by financial transaction device if the court is a county court or
a municipal court operated by a county, or by any other reasonable method, in
any time, and on any terms that the court considers just. If the court is a
county court or a municipal court operated by a county, the acceptance of
payments by any financial transaction device shall be governed by the policy
adopted by the board of county commissioners of the county pursuant to R.C. §
301.28. If the court is a municipal court not operated by a county, the clerk
may pay any fee associated with processing an electronic transfer out of public
money or may charge the fee to the offender.
         (c)   To defray administrative costs, charge a reasonable fee to an
offender who elects a payment plan rather than a lump sum payment of any
financial sanction.
      (8)   No financial sanction imposed under this division (G) shall
preclude a victim from bringing a civil action against the offender.
      (9)   If the court imposes restitution, fines, fees, or incarceration
costs on a business or corporation, it is the duty of the person authorized to
make disbursements from assets of the business or corporation to pay the
restitution, fines, fees, or incarceration costs from those assets.
(R.C. § 2929.28)
   (H)   Organizational penalties.
      (1)   Regardless of the other penalties provided in this section, an
organization convicted of an offense pursuant to §
130.09 shall be fined by the court as follows:
         (a)   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than $5,000;
         (b)   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than $4,000;
         (c)   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than $3,000;
         (d)   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than $2,000;
         (e)   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than $1,000;
         (f)   For a misdemeanor not specifically classified, not more than
$2,000;
         (g)   For a minor misdemeanor not specifically classified, not more
than $1,000.
      (2)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not specifically
classified, and the section defining the offense or penalty plainly indicates a
purpose to impose the penalty provided for violation upon organizations, then
such penalty shall be imposed in lieu of the penalty provided in this section.
      (3)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not specifically
classified, and the penalty provided includes a higher fine than that provided
in this section, then the penalty imposed shall be pursuant to the penalty
provided for violation of the section defining the offense.
      (4)   This section does not prevent the imposition of available civil
sanctions against an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to §
130.09, either in addition to or in lieu of a fine imposed pursuant to this
section.
(R.C. § 2929.31)
Statutory reference:
   Citation issuance and limitations on arrest for minor misdemeanors, see R.C.
§ 2935.26
   Crime Victim’s Reparations Fund, see R.C. § 2929.32
   Habitual sex offender and sexual predator registration, see R.C. Chapter
2950
   Reimbursement for costs of confinement, see R.C. §§ 2929.36 et seq.
   Reports to health care licensing boards of criminal offenses, see R.C. §
2929.42
   Restitution, see R.C. § 2929.281
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
   
131.01   Definitions
   
131.02   Arson; determining property value or amount of physical harm
   
131.03   Criminal damaging or endangering; vehicular vandalism
   
131.04   Criminal mischief
   
131.05   Damaging or endangering aircraft or airport operations
   
131.06   Criminal trespass; aggravated trespass
   
131.07   Tampering with coin machines
   
131.08   Theft
   
131.09   Unauthorized use of a vehicle
   
131.10   Unauthorized use of property, including telecommunication property and
computers; possession of municipal property
   
131.11   Passing bad checks
   
131.12   Misuse of credit cards
   
131.13   Making or using slugs
   
131.14   Prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud
   
131.15   Tampering with records
   
131.16   Securing writings by deception
   
131.17   Defrauding creditors
   
131.18   Receiving stolen property
   
131.19   Value of stolen property
   
131.20   Degree of offense when certain property involved
   
131.21   Injuring vines, bushes, trees, or crops
   
131.22   Detention and arrest of shoplifters and those committing motion
picture piracy; protection of institutional property
   
131.23   Insurance fraud; workers’ compensation fraud; Medicaid fraud
   
131.24   Injury to property by hunters
   
131.25   Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property or rental
services; evidence of lack of capacity to consent
   
131.26   Forgery of identification cards
   
131.27   Criminal simulation
   
131.28   Personating an officer
   
131.29   Trademark counterfeiting
   
131.30   Diminishing or interfering with forfeitable property
   
131.31   Recording credit card, telephone or Social Security numbers
   
131.32   Prosecutions for theft of utilities
   
131.33   Motion picture piracy
   
131.34   Railroad vandalism; criminal trespass; interference with operation of
train; grade crossing device vandalism
   
131.35   Desecration
Statutory reference:
   Cable television service devices, unauthorized sale or possession, felony,
see R.C. § 2913.041
   Deceptive acts or practices in connection with consumer transactions, see
O.A.C. Chapter 109:4-3
   Disrupting public services, felony, see R.C. § 2909.04
   E-mail advertisements, civil offenses and felony forgery offense, see R.C. §
2307.64
   E-mail spam, civil offenses and felony offenses, see R.C. § 2913.421
   Food stamps, illegal use, see R.C. § 2913.46
   Telecommunications: fraud and unlawful use of a device, felony offenses, see
R.C. §§ 2913.05 and 2913.06
   Terrorism involving agricultural products or equipment, see R.C. § 901.511
§ 131.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTIVE DUTY SERVICE MEMBER. Any member of the armed forces of the United
States performing active duty under Title 10 of the United States Code.
   ANHYDROUS AMMONIA. A compound formed by the combination of two gaseous
elements, nitrogen and hydrogen, in the manner described below. Anhydrous
ammonia is one part nitrogen to three parts hydrogen (NH3). Anhydrous ammonia
by weight is fourteen parts nitrogen to three parts hydrogen, which is
approximately 82% nitrogen to 18% hydrogen.
   ASSISTANCE DOG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.
   CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE. Any services provided by or through the facilities
of any cable television system or other similar closed circuit coaxial cable
communications system, or any microwave or similar transmission service used in
connection with any cable television system or other similar closed circuit
coaxial cable communications system.
   COIN MACHINE. Any mechanical or electronic device designed to do both of the
following:
      (1)   Receive a coin or bill, or token made for that purpose;
      (2)   In return for the insertion or deposit of a coin, bill, or token,
automatically dispense property, provide a service, or grant a license.
   COMPUTER. An electronic device that performs logical, arithmetic, and memory
functions by the manipulation of electronic or magnetic impulses. The term
includes but is not limited to all input, output, processing, storage, computer
program, or communication facilities that are connected, or related, in a
computer system or network to an electronic device of that nature.
   COMPUTER CONTAMINANT. Means a computer program that is designed to modify,
damage, destroy, disable, deny or degrade access to, allow unauthorized access
to, functionally impair, record, or transmit information within a computer,
computer system, or computer network without the express or implied consent of
the owner or other person authorized to give consent and that is of a type or
kind described in divisions (1) through (4) of this definition or of a type or
kind similar to a type or kind described in divisions (1) through (4) of this
definition:
      (1)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “viruses” and
“worms” that are self-replicating or self-propagating and that are designed to
contaminate other computer programs, compromise computer security, consume
computer resources, modify, destroy, record, or transmit data, or disrupt the
normal operation of the computer, computer system, or computer network;
      (2)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “Trojans” or “Trojan
horses” that are not self-replicating or self-propagating and that are designed
to compromise computer security, consume computer resources, modify, destroy,
record, or transmit data, or disrupt the normal operation of the computer,
computer system, or computer network;
      (3)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “zombies” that are
designed to use a computer without the knowledge and consent of the owner, or
other person authorized to give consent, and that are designed to send large
quantities of data to a targeted computer network for the purpose of degrading
the targeted computer’s or network’s performance, or denying access through the
network to the targeted computer or network, resulting in what is commonly
known as “denial of service” or “distributed denial of service” attacks;
      (4)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “trap doors”, “back
doors”, or “root kits” that are designed to bypass standard authentication
software and that are designed to allow access or use of a computer without the
knowledge or consent of the owner, or other person authorized to give consent.
   COMPUTER HACKING.
      (1)   The term means any of the following:
         (a)   Gaining access or attempting to gain access to all or part of a
computer, computer system, or a computer network without express or implied
authorization with the intent to defraud or with intent to commit a crime;
         (b)   Misusing computer or network services including but not limited
to mail transfer programs, file transfer programs, proxy servers, and web
servers by performing functions not authorized by the owner of the computer,
computer system, or computer network or other person authorized to give
consent. As used in this division, “misuse of computer and network services”
includes but is not limited to the unauthorized use of any of the following:
            1.   Mail transfer programs to send mail to persons other than the
authorized users of that computer or computer network;
            2.   File transfer program services or proxy servers to access
other computers, computer systems, or computer networks;
            3.   Web servers to redirect users to other web pages or web
servers.
         (c)   1.   Subject to division (1)(c)2. of this definition, using a
group of computer programs commonly known as “port scanners” or “probes” to
intentionally access any computer, computer system, or computer network without
the permission of the owner of the computer, computer system, or computer
network or other person authorized to give consent. The group of computer
programs referred to in this division includes but is not limited to those
computer programs that use a computer network to access a computer, computer
system, or another computer network to determine any of the following: the
presence or types of computers or computer systems on a network; the computer
network’s facilities and capabilities; the availability of computer or network
services; the presence or versions of computer software including but not
limited to operating systems, computer services, or computer contaminants; the
presence of a known computer software deficiency that can be used to gain
unauthorized access to a computer, computer system, or computer network; or any
other information about a computer, computer system, or computer network not
necessary for the normal and lawful operation of the computer initiating the
access.
            2.   The group of computer programs referred to in division (1)
(c)1. of this definition does not include standard computer software used for
the normal operation, administration, management, and test of a computer,
computer system, or computer network including but not limited to domain name
services, mail transfer services, and other operating system services, computer
programs commonly called “ping”, “tcpdump”, and “traceroute” and other network
monitoring and management computer software, and computer programs commonly
knows as “nslookup” and “whois” and other systems administration computer
software.
         (d)   The intentional use of a computer, computer system, or a
computer network in a manner that exceeds any right or permission granted by
the owner of the computer, computer system, or computer network or other person
authorized to give consent.
      (2)   The term does not include the introduction of a computer
contaminant, as defined in this section, into a computer, computer system,
computer program, or computer network.
   COMPUTER NETWORK. A set of related and remotely-connected computers and
communication facilities that includes more than one computer system that has
the capability to transmit among the connected computers and communication
facilities through the use of computer facilities.
   COMPUTER PROGRAM. An ordered set of data representing coded instructions or
statements that, when executed by a computer, causes the computer to process
data.
   COMPUTER SERVICES. Includes but is not limited to the use of a computer
system, computer network, computer program, data that is prepared for computer
use, or data that is contained within a computer system or computer network.
   COMPUTER SOFTWARE. Computer programs, procedures, and other documentation
associated with the operation of a computer system.
   COMPUTER SYSTEM. A computer and related devices, whether connected or
unconnected, including but not limited to data input, output, and storage
devices, data communications links, and computer programs and data that make
the system capable of performing specified special purpose data processing
tasks.
   COUNTERFEIT TELECOMMUNICATIONS DE-VICE. A telecommunications device that,
alone or with another telecommunications device, has been altered, constructed,
manufactured, or programmed to acquire, intercept, receive, or otherwise
facilitate the use of a telecommunications service or information service
without the authority or consent of the provider of the telecommunications
service or information service. The phrase includes but is not limited to a
clone telephone, clone microchip, tumbler telephone, or tumbler microchip; a
wireless scanning device capable of acquiring, intercepting, receiving, or
otherwise facilitating the use of telecommunications service or information
service without immediate detection; or a device, equipment, hardware, or
software designed for, or capable of, altering or changing the electronic
serial number in a wireless telephone.
   CREATE A SUBSTANTIAL RISK OF SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO ANY PERSON. Includes
the creation of a substantial risk of serious physical harm to any emergency
personnel.
   CREDIT CARD. Includes but is not limited to a card, code, device, or other
means of access to a customer’s account for the purpose of obtaining money,
property, labor, or services on credit, or for initiating an electronic fund
transfer at a point-of-sale terminal, an automated teller machine, or a cash
dispensing machine. It also includes a county procurement card issued under
R.C. § 301.29.
   DANGEROUS DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   DANGEROUS ORDNANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2923.11.
   DATA. A representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts, or
instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner and
that are intended for use in a computer, computer system, or computer network.
   DECEPTION. To knowingly deceive another or cause another to be deceived by
any false or misleading representation, by withholding information, by
preventing another from acquiring information, or by any other conduct, act, or
omission that creates, confirms, or perpetuates a false impression in another,
including a false impression as to law, value, state of mind, or other
objective or subjective fact.
   DEFRAUD. To knowingly obtain, by deception, some benefit for oneself or
another, or to knowingly cause, by deception, some detriment to another.
   DEPRIVE. To do any of the following:
      (1)   To withhold property of another permanently, or for a period that
appropriates a substantial portion of its value or use, or with purpose to
restore it only upon payment of a reward or other consideration;
      (2)   To dispose of property so as to make it unlikely that the owner
will recover it;
      (3)   To accept, use, or appropriate money, property, or services, with
purpose not to give proper consideration in return for the money, property, or
services, and without reasonable justification or excuse for not giving proper
consideration.
   DISABLED ADULT. A person who is 18 years of age or older and has some
impairment of body or mind that makes the person unable to work at any
substantially remunerative employment that the person otherwise would be able
to perform and that will, with reasonable probability, continue for a period of
at least 12 months without any present indication of recovery from the
impairment, or who is 18 years of age or older and has been certified as
permanently and totally disabled by an agency of this state or the United
States that has the function of so classifying persons.
   DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
   ELDERLY PERSON. A person who is 65 years of age or older.
   ELECTRONIC FUND TRANSFER. Has the same meaning as in 92 Stat. 3728, 15
U.S.C. § 1693a, as amended.
   EMERGENCY PERSONNEL. Means any of the following persons:
      (1)   A peace officer, as defined in R.C. § 2935.01;
      (2)   A member of a fire department or other firefighting agency of a
municipal corporation, township, township fire district, joint fire district,
other political subdivision, or combination of political subdivisions;
      (3)   A member of a private fire company, as defined in R.C. § 9.60, or a
volunteer firefighter;
      (4)    A member of a joint ambulance district or joint emergency medical
services district;
      (5)   An emergency medical technician-basic, emergency medical
technician-intermediate, emergency medical technician-paramedic, ambulance
operator, or other member of an emergency medical service that is owned or
operated by a political subdivision or a private entity;
      (6)   The State Fire Marshal, the Chief Deputy State Fire Marshal, or an
assistant state fire marshal;
      (7)   A fire prevention officer of a political subdivision or an arson,
fire, or similar investigator of a political subdivision.
   FEDERALLY-LICENSED FIREARMS DEALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5502.63.
   FIREARM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2923.11.
   FORGE. To fabricate or create, in whole or in part and by any means, any
spurious writing, or to make, execute, alter, complete, reproduce, or otherwise
purport to authenticate any writing, when the writing in fact is not
authenticated by that conduct.
   GAIN ACCESS. To approach, instruct, communicate with, store data in,
retrieve data from, or otherwise make use of any resources of a computer,
computer system, or computer network, or any cable service or cable system both
as defined in R.C. § 2913.04.
   INFORMATION SERVICE.
      (1)   Subject to division (2) of this definition, the offering of a
capability for generating, acquiring, storing, transforming, processing,
retrieving, utilizing, or making available information via telecommunications,
including but not limited to electronic publishing.
      (2)   The term does not include any use of a capability of a type
described in division (1) of this definition for the management, control, or
operation of a telecommunications system or the management of a
telecommunications service.
   INTERNET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 341.42.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   OCCUPIED STRUCTURE. Means any house, building, outbuilding, watercraft,
aircraft, railroad car, truck, trailer, tent, or other structure, vehicle, or
shelter, or any portion thereof, to which any of the following applies:
      (1)   It is maintained as a permanent or temporary dwelling, even though
it is temporarily unoccupied and whether nor not any person is actually
present;
      (2)   At the time, it is occupied as the permanent or temporary
habitation of any person, whether or not any person is actually present;
      (3)   At the time, it is specially adapted for the overnight
accommodation of any person, whether or not any person is actually present;
      (4)   At the time, any person is present or likely to be present in it.
   OWNER. Unless the context requires a different meaning, any person, other
than the actor, who is the owner of, who has possession or control of, or who
has any license or interest in property or services, even though the ownership,
possession, control, license, or interest is unlawful.
   POLICE DOG OR HORSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.321.
   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2744.01.
   RENTED PROPERTY. Personal property in which the right of possession and use
of the property is for a short and possibly indeterminate term in return for
consideration; the rentee generally controls the duration of possession of the
property within any applicable minimum or maximum term; and the amount of
consideration is generally determined by the duration of possession of the
property.
   SERVICES. Includes labor, personal services, professional services, rental
services, public utility services including wireless service as defined in R.C.
§ 128.01(F)(1), common carrier services, and food, drink, transportation,
entertainment, and cable television services and, for purposes of R.C. §
2913.04 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, includes cable
services as defined in that section.
   SLUG. An object that, by virtue of its size, shape, composition, or other
quality, is capable of being inserted or deposited in a coin machine as an
improper substitute for a genuine coin, bill, or token made for that purpose.
   STATE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2744.01.
   TELECOMMUNICATION. The origination, emission, dissemination, transmission,
or reception of data, images, signals, sounds, or other intelligence or
equivalence or intelligence of any nature over any communications system by any
method, including but not limited to a fiber optic, electronic, magnetic,
optical, digital or analog method.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Any instrument, equipment, machine, or other
device that facilitates telecommunication, including but not limited to a
computer, computer network, computer chip, computer circuit, scanner,
telephone, cellular telephone, pager, personal communications device,
transponder, receiver, radio, modem, or device that enables the use of a modem.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. The pro-viding, allowing, facilitating, or
generating of any form of telecommunication through the use of a
telecommunications device over a telecommunications system.
   THEFT OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2911.12, 2911.13,
2911.31, 2911.32, 2913.02, 2913.03, 2913.04, 2913.041, 2913.11, 2913.21,
2913.31, 2913.32, 2913.33, 2913.34, 2913.40, 2913.42, 2913.43, 2913.44,
2913.45, 2913.47, 2913.48, former R.C. § 2913.47 or 2913.48, or R.C. § 2913.51,
2915.05, or 2921.41;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States substantially equivalent to any
section listed in division (1) of this definition, or a violation of R.C. §
2913.41, 2913.81 or 2915.06 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law
of this or any other state or the United States involving robbery, burglary,
breaking and entering, theft, embezzlement, wrongful conversion, forgery,
counterfeiting, deceit, or fraud;
      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing any offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
   UTTER. To issue, publish, transfer, use, put or send into circulation,
deliver, or display.
   WRITING. Any computer software, document, letter, memorandum, note, paper,
plate, data, film, or other thing having in or upon it any written, type-
written, or printed matter, and any token, stamp, seal, credit card, badge,
trademark, label, or other symbol of value, right, privilege, license, or
identification.
(R.C. §§ 2909.01, 2913.01)
§ 131.02 ARSON; DETERMINING PROPERTY VALUE OR AMOUNT OF PHYSICAL HARM.
   (A)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly do any of
the following:
      (1)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
property of another without the other person’s consent;
      (2)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
property of the offender or another, with purpose to defraud;
      (3)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to the
statehouse or a courthouse, school building, or other building or structure
that is owned or controlled by the state, any political subdivision, or any
department, agency, or instrumentality of the state or a political subdivision,
and that is used for public purposes;
      (4)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm, through the
offer or the acceptance of an agreement for hire or other consideration, to any
property of another without the other person’s consent or to any property of
the offender or another with purpose to defraud;
      (5)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any park,
preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over land, forest, timberland,
greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is owned or controlled by
another person, the state, or a political subdivision without the consent of
the other person, the state, or the political subdivision;
      (6)   With purpose to defraud, cause, or create a substantial risk of,
physical harm to any park, preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over
land, forest, timberland, greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is
owned or controlled by the offender, another person, the state, or a political
subdivision.
   (B)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly do any of
the following:
      (1)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
structure of another that is not an occupied structure;
      (2)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm, through the
offer or the acceptance of an agreement for hire or other consideration, to any
structure of another that is not an occupied structure;
      (3)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
structure that is not an occupied structure and that is in or on any park,
preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over land, forest, timberland,
greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is owned or controlled by
another person, the state, or a political subdivision.
   (C)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B)(1)
or (B)(2) of this section that the defendant acted with the consent of the
other person.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B)(3) of
this section that the defendant acted with the consent of the other person, the
state, or the political subdivision.
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of arson.
      (2)   A violation of division (A)(1) or (B)(1) of this section is one of
the following:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(2)(b) of this
section, a misdemeanor of the first degree;
         (b)   If the value of the property or the amount of the physical harm
involved is $1,000 or more, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (3)   A violation of division (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), (A)(5), (A)(6), (B)
(2) or (B)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2909.03)
   (E)   Determining property value or amount of physical harm.
      (1)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of
property or amount of physical harm involved in a violation of division (A)(1)
or (B)(1) of this section:
         (a)   If the property is an heirloom, memento, collector’s item,
antique, museum piece, manuscript, document, record, or other thing that is
either irreplaceable or is replaceable only on the expenditure of substantial
time, effort, or money, the value of the property or the amount of physical
harm involved is the amount that would compensate the owner for its loss.
         (b)   If the property is not covered under division (B)(1)(a) of this
section, and the physical harm is such that the property can be restored
substantially to its former condition, the amount of physical harm involved is
the reasonable cost of restoring the property.
         (c)   If the property is not covered under division (B)(1)(a) of this
section, and the physical harm is such that the property cannot be restored
substantially to its former condition, the value of the property, in the case
of personal property, is the cost of replacing the property with new property
of like kind and quality, and in the case of real property or real property
fixtures, is the difference in the fair market value of the property
immediately before and immediately after the offense.
      (2)   As used in this section, FAIR MARKET VALUE has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 2913.61.
      (3)   Prima facie evidence of the value of property, as provided in R.C.
§ 2913.61(D), may be used to establish the value of property pursuant to this
section.
(R.C. § 2909.11(B) - (D))
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated arson, felony offense, see R.C. § 2909.02
   Arson offender registration, see R.C. §§ 2909.13, 2909.14 and 2909.15
   Convicted arsonist to make restitution to public agency, see R.C. § 2929.71
§ 131.03 CRIMINAL DAMAGING OR ENDANGERING; VEHICULAR VANDALISM.
   (A)   Criminal damaging or endangering.
      (1)   No person shall cause or create a substantial risk of physical harm
to any property of another without the other person’s consent:
         (a)   Knowingly, by any means; or
         (b)   Recklessly, by means of fire, explosion, flood, poison gas,
poison, radioactive material, caustic or corrosive material, or other
inherently dangerous agency or substance.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (A) is guilty of criminal damaging
or endangering, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If violation of this
division (A) creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging
or endangering is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the property involved
in a violation of this division (A) is an aircraft, an aircraft engine,
propeller, appliance, spare part, or any other equipment or implement used or
intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the violation
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging or endangering
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the property
involved in a violation of this division (A) is an aircraft, an aircraft
engine, propeller, appliance, spare part, or any other equipment or implement
used or intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the
violation creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person or if the
property involved in a violation of this division (A) is an occupied aircraft,
criminal damaging or endangering is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2909.06)
   (B)   Vehicular vandalism.
      (1)   As used in this division (B):
         ALLEY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
         HIGHWAY. Means any highway as defined in R.C. § 4511.01 or any lane,
road, street, alley, bridge, or overpass.
         STREET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
         VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
         VESSEL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1546.01.
         WATERS IN THIS STATE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1546.01.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any
object at, onto, or in the path of any of the following:
         (a)   Any vehicle on a highway;
         (b)   Any boat or vessel on any of the waters in this state.
      (3)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of vehicular
vandalism. Except as otherwise provided in this division (B)(3), vehicular
vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of this
division (B) creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person or the
violation of this division (B) causes serious physical harm to property,
vehicular vandalism is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
If the violation of this division (B) causes physical harm to any person or
serious physical harm to any person, vehicular vandalism is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.09)
Statutory reference:
   Disrupting public services, felony offense, see R.C. § 2909.04
   Vandalism, felony offense, see R.C. § 2909.05
§ 131.04 CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.
   (A)   No person shall:
      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage,
destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with the either of the following:
         (a)   The property of another;
         (b)   One’s own residential real property with the purpose to decrease
the value of or enjoyment of the residential real property, if both of the
following apply:
            1.   The residential real property is subject to a mortgage.
            2.   The person has been served with a summons and complaint in a
pending residential mortgage loan foreclosure action relating to that real
property. As used in this division, “pending” includes the time between
judgment entry and confirmation of sale.
      (2)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of property of
another, employ a tear gas device, stink bomb, smoke generator, or other device
releasing a substance that is harmful or offensive to persons exposed, or that
tends to cause public alarm;
      (3)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage,
destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with a bench mark, triangulation
station, boundary marker, or other survey station, monument, or marker;
      (4)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage,
destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with any safety device, the property of
another, or the property of the offender when required or placed for the safety
of others, so as to destroy or diminish its effectiveness or availability for
its intended purpose;
      (5)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of the property
of another, set a fire on the land of another or place personal property that
has been set on fire on the land of another, which fire or personal property is
outside and apart from any building, other structure, or personal property that
is on that land;
      (6)   Without privilege to do so, and with intent to impair the
functioning of any computer, computer system, computer network, computer
software, or computer program, knowingly do any of the following:
         (a)   In any manner or by any means, including but not limited to
computer hacking, alter, damage, destroy, or modify a computer, computer
system, computer network, computer software, or computer program or data
contained in a computer, computer system, computer network, computer software,
or computer program;
         (b)   Introduce a computer contaminant into a computer, computer
system, computer network, computer software, or computer program.
      (7)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly destroy or improperly tamper
with a critical infrastructure facility.
   (B)   As used in this section:
      CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2911.21.
      IMPROPERLY TAMPER. Means to change the physical location or the physical
condition of the property.
      SAFETY DEVICE. Means any fire extinguisher, fire hose, or fire axe, or
any fire escape, emergency exit, or emergency escape equipment, or any life
line, life-saving ring, life preserver, or life boat or raft, or any alarm,
light, flare, signal, sign, or notice intended to warn of danger or emergency,
or intended for other safety purposes, or any guard railing or safety
barricade, or any traffic sign or signal, or any railroad grade crossing sign,
signal, or gate, or any first aid or survival equipment, or any other device,
apparatus, or equipment intended for protecting or preserving the safety of
persons or property.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal mischief,
and shall be punished as provided in division (C)(2), (C)(3), or (C)(4) of this
section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree. Except as otherwise provided
in this division, if the violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4),
or (A)(5) of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person,
criminal mischief committed in violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3),
(A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
property involved in the violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4),
or (A)(5) of this section is an aircraft, an aircraft engine, propeller,
appliance, spare part, fuel, lubricant, hydraulic fluid, any other equipment,
implement, or material used or intended to be used in the operation of an
aircraft, or any cargo carried or intended to be carried in an aircraft and if
the violation creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or if the
aircraft in question is an occupied aircraft, criminal mischief committed in
violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (A)(6) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the value of the computer, computer system, computer
network, computer software, computer program, or data involved in the violation
of division (A)(6) of this section or the loss to the victim resulting from the
violation is $1,000 or more, or if the computer, computer system, computer
network, computer software, computer program, or data involved in the violation
of division (A)(6) is used or intended to be used in the operation of an
aircraft and the violation creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or
if the aircraft in question is an occupied aircraft, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (A)(6) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   Criminal mischief committed in violation of division (A)(7) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.07)
§ 131.05 DAMAGING OR ENDANGERING AIRCRAFT OR AIRPORT OPERATIONS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      AIR GUN. Means a hand pistol or rifle that propels its projectile by
means of releasing compressed air, carbon dioxide, or other gas.
      AIRPORT OPERATIONAL SURFACE. Means any surface of land or water that is
developed, posted, or marked so as to give an observer reasonable notice that
the surface is designed and developed for the purpose of storing, parking,
taxiing, or operating aircraft, or any surface of land or water that is
actually being used for any of those purposes.
      FIREARM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2923.11.
      SPRING-OPERATED GUN. Means a hand pistol or rifle that propels a
projectile not less than four or more than five millimeters in diameter by
means of a spring.
   (B)   No person shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly throw an object at, or drop an object upon, any moving
aircraft.
      (2)   Knowingly shoot with a bow and arrow, or knowingly discharge a
firearm, air gun, or spring-operated gun, at or toward any aircraft.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly or recklessly shoot with a bow and arrow, or
shall knowingly or recklessly discharge a firearm, air gun, or spring-operated
gun, upon or over any airport operational surface. This division does not apply
to the following:
      (1)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or of the
United States, or a law enforcement officer, authorized to discharge firearms
and acting within the scope of his or her duties.
      (2)   A person who, with the consent of the owner or operator of the
airport operational surface or the authorized agent of either, is lawfully
engaged in any hunting or sporting activity or is otherwise lawfully
discharging a firearm.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of endangering
aircraft, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation creates any risk
of physical harm to any person, or if the aircraft that is the subject of the
violation is occupied, endangering aircraft is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (E)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of endangering
airport operations, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the violation
creates a risk of physical harm to any person or substantial risk of serious
harm to any person, endangering airport operations is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law. In addition to any other penalty or sanction
imposed for the violation, the hunting license or permit of a person who
violates division (C) of this section while hunting shall be suspended or
revoked pursuant to R.C. § 1533.68.
(R.C. § 2909.08(A) - (E))
§ 131.06 CRIMINAL TRESPASS; AGGRAVATED TRESPASS.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another;
      (2)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, the
use of which is lawfully restricted to certain persons, purposes, modes, or
hours, when the offender knows the offender is in violation of any such
restriction or is reckless in that regard;
      (3)   Recklessly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, as
to which notice against unauthorized access or presence is given by actual
communication to the offender, or in a manner prescribed by law, or by posting
in a manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential
intruders, or by fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to restrict
access;
      (4)   Being on the land or premises of another, negligently fail or
refuse to leave upon being notified by signage posted in a conspicuous place or
otherwise being notified to do so by the owner or occupant, or the agent or
servant of either;
      (5)   Knowingly enter or remain on a critical infrastructure facility.
   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the land or
premises involved was owned, controlled, or in custody of a public agency.
   (C)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the offender was
authorized to enter or remain on the land or premises involved, when the
authorization was secured by deception.
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal trespass.
Criminal trespass in violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), or (A)(4) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Criminal trespass in
violation of division (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28, if the person, in committing the
violation of this section, used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-
purpose vehicle, the court shall impose a fine of two times the usual amount
imposed for the violation.
      (3)   If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to two or more violations of this section, R.C. § 2911.21 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and the offender, in committing each violation,
used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle, the court,
in addition to or independent of all other penalties imposed for the violation,
may impound the certificate of registration of that snowmobile or off-highway
motorcycle or the certificate of registration and license plate of that all-
purpose vehicle for not less than 60 days. In such a case, R.C. § 4519.47
applies.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, if the
offender, in committing the violation of this section, used an all-purpose
vehicle, the Clerk of the Court shall pay the fine imposed pursuant to this
section to the State Recreational Vehicle Fund created by R.C. § 4519.11.
   (F)   As used in divisions (A) through (E) of this section:
      ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE, and SNOWMOBILE. Have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 4519.01.
      CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY. Means:
         (a)   One of the following, if completely enclosed by a fence or other
physical barrier that is obviously designed to exclude intruders, or if clearly
marked with signs that are reasonably likely to come to the attention of
potential intruders and that indicate entry is forbidden without site
authorization:
            1.   A petroleum or alumina refinery;
            2.   An electric generating facility, substation, switching
station, electrical control center, or electric transmission and distribution
lines and associated equipment;
            3.   A chemical, polymer, or rubber manufacturing facility;
            4.   A water intake structure, water treatment facility, waste
water facility, drainage facility, water management facility, or any similar
water or sewage treatment system and its water and sewage piping;
            5.   A natural gas company facility or interstate natural gas
pipeline, including a pipeline interconnection, a natural gas compressor
station and associated facilities, city gate or town border station, metering
station, above-ground piping, regulator station, valve site, delivery station,
fabricated assembly, or any other part of a natural gas storage facility
involved in the gathering, storage, transmission, or distribution of gas;
            6.   A telecommunications central switching office or remote
switching facility or an equivalent network facility that serves a similar
purpose;
            7.   Wireline or wireless telecommunications infrastructure,
including telecommunications towers and telephone poles and lines, including
fiber optic lines;
            8.   A port, trucking terminal, or other freight transportation
facility;
            9.   A gas processing plant, including a plant used in the
processing, treatment, or fractionation of natural gas or natural gas liquids;
            10.   A transmission facility used by a federally licensed radio or
television station;
            11.   A steel-making facility that uses an electric arc furnace to
make steel;
            12.   A facility identified and regulated by the United States
Department of Homeland Security’s Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards
Program under 6 C.F.R. part 27;
            13.   A dam that is regulated by the state or federal government;
            14.   A crude oil or refined products storage and distribution
facility, including valve sites, pipeline interconnections, pump station,
metering station, below- or above-ground pipeline, or piping and truck loading
or off-loading facility;
            15.   A video service network and broadband infrastructure,
including associated buildings and facilities, video service headends, towers,
utility poles, and utility lines such as fiber optic lines. As used in this
division, “video service network” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
            16.   Any above-ground portion of an oil, gas, hazardous liquid or
chemical pipeline, tank, or other storage facility;
            17.   Any above-ground portion of a well, well pad, or production
operation;
            18.   A laydown area or construction site for pipe and other
equipment intended for use on an interstate or intrastate natural gas or crude
oil pipeline;
            19.   Any mining operation, including any processing equipment,
batching operation, or support facility for that mining operation.
         (b)   With respect to a video service network or broadband or wireless
telecommunications infrastructure, the above-ground portion of a facility
installed in a public right-of-way on a utility pole or in a conduit;
         (c)   Any railroad property;
         (d)   An electronic asset of any of the following:
            1.   An electric light company that is a public utility under R.C.
§ 4905.02;
            2.   An electric cooperative, as defined in R.C. § 4928.01;
            3.   A municipal electric utility, as defined in R.C. § 4928.01;
            4.   A natural gas company that is a public utility under R.C. §
4905.02;
            5.   A telephone company that is a public utility under R.C. §
4905.02;
            6.   A video service provider, including a cable operator, as those
terms are defined in R.C. § 1332.21.
      ELECTRONIC ASSET. Includes, but is not limited to, the hardware,
software, and data of a programmable electronic device; all communications,
operations, and customer data networks; and the contents of those data
networks.
      LAND or PREMISES. Includes any land, building, structure, or place
belonging to, controlled by, or in custody of another, and any separate
enclosure or room, or portion thereof.
      PRODUCTION OPERATION, WELL, and WELL PAD. Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 1509.01.
(R.C. § 2911.21)
   (G)   Aggravated trespass.
      (1)   (a)   No person shall enter or remain on the land or premises of
another with purpose to commit on that land or those premises a misdemeanor,
the elements of which involve causing physical harm to another person or
causing another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to
that person.
         (b)   No person shall enter or remain on a critical infrastructure
facility with purpose to destroy or tamper with the facility.
      (2)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated trespass.
Aggravated trespass in violation of division (G)(1)(a) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Aggravated trespass in violation of division
(G)(1)(b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (3)   As used in this division (G), CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY has
the same meaning as in R.C. § 2911.21.
(R.C. § 2911.211)
   (H)   Criminal trespass on a place of public amusement.
      (1)   As used in this division (H), PLACE OF PUBLIC AMUSEMENT means a
stadium, theater, or other facility, whether licensed or not, at which a live
performance, sporting event, or other activity takes place for entertainment of
the public and to which access is made available to the public, regardless of
whether admission is charged.
      (2)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly enter or
remain on any restricted portion of a place of public amusement and, as a
result of that conduct, interrupt or cause the delay of the live performance,
sporting event, or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement
after a printed written notice has been given as provided in division (H)(4)(a)
of this section that the general public is restricted from access to that
restricted portion of the place of public amusement. A restricted portion of a
place of public amusement may include but is not limited to a playing field, an
athletic surface, or a stage located at the place of public amusement.
      (3)   An owner or lessee of a place of public amusement, an agent of the
owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a place of public amusement
may use reasonable force to restrain and remove a person from a restricted
portion of the place of public amusement if the person enters or remains on the
restricted portion of the place of public amusement and, as a result of that
conduct, interrupts or causes the delay of the live performance, sporting
event, or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement. This
division does not provide immunity from criminal liability for any use of force
beyond reasonable force by an owner or lessee of a place of public amusement,
an agent of either the owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a
place of public amusement.
      (4)   (a)   Notice has been given that the general public is restricted
from access to a portion of a place of public amusement if a printed written
notice of the restricted access has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at
the entrance to that portion of the place of public amusement. If a printed
written notice is posted or exhibited as described in this division regarding a
portion of a place of public amusement, in addition to that posting or
exhibition, notice that the general public is restricted from access to that
portion of the place of public amusement also may be given, but is not required
to be given, by either of the following means:
            1.   By notifying the person personally, either orally or in
writing, that access to that portion of the place of public amusement is
restricted;
            2.   By broadcasting over the public address system of the place of
public amusement an oral warning that access to that portion of the place of
public amusement is restricted.
         (b)   If notice that the general public is restricted from access to a
portion of a place of public amusement is provided by the posting or exhibition
of a printed written notice as described in division (H)(4)(a) of this section,
the municipality, in a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (H)(2)
of this section, is not required to prove that the defendant received actual
notice that the general public is restricted from access to a portion of a
place of public amusement.
      (5)   (a)   Whoever violates division (H)(2) of this section is guilty of
criminal trespass on a place of public amusement, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
         (b)   In addition to any jail term, fine, or other sentence, penalty,
or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to division (H)(5)(a) of this
section, a court may require an offender who violates this section to perform
not less than 30 and not more than 120 hours of supervised community service
work.
(R.C. § 2911.23)
§ 131.07 TAMPERING WITH COIN MACHINES.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to commit theft or to defraud, shall knowingly
enter, force an entrance into, tamper with, or insert any part of an instrument
into any coin machine.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with coin
machines, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of this section or of any theft offense as
defined in R.C. § 2913.01, tampering with coin machines is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2911.32)
§ 131.08 THEFT.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to deprive the owner of property or services,
shall knowingly obtain or exert control over either the property or services in
any of the following ways:
      (1)   Without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give
consent;
      (2)   Beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of the owner or
person authorized to give consent;
      (3)   By deception;
      (4)   By threat;
      (5)   By intimidation.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of theft. Except as otherwise
provided in this division, a violation of this section is misdemeanor theft, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If any of the following criteria are met, then
a violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law:
      (1)   If the value of the property or services is $1,000 or more;
      (2)   If the property stolen is any of the property listed in R.C. §
2913.71;
      (3)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person, disabled adult,
active duty service member, or spouse of an active duty service member;
      (4)   If the property stolen is a firearm or dangerous ordnance;
      (5)   If the property stolen is a motor vehicle;
      (6)   If the property stolen is any dangerous drug, or if the offender
previously has been convicted of a felony drug abuse offense;
      (7)   If the property stolen is a police dog or horse or an assistance
dog and the offender knows or should know that the property stolen is a police
dog or horse or an assistance dog;
      (8)   If the property stolen is anhydrous ammonia; or
      (9)    If the property stolen is a special purchase article as defined in
R.C. § 4737.04 or is a bulk merchandise container as defined in R.C. §
4737.012.
   (C)   In addition to the penalties described in division (B) of this
section, if the offender committed the violation by causing a motor vehicle to
leave the premises of an establishment at which gasoline is offered for retail
sale without the offender making full payment for gasoline that was dispensed
into the fuel tank of the motor vehicle or into another container, the court
may do one of the following:
      (1)   Unless division (C)(2) of this section applies, suspend for not
more than six months the offenders driver’s license, probationary driver’s
license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or
nonresident operating privilege;
      (2)   If the offender’s driver’s license, probationary driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or nonresident
operating privilege has previously been suspended pursuant to division (C)(1)
of this section, or any other substantially equivalent state or local law,
impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s license, permit, or privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7), provided that the suspension
shall be at least six months;
      (3)   The court, in lieu of suspending the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, probationary driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or nonresident operating privilege pursuant to division (C)
(1) or (C)(2) of this section, instead may require the offender to perform
community service for a number of hours determined by the court.
   (D)   In addition to the penalties described in division (B) of this
section, if the offender committed the violation by stealing rented property or
rental services, the court may order that the offender make restitution
pursuant to R.C. § 2929.18 or R.C. § 2929.28. Restitution may include, but is
not limited to, the cost of repairing or replacing the stolen property, or the
cost of repairing the stolen property and any loss of revenue resulting from
deprivation of the property due to theft of rental services that is less than
or equal to the actual value of the property at the time it was rented.
Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property or rental services shall
be determined pursuant to the provisions of R.C. § 2913.72.
   (E)   The sentencing court that suspends an offender’s license, permit, or
nonresident operating privilege under division (C) of this section may grant
the offender limited driving privileges during the period of the suspension in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 4510.
(R.C. § 2913.02)
Statutory reference:
   Felony theft provisions, see R.C. § 2913.02(B)
§ 131.09 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF A VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle,
motorcycle, motorboat, or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of
the owner or person authorized to give consent.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle,
motorboat, or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of the owner or
person authorized to give consent, and either remove it from this state, or
keep possession of it for more than 48 hours.
   (C)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section:
      (1)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor, though mistaken,
reasonably believed that he or she was authorized to use or operate the
property.
      (2)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor reasonably believed
that the owner or person empowered to give consent would authorize the actor to
use or operate the property.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unauthorized use of a
vehicle.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (D)(1), a violation
of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled adult and if the victim
incurs a loss as a result of the violation, a violation of division (A) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (B) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.03)
Statutory reference:
   Theft offense involving a motor vehicle, offender to pay towing and storage
fees, see R.C. § 2913.82
§ 131.10 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PROPERTY, INCLUDING TELECOMMUNICATION PROPERTY AND
COMPUTERS; POSSESSION OF MUNICIPAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly use or operate the property of another
without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent.
   (B)   No person, in any manner and by any means, including but not limited
to computer hacking, shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to,
or cause access to be gained to any computer, computer system, computer
network, cable service, cable system, telecommunications device,
telecommunications service, or information service without the consent of, or
beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of, the owner of the
computer, computer system, computer network, cable service, cable system,
telecommunications device, telecommunications service, or information service
or other person authorized to give consent.
   (C)   Except as permitted under R.C. § 5503.101, no person shall knowingly
gain access to, attempt to gain access to, cause access to be granted to, or
disseminate information gained from access to the law enforcement automated
database system created pursuant to R.C. § 5503.10 without the consent of, or
beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of, the chair of the Law
Enforcement Automated Data System Steering Committee.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to,
cause access to be granted to, or disseminate information gained from access to
the Ohio law enforcement gateway established and operated pursuant to R.C. §
109.57(C)(1) without the consent of, or beyond the scope of the express or
implied consent of, the Superintendent of the Bureau of Criminal Identification
and Investigation.
   (E)   The affirmative defenses contained in R.C. § 2913.03(C) are
affirmative defenses to a charge under this section.
   (F)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of property. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
unauthorized use of property is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (1)   If unauthorized use of property is committed for the purpose of
devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to obtain property or services,
unauthorized use of property is whichever of the following is applicable:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided below, unauthorized use of property
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   If the value of the property or services or the loss to the
victim is $1,000 or more, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (2)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled
adult, unauthorized use of property is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (G)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of computer, cable, or telecommunication property, a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (H)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of the law enforcement automated database system, a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (I)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of the Ohio law enforcement gateway, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
   (J)   As used in this section:
      CABLE OPERATOR. Means any person or group of persons that does either of
the following:
         (a)   Provides cable service over a cable system and directly through
one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that cable system;
         (b)   Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of a cable system.
      CABLE SERVICE. Means any of the following:
         (a)   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or
of information that a cable operator makes available to all subscribers
generally;
         (b)   Subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the
selection or use of video programming or of information that a cable operator
makes available to all subscribers generally, both as described in division (a)
of this definition;
         (c)   Any cable television service.
      CABLE SYSTEM. Means any facility, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes video
programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community.
The term does not include any of the following:
         (a)   Any facility that serves only to retransmit the television
signals of one or more television broadcast stations;
         (b)   Any facility that serves subscribers without using any public
right-of-way;
         (c)   Any facility of a common carrier that, under 47 U.S.C. § 522(7)
(c), is excluded from the term “cable system” as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(7);
         (d)   Any open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. § 573;
         (e)   Any facility of any electric utility used solely for operating
its electric utility system.
(R.C. § 2913.04)
   (K)   Possession of municipal property.
      (1)   No person shall, without being authorized, have in his or her
control or possession any equipment, tools, implements or other property
belonging to the municipality.
(R.C. § 5589.12)
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (K) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 5589.99(B))
Statutory reference:
   Telecommunications: fraud and unlawful use of a device, felony offenses, see
R.C. §§ 2913.05 and 2913.06
§ 131.11 PASSING BAD CHECKS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      CHECK. Includes any form of debit from a demand deposit account,
including but not limited to any of the following:
         (a)   A check, bill of exchange, draft, order of withdrawal, or
similar negotiable or non-negotiable instrument;
         (b)   An electronic check, electronic transaction, debit card
transaction, check card transaction, substitute check, web check, or any form
of automated clearing house transaction.
      ISSUE A CHECK. Means causing any form of debit from a demand deposit
account.
   (B)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall issue or transfer or cause
to be issued or transferred a check or other negotiable instrument, knowing
that it will be dishonored or knowing that a person has ordered or will order
stop payment on the check or other negotiable instrument.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers a check
or other negotiable instrument is presumed to know that it will be dishonored
if either of the following occurs:
      (1)   The drawer has no account with the drawee at the time of issue or
the stated date, whichever is later.
      (2)   The check or other negotiable instrument was properly refused
payment for insufficient funds upon presentment within 30 days after issue or
the stated date, whichever is later, and the liability of the drawer, indorser,
or any party who may be liable thereon is not discharged by payment or
satisfaction within ten days after receiving notice of dishonor.
   (D)   In determining the value of the payment for purposes of division (E)
of this section, the court may aggregate all checks and other negotiable
instruments that the offender issued or transferred or caused to be issued or
transferred in violation of division (B) of this section within a period of 180
consecutive days.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of passing bad checks. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, passing bad checks is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the check or checks or other negotiable instrument or
instruments are issued or transferred to a single vendor or single other person
for the payment of $1,000 or more, or if the check or checks or other
negotiable instrument or instruments are issued or transferred to multiple
vendors or persons for the payment of $1,500 or more, passing bad checks is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.11)
§ 131.12 MISUSE OF CREDIT CARDS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Practice deception for the purpose of procuring the issuance of a
credit card, when a credit card is issued in actual reliance thereon;
      (2)   Knowingly buy or sell a credit card from or to a person other than
the issuer;
      (3)   As an officer, employee, or appointee of a political subdivision or
as a public servant as defined under R.C. § 2921.01, knowingly misuse a credit
card account held by a political subdivision.
   (B)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Obtain control over a credit card as security for a debt;
      (2)   Obtain property or services by the use of a credit card, in one or
more transactions, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the card
has expired or been revoked, or was obtained, is retained, or is being used in
violation of law;
      (3)   Furnish property or services upon presentation of a credit card,
knowing that the card is being used in violation of law;
      (4)   Represent or cause to be represented to the issuer of a credit card
that property or services have been furnished, knowing that the representation
is false.
   (C)   No person, with purpose to violate this section, shall receive,
possess, control, or dispose of a credit card.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misuse of credit cards.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) of this section, a
violation of division (A), (B)(1), or (C) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division or division (D)(3) of
this section, a violation of division (B)(2), (B)(3), or (B)(4) of this section
is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the cumulative retail value of the
property and services involved in one or more violations of division (B)(2),
(B)(3), or (B)(4) of this section which violations involve one or more credit
card accounts and occur within a period of 90 consecutive days commencing on
the date of the first violation, is $1,000 or more, misuse of credit cards is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled
adult, and if the offense involves a violation of division (B)(1) or (B)(2) of
this section, misuse of credit cards is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.21)
§ 131.13 MAKING OR USING SLUGS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Insert or deposit a slug in a coin machine, with purpose to
defraud;
      (2)   Make, possess, or dispose of a slug, with purpose of enabling
another to defraud by inserting or depositing it in a coin machine.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or using slugs, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 2913.33)
§ 131.14 PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF PURPOSE TO DEFRAUD.
   In a prosecution of a person for a theft offense that alleges that the
person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she was facilitating a
fraud, hired or rented an aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, kept
or operated any of the same that has been hired or rented, or engaged
accommodations at a hotel, motel, inn, campground, or other hostelry, it is
prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud if the person did any of the
following:
   (A)   Used deception to induce the rental agency to furnish the person with
the aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat, sailboat, camper, trailer,
horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, or used deception to induce the
hostelry to furnish the person with accommodations;
   (B)   Hired or rented any aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, or
engaged accommodations, knowing that he or she is without sufficient means to
pay the hire or rental;
   (C)   Absconded without paying the hire or rental;
   (D)   Knowingly failed to pay the hire or rental as required by the contract
of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure;
   (E)   Knowingly failed to return hired or rented property as required by the
contract of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure.
(R.C. § 2913.41)
§ 131.15 TAMPERING WITH RECORDS.
   (A)   No person, knowing that he or she has no privilege to do so, and with
purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is facilitating a fraud, shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Falsify, destroy, remove, conceal, alter, deface, or mutilate any
writing, computer software, data, or record;
      (2)   Utter any writing or record, knowing it to have been tampered with
as provided in division (A)(1) of this section.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with records.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) of this section, if the
offense does not involve data or computer software, tampering with records is
whichever of the following is applicable:
         (a)   If division (B)(1)(b) of this section does not apply, it is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   If the writing or record is a will unrevoked at the time of the
offense, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) of this section, if the
offense involves a violation of division (A) of this section involving data or
computer software, tampering with records is whichever of the following is
applicable:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2)(b) of this
section, it is a misdemeanor of the first degree;
         (b)   If the value of the data or computer software involved in the
offense or the loss to the victim is $1,000 or more or if the offense is
committed for the purpose of devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to
obtain property or services and the value of the property or services or the
loss to the victim is $7,500 or more, it is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the writing, data, computer software, or record is kept by or
belongs to a local, state, or federal governmental entity, it is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.42)
§ 131.16 SECURING WRITINGS BY DECEPTION.
   (A)   No person, by deception, shall cause another to execute any writing
that disposes of or encumbers property, or by which a pecuniary obligation is
incurred.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of securing writings by
deception. Except as otherwise provided in this division, securing writings by
deception is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property or
the obligation involved is $1,000 or more, securing writings by deception is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate to state law. If the victim of the
offense is an elderly person, disabled adult, active duty service member, or
spouse of an active duty service member, securing writings by deception is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.43)
§ 131.17 DEFRAUDING CREDITORS.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud one or more of his or her
creditors, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Remove, conceal, destroy, encumber, convey, or otherwise deal with
any of his or her property;
      (2)   Misrepresent or refuse to disclose to a fiduciary appointed to
administer or manage his or her affairs or estate, the existence, amount, or
location of any of his or her property, or any other information regarding the
property which he or she is legally required to furnish to the fiduciary.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of defrauding creditors.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, defrauding creditors is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property involved is
$1,000 or more, defrauding creditors is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.45)
§ 131.18 RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall receive, retain, or dispose of property of another
knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the property has been
obtained through commission of a theft offense.
   (B)   It is not a defense to a charge of receiving stolen property in
violation of this section that the property was obtained by means other than
through the commission of a theft offense if the property was explicitly
represented to the accused person as being obtained through the commission of a
theft offense.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of receiving stolen property.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, receiving stolen property is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If any of the following criteria are met, then
a violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law:
      (1)   The value of the property involved is $1,000 or more;
      (2)   The property involved is any of the property listed in R.C. §
2913.71;
      (3)   The property involved is a firearm or dangerous ordnance, as
defined in R.C. § 2923.11;
      (4)   The property involved is a motor vehicle as defined in R.C. §
4501.01;
      (5)   The property involved is any dangerous drug, as defined in R.C. §
4729.01; or
      (6)   The property involved in violation of this section is a special
purchase article as defined in R.C. § 4737.04 or a bulk merchandise container
as defined in R.C. § 4737.012.
(R.C. § 2913.51)
§ 131.19 VALUE OF STOLEN PROPERTY.
   (A)   If more than one item of property or services is involved in a theft
offense or in a violation of R.C. § 1716.14(A) involving a victim who is an
elderly person or disabled adult, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the value of the property or services involved for the purpose of
determining the value as required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value
of all property or services involved in the offense.
   (B)   (1)   When a series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02, or a series of
violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or
complicity in violations of R.C. § 1716.14(A), R.C. § 2913.02, 2913.03, or
2913.04, R.C. § 2913.21(B)(1) or (B)(2), or R.C. § 2913.31 or 2913.43 involving
a victim who is an elderly person or disabled adult, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, is committed by the
offender in the offender’s same employment, capacity, or relationship to
another, all of those offenses shall be tried as a single offense. When a
series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02, or a series of violations of, attempts
to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in violations
of R.C. § 2913.02 or 2913.43 involving a victim who is an active duty service
member or spouse of an active duty service member, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, is committed by the
offender in the offender’s same employment, capacity, or relationship to
another, all of those offenses shall be tried as a single offense. The value of
the property or services involved in the series of offenses for the purpose of
determining the value as required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value
of all property and services involved in all offenses in the series.
      (2)   If an offender commits a series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02
that involves a common course of conduct to defraud multiple victims, all of
the offenses may be tried as a single offense. If an offender is being tried
for the commission of a series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation
of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in violations of R.C. § 1716.14(A),
R.C. § 2913.02, 2913.03, or 2913.04, R.C. § 2913.21(B)(1) or (B)(2), or R.C. §
2913.31 or 2913.43, whether committed against one victim or more than one
victim, involving a victim who is an elderly person or disabled adult, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, pursuant
to a scheme or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried as a
single offense. If an offender is being tried for the commission of a series of
violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or
complicity in violations of R.C. § 2913.02 or 2913.43, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, whether committed
against one victim or more than one victim, involving a victim who is an active
duty service member or spouse of an active duty service member pursuant to a
scheme or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried as a single
offense. If the offenses are tried as a single offense, the value of the
property or services involved for the purpose of determining the value as
required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property and
services involved in all of the offenses in the course of conduct.
      (3)   When a series of two or more offenses under R.C. § 2913.40,
2913.48, or 2921.41 is committed by the offender in the offender’s same
employment, capacity, or relationship to another, all of those offenses may be
tried as a single offense. If the offenses are tried as a single offense, the
value of the property or services involved for the purpose of determining the
value as required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property
and services involved in all of the offenses in the series of two or more
offenses.
      (4)   In prosecuting a single offense under division (B)(1), (B)(2) or
(B)(3) of this section, it is not necessary to separately allege and prove each
offense in the series. Rather, it is sufficient to allege and prove that the
offender, within a given span of time, committed one or more theft offenses or
violations of R.C. § 2913.40, 2913.48, or 2921.41 in the offender’s same
employment, capacity, or relationship to another as described in division (B)
(1) or (B)(3) of this section, or committed one or more theft offenses that
involve a common course of conduct to defraud multiple victims or a scheme or
course of conduct as described in division (B)(2) of this section. While it is
not necessary to separately allege and prove each offense in the series in
order to prosecute a single offense under division (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) of
this section, it remains necessary in prosecuting them as a single offense to
prove the aggregate value of the property or services in order to meet the
requisite statutory offense level sought by the prosecution.
   (C)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of
property or services involved in a theft offense:
      (1)   The value of an heirloom, memento, collector’s item, antique,
museum piece, manuscript, document, record, or other thing that has intrinsic
worth to its owner and that either is irreplaceable or is replaceable only on
the expenditure of substantial time, effort, or money, is the amount which
would compensate the owner for its loss.
      (2)   The value of personal effects and household goods, and of
materials, supplies, equipment, and fixtures used in the profession, business,
trade, occupation, or avocation of its owner, which property is not covered
under division (C)(1) of this section, and which retains substantial utility
for its purpose regardless of its age or condition, is the cost of replacing
such property with new property of like kind and quality.
      (3)   The value of any real or personal property that is not covered
under division (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this section, and the value of services, is
the fair market value of the property or services. As used in this section,
FAIR MARKET VALUE is the money consideration which a buyer would give and a
seller would accept for property or services, assuming that the buyer is
willing to buy and the seller is willing to sell, that both are fully informed
as to all facts material to the transaction, and that neither is under any
compulsion to act.
   (D)   Without limitation on the evidence which may be used to establish the
value of property or services involved in a theft offense:
      (1)   When the property involved is personal property held for sale at
wholesale or retail, the price at which the property was held for sale is prima
facie evidence of its value.
      (2)   When the property involved is a security or commodity traded on an
exchange, the closing price or, if there is no closing price, the asked price,
given in the latest marked quotation prior to the offense, is prima facie
evidence of the value of the security or commodity.
      (3)   When the property involved is livestock, poultry, or raw
agricultural products for which a local market price is available, the latest
local market price prior to the offense is prima facie evidence of the value of
the livestock, poultry, or products.
      (4)   When the property involved is a negotiable instrument, the face
value is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (5)   When the property involved is a warehouse receipt, bill of lading,
pawn ticket, claim check, or other instrument entitling the holder or bearer to
receive property, the face value or, if there is no face value, the value of
the property covered by the instrument less any payment necessary to receive
the property, is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (6)   When the property involved is a ticket of admission, ticket for
transportation, coupon, token, or other instrument entitling the holder or
bearer to receive property or services, the face value or, if there is no face
value, the value of the property or services which may be received by the
instrument is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (7)   When the services involved are gas, electricity, water, telephone,
transportation, shipping, or other services for which the rate is established
by law, the duly established rate is prima facie evidence of the value of the
services.
      (8)   When the services involved are services for which the rate is not
established by law, and the offender has been notified prior to the offense of
the rate for the services, either in writing, or orally, or by posting in a
manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential offenders,
the rate contained in the notice is prima facie evidence of the value of the
services.
(R.C. § 2913.61(B) - (E))
§ 131.20 DEGREE OF OFFENSE WHEN CERTAIN PROPERTY INVOLVED.
   Regardless of the value of the property involved, and regardless of whether
the offender previously has been convicted of a theft offense, a violation of §
131.08 or §
131.18 is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the property
involved is any of the following:
   (A)   A credit card;
   (B)   A printed form for a check or other negotiable instrument, that on its
face identifies the drawer or maker for whose use it is designed or identifies
the account on which it is to be drawn, and that has not been executed by the
drawer or maker or on which the amount is blank;
   (C)   A motor vehicle identification license plate as prescribed by R.C. §
4503.22, a temporary motor vehicle license registration as prescribed by R.C. §
4503.182, or any comparable temporary motor vehicle license registration as
prescribed by the applicable law of another state or the United States;
   (D)   A blank form for a certificate of title or a manufacturer’s or
importer’s certificate to a motor vehicle, as prescribed by R.C. § 4505.07;
   (E)   A blank form for any license listed in R.C. § 4507.01.
(R.C. § 2913.71)
§ 131.21 INJURING VINES, BUSHES, TREES, OR CROPS.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly cut down,
destroy, girdle, or otherwise injure a vine, bush, shrub, sapling, tree, or
crop standing or growing on the land of another or upon public land.
   (B)   In addition to the penalty provided in division (C) of this section,
whoever violates this section is liable in treble damages for the injury
caused.
(R.C. § 901.51)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 901.99(A))
§ 131.22 DETENTION AND ARREST OF SHOPLIFTERS AND THOSE COMMITTING MOTION
PICTURE PIRACY; PROTECTION OF INSTITUTIONAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      ARCHIVAL INSTITUTION. Means any public or private building, structure, or
shelter in which are stored historical documents, devices, records,
manuscripts, or items of public interest, which historical materials are stored
to preserve the materials or the information in the materials, to disseminate
the information contained in the materials, or to make the materials available
for public inspection or for inspection by certain persons who have a
particular interest in, use for, or knowledge concerning the materials.
      AUDIOVISUAL RECORDING FUNCTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2913.07.
      FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.07.
      MUSEUM. Means any public or private nonprofit institution that is
permanently organized for primarily educational or aesthetic purposes, owns or
borrows objects or items of public interest, and cares for and exhibits to the
public the objects or items.
      PRETRIAL DIVERSION PROGRAM. Means a rehabilitative, educational program
designed to reduce recidivism and promote personal responsibility that is at
least four hours in length and that has been approved by any court in this
state.
   (B)   A merchant, or an employee or agent of a merchant, who has probable
cause to believe that things offered for sale by a mercantile establishment
have been unlawfully taken by a person, may, for the purposes set forth in
division (D) below, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable
length of time within the mercantile establishment or its immediate vicinity.
   (C)   Any officer, employee, or agent of a library, museum, or archival
institution may, for the purposes set forth in division (D) below or for the
purpose of conducting a reasonable investigation of a belief that the person
has acted in a manner described in divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) below, detain a
person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time within, or in the
immediate vicinity of, the library, museum, or archival institution, if the
officer, employee, or agent has probable cause to believe that the person has:
      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly moved, defaced, damaged,
destroyed, or otherwise improperly tampered with property owned by or in the
custody of the library, museum, or archival institution; or
      (2)   With purpose to deprive the library, museum, or archival
institution of property owned by it or in its custody, knowingly obtained or
exerted control over the property without the consent of the owner or person
authorized to give consent, beyond the scope of the express or implied consent
of the owner or person authorized to give consent, by deception, or by threat.
   (D)   An officer, agent, or employee of a library, museum, or archival
institution pursuant to division (C) above or a merchant or an employee or
agent of a merchant pursuant to division (B) above may detain another person
for any of the following purposes:
      (1)   To recover the property that is the subject of the unlawful taking,
criminal mischief, or theft;
      (2)   To cause an arrest to be made by a peace officer;
      (3)   To obtain a warrant of arrest;
      (4)   To offer the person, if the person is suspected of the unlawful
taking, criminal mischief, or theft and notwithstanding any other provision of
this code or the Ohio Revised Code, an opportunity to complete a pretrial
diversion program and to inform the person of the other legal remedies
available to the library, museum, archival institution, or merchant.
   (E)   The owner or lessee of a facility in which a motion picture is being
shown, or the owner’s or lessee’s employee or agent, who has probable cause to
believe that a person is or has been operating an audiovisual recording
function of a device in violation of R.C. § 2917.07 may, for the purpose of
causing an arrest to be made by a peace officer or of obtaining an arrest
warrant, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of
time within the facility or its immediate vicinity.
   (F)   The officer, agent, or employee of the library, museum, or archival
institution, the merchant or an employee or agent of a merchant, or the owner,
lessee, employee, or agent of the facility acting under divisions (B), (C) or
(E) above shall not search the person detained, search or seize any property
belonging to the person detained without the person’s consent, or use undue
restraint upon the person detained.
   (G)   Any peace officer may arrest without a warrant any person that the
officer has probable cause to believe has committed any act described in
divisions (C)(1) or (C)(2) above, that the officer has probable cause to
believe has committed an unlawful taking in a mercantile establishment, or that
the officer has reasonable cause to believe has committed an act prohibited by
R.C. § 2913.07. An arrest under this division shall be made within a reasonable
time after the commission of the act or unlawful taking.
(R.C. § 2935.041)
Statutory reference:
   Arrest without a warrant generally, see R.C. § 2935.03
   Probable cause, see R.C. § 2933.22
§ 131.23 INSURANCE FRAUD; WORKERS’ COMPENSATION FRAUD; MEDICAID FRAUD.
   (A)   Insurance fraud.
      (1)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following:
         (a)   Present to, or cause to be presented to, an insurer any written
or oral statement that is part of, or in support of, an application for
insurance, a claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a claim for any other
benefit pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the
statement, is false or deceptive;
         (b)   Assist, aid, abet, solicit, procure, or conspire with another to
prepare or make any written or oral statement that is intended to be presented
to an insurer as part of, or in support of, an application for insurance, a
claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a claim for any other benefit
pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the statement,
is false or deceptive.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (A) is guilty of insurance fraud.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, insurance fraud is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the amount of the claim that is false or deceptive is
$1,000 or more, insurance fraud is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   This division (A) shall not be construed to abrogate, waive, or
modify R.C. § 2317.02(A).
      (4)   As used in this division (A):
         DATA. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01 and additionally
includes any other representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts,
or instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner.
         DECEPTIVE. Means that a statement, in whole or in part, would cause
another to be deceived because it contains a misleading representation,
withholds information, prevents the acquisition of information, or by any other
conduct, act, or omission creates, confirms, or perpetuates a false impression,
including but not limited to a false impression as to law, value, state of
mind, or other objective or subjective fact.
         INSURER. Means any person that is authorized to engage in the business
of insurance in this state under R.C. Title 39, the Ohio Fair Plan Underwriting
Association created under R.C. § 3929.43, any health insuring corporation, and
any legal entity that is self-insured and provides benefits to its employees or
members.
         POLICY. Means a policy, certificate, contract, or plan that is issued
by an insurer.
         STATEMENT. Includes but is not limited to any notice, letter, or
memorandum; proof of loss; bill of lading; receipt for payment; invoice,
account, or other financial statement; estimate of property damage; bill for
services; diagnosis or prognosis; prescription; hospital, medical, or dental
chart or other record; x-ray, photograph, videotape, or movie film; test
result; other evidence of loss, injury, or expense; computer-generated
document; and data in any form.
(R.C. § 2913.47)
   (B)   Workers’ compensation fraud.
      (1)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud shall do any of the following:
         (a)   Receive workers’ compensation benefits to which the person is
not entitled;
         (b)   Make or present or cause to be made or presented a false or
misleading statement with the purpose to secure payment for goods or services
rendered under R.C. Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127, or 4131 or to secure workers’
compensation benefits;
         (c)   Alter, falsify, destroy, conceal, or remove any record or
document that is necessary to fully establish the validity of any claim filed
with, or necessary to establish the nature and validity of all goods and
services for which reimbursement or payment was received or is requested from
the Bureau of Workers’ Compensation, or a self-insuring employer under R.C.
Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127, or 4131;
         (d)   Enter into an agreement or conspiracy to defraud the Bureau of
Workers’ Compensation or a self-insuring employer by making or presenting or
causing to be made or presented a false claim for workers’ compensation
benefits;
         (e)   Make or present or cause to be made or presented a false
statement concerning manual codes, classification or employees, payroll, paid
compensation, or number of personnel, when information of that nature is
necessary to determine the actual workers’ compensation premium or assessment
owed to the Bureau by an employer;
         (f)   Alter, forge, or create a workers’ compensation certificate or
falsely show current or correct workers’ compensation coverage;
         (g)   Fail to secure or maintain workers’ compensation coverage as
required by R.C. Chapter 4123 with the intent to defraud the Bureau of Workers’
Compensation.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of workers’
compensation fraud. Except as otherwise provided in this division, workers’
compensation fraud is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of
premiums and assessments unpaid pursuant to actions described in divisions (B)
(1)(e), (B)(1)(f), or (B)(1)(g) of this section, or goods, services, property,
or money stolen is $1,000 or more, workers’ compensation fraud is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Upon application of the governmental body that conducted the
investigation and prosecution of a violation of this division (B), the court
shall order the person who is convicted of the violation to pay the
governmental body its costs of investigating and prosecuting the case. These
costs are in addition to any other costs or penalty provided under federal,
state or local law.
      (4)   The remedies and penalties provided in this division (B) are not
exclusive remedies and penalties and do not preclude the use of any other
criminal or civil remedy or penalty for any act that is in violation of this
division (B).
      (5)   As used in this division (B):
         CLAIM. Means any attempt to cause the Bureau of Workers’ Compensation,
an independent third party with whom the administrator or an employer contracts
under R.C. § 4121.44, or a self-insuring employer to make payment or
reimbursement for workers’ compensation benefits.
         EMPLOYEE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4123.01.
         EMPLOYER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4123.01.
         EMPLOYMENT. Means participating in any trade, occupation, business,
service, or profession for substantial gainful remuneration.
         FALSE. Means wholly or partially untrue or deceptive.
         GOODS. Includes but is not limited to medical supplies, appliances,
rehabilitative equipment, and any other apparatus or furnishing provided or
used in the care, treatment, or rehabilitation of a claimant for workers’
compensation benefits.
         RECORDS. Means any medical, professional, financial, or business
record relating to the treatment or care of any person, to goods or services
provided to any person, or to rates paid for goods or services provided to any
person, or any record that the administrator of workers’ compensation requires
pursuant to rule.
         REMUNERATION. Includes but is not limited to wages, commissions,
rebates, and any other reward or consideration.
         SELF-INSURING EMPLOYER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4123.01.
         SERVICES. Includes but is not limited to any service provided by any
health care provider to a claimant for workers’ compensation benefits and any
and all services provided by the Bureau as part of workers’ compensation
insurance coverage.
         STATEMENT. Includes but is not limited to any oral, written,
electronic, electronic impulse, or magnetic communication notice, letter,
memorandum, receipt for payment, invoice, account, financial statement, or bill
for services; a diagnosis, prognosis, prescription, hospital, medical, or
dental chart or other record; and a computer generated document.
         WORKERS’ COMPENSATION BENEFITS. Means any compensation or benefits
payable under R.C. Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127, or 4131.
(R.C. § 2913.48)
   (C)   Medicaid fraud.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a false or
misleading statement or representation for use in obtaining reimbursement from
the Medicaid program.
      (2)   No person, with purpose to commit fraud or knowing that the person
is facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following:
         (a)   Contrary to the terms of the person’s provider agreement,
charge, solicit, accept or receive for goods or services that the person
provides under the Medicaid program any property, money or other consideration
in addition to the amount of reimbursement under the Medicaid program and the
person’s provider agreement for the goods or services and any cost-sharing
expenses authorized by R.C. § 5162.20 or rules adopted by the Medicaid Director
regarding the Medicaid program.
         (b)   Solicit, offer or receive any remuneration, other than any cost-
sharing expenses authorized by R.C. § 5162.20 or rules adopted by the Medicaid
Director regarding the Medicaid program, in cash or in kind, including but not
limited to a kickback or rebate, in connection with the furnishing of goods or
services for which whole or partial reimbursement is or may be made under the
Medicaid program.
      (3)   No person, having submitted a claim for or provided goods or
services under the Medicaid program, shall do either of the following for a
period of at least six years after a reimbursement pursuant to that claim, or a
reimbursement for those goods or services, is received under the Medicaid
program:
         (a)   Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any records
that are necessary to fully disclose the nature of all goods or services for
which the claim was submitted, or for which reimbursement was received, by the
person; or
         (b)   Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any records
that are necessary to disclose fully all income and expenditures upon which
rates of reimbursements were based for the person.
      (4)   Whoever violates this division (C) is guilty of Medicaid fraud.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, Medicaid fraud is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the value of the property, services or funds obtained
in violation of this section is $1,000 or more, Medicaid fraud is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
      (5)   Upon application of the governmental agency, office or other entity
that conducted the investigation and prosecution in a case under this section,
the court shall order any person who is convicted of a violation of this
section for receiving any reimbursement for furnishing goods or services under
the Medicaid program to which the person is not entitled to pay to the
applicant its cost of investigating and prosecuting the case. The costs of
investigation and prosecution that a defendant is ordered to pay pursuant to
this division shall be in addition to any other penalties for the receipt of
that reimbursement that are provided in this section, R.C. § 2913.40 or
5164.35, or any other provision of law.
      (6)   The provisions of this section are not intended to be exclusive
remedies and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or civil remedy for
any act that is in violation of this section.
      (7)   As used in this division (C):
         PROVIDER. Means any person who has signed a provider agreement with
the Department of Medicaid to provide goods or services pursuant to the
Medicaid program or any person who has signed an agreement with a party to such
a provider agreement under which the person agrees to provide goods or services
that are reimbursable under the Medicaid program.
         PROVIDER AGREEMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
         RECIPIENT. Means any individual who receives goods or services from a
provider under the Medicaid program.
         RECORDS. Means any medical, professional, financial or business
records relating to the treatment or care of any recipient, to goods or
services provided to any recipient, or to rates paid for goods or services
provided to any recipient, and any records that are required by the rules of
the Medicaid Director to be kept for the Medicaid program.
         STATEMENT or REPRESENTATION. Means any oral, written, electronic,
electronic impulse or magnetic communication that is used to identify an item
of goods or a service for which reimbursement may be made under the Medicaid
program or that states income and expense and is or may be used to determine a
rate of reimbursement under the Medicaid program.
(R.C. § 2913.40)
   (D)   Medicaid eligibility fraud.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following in an application
for enrollment in the Medicaid program or in a document that requires a
disclosure of assets for the purpose of determining eligibility for the
Medicaid program:
         (a)   Make or cause to be made a false or misleading statement;
         (b)   Conceal an interest in property;
         (c)   1.   Except as provided in division (D)(1)(c)2. of this section,
fail to disclose a transfer of property that occurred during the period
beginning 36 months before submission of the application or document and ending
on the date the application or document was submitted;
            2.   Fail to disclose a transfer of property that occurred during
the period beginning 60 months before submission of the application or document
and ending on the date the application or document was submitted and that was
made to an irrevocable trust a portion of which is not distributable to the
applicant for or recipient of Medicaid or to a revocable trust.
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates this division (D) is guilty of Medicaid
eligibility fraud. Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation
of this division (D) is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the
Medicaid services paid as a result of the violation is $1,000 or more, a
violation of this division (D) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
         (b)   In addition to imposing a sentence under division (D)(2)(a) of
this section, the court shall order that a person who is guilty of Medicaid
eligibility fraud make restitution in the full amount of any Medicaid services
paid on behalf of an applicant for or recipient of Medicaid for which the
applicant or recipient was not eligible, plus interest at the rate applicable
to judgments on unreimbursed amounts from the date on which the Medicaid
services were paid to the date on which restitution is made.
         (c)   The remedies and penalties provided in this division (D) are not
exclusive and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or civil remedy for
any act that is in violation of this division (D).
      (3)   This division (D) does not apply to a person who fully disclosed in
an application for Medicaid or in a document that requires a disclosure of
assets for the purpose of determining eligibility for Medicaid all of the
interests in property of the applicant for or recipient of Medicaid, all
transfers of property by the applicant for or recipient of Medicaid, and the
circumstances of all those transfers.
      (4)   Any amounts of Medicaid services recovered as restitution under
this division (D) and any interest on those amounts shall be credited to the
General Revenue Fund, and any applicable federal share shall be returned to the
appropriate agency or department of the United States.
      (5)   As used in this division (D):
         MEDICAID SERVICES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
         PROPERTY. Means any real or personal property or other asset in which
a person has any legal title or interest.
(R.C. § 2913.401)
§ 131.24 INJURY TO PROPERTY BY HUNTERS.
   (A)   No person in the act of hunting, pursuing, taking, or killing a wild
animal shall act in a negligent, careless, or reckless manner so as to injure
property.
(R.C. § 1533.171(A))
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 1533.99(C))
Statutory reference:
   Violation, license revocation, see R.C. § 1533.171(B) through (E)
§ 131.25 EVIDENCE OF INTENT TO COMMIT THEFT OF RENTED PROPERTY OR RENTAL
SERVICES; EVIDENCE OF LACK OF CAPACITY TO CONSENT.
   (A)   Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property or rental
services.
      (1)   As used in this division (A):
         RENTER. Means a person who owns rented property.
         RENTEE. Means a person who pays consideration to a renter for the use
of rented property.
      (2)   Each of the following shall be considered evidence of intent to
commit theft of rented property or rental services:
         (a)   At the time of entering into the rental contract, the rentee
presented the renter with identification that was materially false, fictitious,
or not current with respect to name, address, place of employment, or other
relevant information.
         (b)   After receiving a notice demanding the return of the rented
property as provided in division (A)(3) of this section, the rentee neither
returned the rented property nor made arrangements acceptable with the renter
to return the rented property.
      (3)   To establish that a rentee has an intent to commit theft of rented
property or rental services under division (A)(2)(b) above, a renter may issue
a notice to a rentee demanding the return of the rented property. The renter
shall mail the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
rentee at the address the rentee gave when the rental contract was executed, or
to the rentee at the last address the rentee or the rentee’s agent furnished in
writing to the renter.
      (4)   A demand for the return of the rented property is not a
prerequisite for the prosecution of a rentee for theft of rented property or
rental services. The evidence specified in division (A)(2) above does not
constitute the only evidence that may be considered as evidence of intent to
commit theft of rented property or rental services.
(R.C. § 2913.72)
   (B)   Evidence of lack of capacity to consent.
      (1)   In a prosecution for any alleged violation of §
131.08 through
131.20,
131.23,
131.25 through
131.29, or
132.11, if the lack of consent of the victim is an element of the provision
that allegedly was violated, evidence that, at the time of the alleged
violation, the victim lacked the capacity to give consent is admissible to show
that the victim did not give consent.
      (2)   As used in this section, LACKS THE CAPACITY TO CONSENT means being
impaired for any reason to the extent that the person lacks sufficient
understanding or capacity to make and carry out reasonable decisions concerning
the person or the person’s resources.
(R.C. § 2913.73)
§ 131.26 FORGERY OF IDENTIFICATION CARDS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly do either of the following:
      (1)   Forge an identification card.
      (2)   Sell or otherwise distribute a card that purports to be an
identification card, knowing it was forged.
   (B)   As used in this section, IDENTIFICATION CARD means a card that
includes personal information or characteristics of an individual, a purpose of
which is to establish the identity of the bearer described on the card, whether
the words “identity”, “identification”, “identification card”, or other similar
words appear on the card.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of forging
identification cards or selling or distributing forged identification cards.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, forging identification cards or
selling or distributing forged identification cards is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
division (A) of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, forging identification cards or selling or distributing
forged identification cards is a misdemeanor of the first degree and, in
addition, the court shall impose upon the offender a fine not less than $250.
      (2)    If the victim of a violation of this section is an elderly person,
R.C. § 2913.31(C)(2)(b) applies and the offense shall be prosecuted under R.C.
§ 2913.31.
(R.C. § 2913.31(B), (C)(2))
Statutory reference:
   Forgery, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2913.31(A) and (C)(1)
   Forgery of originating address or other routing information in connection
with the transmission of an electronic mail advertisement, felony provisions,
see R.C. § 2307.64
§ 131.27 CRIMINAL SIMULATION.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud, or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Make or alter any object so that it appears to have value because
of antiquity, rarity, curiosity, source, or authorship, which it does not in
fact possess.
      (2)   Practice deception in making, retouching, editing, or reproducing
any photograph, movie film, video tape, phonograph record, or recording tape.
      (3)   Falsely or fraudulently make, simulate, forge, alter, or
counterfeit any wrapper, label, stamp, cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor
Control Commission under R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303, falsely or fraudulently
cause to be made, simulated, forged, altered, or counterfeited any wrapper,
label, stamp, cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under
R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303, or use more than once any wrapper, label, stamp,
cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under R.C. Chapters
4301 and 4303.
      (4)   Offer, or possess with the purpose to offer, any object that the
person knows to have been simulated as provided in divisions (A)(1), (A)(2) or
(A)(3) of this section.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal simulation. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, criminal simulation is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the loss to the victim is $1,000 or more, criminal
simulation is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.32)
§ 131.28 PERSONATING AN OFFICER.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is
facilitating a fraud, or with purpose to induce another to purchase property or
services, shall personate a law enforcement officer, or an inspector,
investigator, or agent of any governmental agency.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of personating an officer, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2913.44)
§ 131.29 TRADEMARK COUNTERFEITING.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Attach, affix, or otherwise use a counterfeit mark in connection
with the manufacture of goods or services, whether or not the goods or services
are intended for sale or resale.
      (2)   Possess, sell, or offer for sale tools, machines, instruments,
materials, articles, or other items of personal property with the knowledge
that they are designed for the production or reproduction of counterfeit marks.
      (3)   Purchase or otherwise acquire goods, and keep or otherwise have the
goods in the person’s possession, with the knowledge that a counterfeit mark is
attached to, affixed to, or otherwise used in connection with the goods and
with the intent to sell or otherwise dispose of the goods.
      (4)   Sell, offer for sale, or otherwise dispose of goods with the
knowledge that a counterfeit mark is attached to, affixed to, or otherwise used
in connection with the goods.
      (5)   Sell, offer for sale, or otherwise provide services with the
knowledge that a counterfeit mark is used in connection with that sale, offer
for sale, or other provision of the services.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of trademark counterfeiting.
      (1)   A violation of division (A)(1) of this section is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)    Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of
division (A)(2) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
circumstances of the violation indicate that the tools, machines, instruments,
materials, articles, or other items of personal property involved in the
violation were intended for use in the commission of a felony, a violation of
division (A)(2) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of
division (A)(3), (A)(4) or (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the cumulative sales price of the goods or services to which or in
connection with which the counterfeit mark is attached, affixed or otherwise
used in the offense is $1,000 or more, a violation of division (A)(3), (A)(4)
or (A)(5) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (C)   A defendant may assert as an affirmative defense to a charge of a
violation of this section defenses, affirmative defenses, and limitations on
remedies that would be available in a civil, criminal or administrative action
or proceeding under the Lanham Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§ 1051 through 1127, as
amended, the Trademark Counterfeiting Act of 1984, being 18 U.S.C. § 2320, as
amended, R.C. Chapter 1329 or another section of the Ohio Revised Code, or
common law.
   (D)   (1)   Law enforcement officers may seize pursuant to Criminal Rule 41,
R.C. Chapter 2933, or R.C. Chapter 2981 either of the following:
         (a)   Goods to which or in connection with which a person attached,
affixed, otherwise used, or intended to attach, affix or otherwise use a
counterfeit mark in violation of this section.
         (b)   Tools, machines, instruments, materials, articles, vehicles or
other items of personal property that are possessed, sold, offered for sale, or
used in a violation of this section or in an attempt to commit or complicity in
the commission of a violation of this section.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. Chapter 2981, if a
person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section, an
attempt to violate this section, or complicity in a violation of this section,
the court involved shall declare that the goods described in division (D)(1)(a)
of this section and the personal property described in division (D)(1)(b) of
this section are contraband and are forfeited. Prior to the court’s entry of
judgment under Criminal Rule 32, the owner of a registered trademark or service
mark that is the subject to the counterfeit mark may recommend a manner in
which the forfeited goods and forfeited personal property should be disposed
of. If that owner makes a timely recommendation of a manner of disposition, the
court is not bound by the recommendation. If that owner makes a timely
recommendation of a manner of disposition, the court may include in its entry
of judgment an order that requires appropriate persons to dispose of the
forfeited goods and forfeited personal property in the recommended manner. If
the owner fails to make a timely recommendation of a manner of disposition or
if that owner makes a timely recommendation of a manner of disposition but the
court determines to not follow the recommendation, the court shall include in
its entry of judgement an order that requires the law enforcement agency that
employs the law enforcement officer who seized the forfeited goods or the
forfeited personal property to destroy them or cause their destruction.
   (E)   This section does not affect the rights of an owner of a trademark or
service mark, or the enforcement in a civil action or in administrative
proceedings of the rights of an owner or a trademark or service mark under the
Lanham Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§ 1051 through 1127, as amended, the Trademark
Counterfeiting Act of 1984, being 18 U.S.C. § 2320, as amended, R.C. Chapter
1329, or another section of the Ohio Revised Code, or common law.
   (F)   As used in this section:
      COUNTERFEIT MARK.
         (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this definition, the term
means a spurious trademark or a spurious service mark that satisfies both of
the following:
            1.   It is identical with or substantially indistinguishable from a
mark that is registered on the principal register in the United States Patent
and Trademark Office for the same goods or services as the goods or services to
which or in connection with which the spurious trademark or spurious service
mark is attached, affixed, or otherwise used, or from a mark that is registered
with the Secretary of State pursuant to R.C. §§ 1329.54 through 1329.67 for the
same goods or services as the goods or services to which or in connection with
which the spurious trademark or spurious service mark is attached, affixed, or
otherwise used, and the owner of the registration uses that registered
trademark, whether or not the offender knows that the mark is registered in a
manner described in this division (a)1.
            2.   Its use is likely to cause confusion or mistake or to deceive
other persons.
         (b)   The term does not include a mark or other designation that is
attached to, affixed to, or otherwise used in connection with goods or services
if the holder of the right to use the mark or other designation authorizes the
manufacturer, producer, or vendor of those goods or services to attach, affix,
or otherwise use the mark or other designation in connection with those goods
or services at the time of their manufacture, production or sale.
      CUMULATIVE SALES PRICE. Means the product of the lowest single unit sales
price charged or sought to be charged by an offender for goods to which or in
connection with which a counterfeit mark is attached, affixed, or otherwise
used or of the lowest single service transaction price charged or sought to be
charged by an offender for services in connection with which a counterfeit mark
is used, multiplied by the total number of those goods or services, whether or
not units of goods are sold or are in an offender’s possession, custody or
control.
      REGISTERED TRADEMARK OR SERVICE MARK. Means a trademark or service mark
that is registered in a manner described in division (a) of the definition of
“counterfeit mark”.
      SERVICE MARK. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1329.54.
      TRADEMARK. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1329.54.
(R.C. § 2913.34)
§ 131.30 DIMINISHING OR INTERFERING WITH FORFEITABLE PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall destroy, damage, remove, or transfer property that is
subject to forfeiture or otherwise take any action in regard to property that
is subject to forfeiture with purpose to do any of the following:
      (1)   Prevent or impair the state’s or political subdivision’s lawful
authority to take the property into its custody or control under R.C. Chapter
2981 or to continue holding the property under its lawful custody or control;
      (2)   Impair or defeat the court’s continuing jurisdiction over the
person and property;
      (3)   Devalue property that the person knows, or has reasonable cause to
believe, is subject to forfeiture proceedings under R.C. Chapter 2981.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with or
diminishing forfeitable property. Except as otherwise provided in this division
(B), interference with or diminishing forfeitable property is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the value of the property is $1,000 or more, interference
with or diminishing forfeitable property is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2981.07)
§ 131.31 RECORDING CREDIT CARD, TELEPHONE OR SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBERS.
   (A)   No person shall record or cause to be recorded either of the
following:
      (1)   A credit card account number of the other party to a transaction,
when a check, bill of exchange or other draft is presented for payment; or
      (2)   The telephone number or Social Security account number of the other
party to a transaction, when payment is made by credit card charge agreement,
check, bill of exchange or other draft.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to a transaction, if all
of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The credit card account number, Social Security account number or
telephone number is recorded for a legitimate business purpose, including
collection purposes.
      (2)   The other party to the transaction consents to the recording of the
credit card account number, Social Security account number or telephone number.
      (3)   The credit card account number, Social Security account number or
telephone number that is recorded during the course of the transaction is not
disclosed to any third party for any purposes other than collection purposes
and is not used to market goods or services unrelated to the goods or services
purchased in the transaction.
   (C)   Nothing in this section prohibits the recording of the number of a
credit card account when given in lieu of a deposit to secure payment in the
event of default, loss, damage or other occurrence, or requires a person to
accept a check presented for payment, if the other party to the transaction
refuses to consent to the recording of the number of the party’s Social
Security account or license to operate a motor vehicle.
(R.C. § 1349.17)
   (D)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1349.99(A))
§ 131.32 PROSECUTIONS FOR THEFT OF UTILITIES.
   (A)   In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in R.C. § 2913.01,
that involves alleged tampering with a gas, electric, steam or water meter,
conduit or attachment of a utility that has been disconnected by the utility,
proof that a meter, conduit or attachment of a utility has been tampered with
is prima facie evidence that the person who is obligated to pay for the service
rendered through the meter, conduit or attachment, and who is in possession or
control of the meter, conduit or attachment at the time the tampering occurred
has caused the tampering with intent to commit a theft offense.
   (B)   In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in R.C. § 2913.01,
that involves the alleged reconnection of a gas, electric, steam or water
meter, conduit or attachment of a utility that has been disconnected by the
utility, proof that a meter, conduit or attachment disconnected by a utility
has been reconnected without the consent of the utility is prima facie evidence
that the person in possession or control of the meter, conduit or attachment at
the time of the reconnection has reconnected the meter, conduit or attachment
with intent to commit a theft offense.
   (C)   As used in this section:
      TAMPER. Means to interfere with, damage or bypass a utility meter,
conduit or attachment with the intent to impede the correct registration of a
meter or the proper functions of a conduit or attachment so as to reduce the
amount of utility service that is registered on the meter.
      UTILITY. Means any electric light company, gas company, natural gas
company, pipe-line company, water-works company or heating or cooling company,
as defined in R.C. § 4905.03(C), (D), (E), (F), (G), or (H), its lessees,
trustees or receivers, or any similar utility owned or operated by a political
subdivision.
(R.C. § 4933.18)
   (D)   Each electric light company, gas company, natural gas company,
pipeline company, waterworks company or heating or cooling company, as defined
by R.C. § 4905.03(C), (D), (E), (F), (G), or (H), or its lessees, trustees or
receivers, and each similar utility owned or operated by a political
subdivision, shall notify its customers, on an annual basis, that tampering
with or bypassing a meter constitutes a theft offense that could result in the
imposition of criminal sanctions.
(R.C. § 4933.19)
§ 131.33 MOTION PICTURE PIRACY.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      AUDIOVISUAL RECORDING FUNCTION. Means the capability of a device to
record or transmit a motion picture or any part of a motion picture by means of
any technology existing on, or developed after, March 9, 2004.
      FACILITY. Means a movie theater.
   (B)   No person, without the written consent of the owner or lessee of the
facility and of the licensor of the motion picture, shall knowingly operate an
audiovisual recording function of a device in a facility in which the motion
picture is being shown.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of motion
picture piracy, a misdemeanor of the first degree on the first offense and a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
   (D)   This section does not prohibit or restrict a lawfully authorized
investigative, law enforcement, protective, or intelligence gathering employee
or agent of the government of this state or a political subdivision of this
state, or of the federal government, when acting in an official capacity, from
operating an audiovisual recording function of a device in any facility in
which a motion picture is being shown.
   (E)   Division (B) of this section does not limit or affect the application
of any other prohibition in this code or the Ohio Revised Code. Any act that is
a violation of both division (B) of this section and another provision of this
code or the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, under the
other provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code, or under both this
section and the other provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code.
(R.C. § 2913.07)
§ 131.34 RAILROAD VANDALISM; CRIMINAL TRESPASS; INTERFERENCE WITH OPERATION OF
TRAIN; GRADE CROSSING DEVICE VANDALISM.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any object
at, onto, or in the path of, any railroad rail, railroad track, locomotive,
engine, railroad car, or other vehicle of a railroad company while such vehicle
is on a railroad track.
   (B)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall climb upon or into any
locomotive, engine, railroad car, or other vehicle of a railroad company when
it is on a railroad track.
   (C)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall disrupt, delay, or
prevent the operation of any train or other vehicle of a railroad company while
such vehicle is on a railroad track.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of railroad
vandalism. Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of criminal
trespass on a locomotive, engine, railroad car, or other railroad vehicle.
Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of interference with
the operation of a train. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
railroad vandalism; criminal trespass on a locomotive, engine, railroad car, or
other railroad vehicle; and interference with the operation of a train each is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of division (A), (B), or
(C) of this section causes serious physical harm to property or creates a
substantial risk of physical harm to any person, causes physical harm to any
person, or causes serious physical harm to any person, the violation is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.10)
   (E)   No person shall knowingly deface, damage, obstruct, remove, or
otherwise impair the operation of any railroad grade crossing warning signal or
other protective device, including any gate, bell, light, crossbuck, stop sign,
yield sign, advance warning sign, or advance pavement marking.
   (F)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section is guilty of railroad
grade crossing device vandalism. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
railroad grade crossing device vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the violation of division (E) of this section causes serious physical harm
to property or creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person,
causes physical harm to any person, or causes serious physical harm to any
person, railroad grade crossing device vandalism is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.101)
§ 131.35 DESECRATION.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall purposely deface, damage,
pollute, or otherwise physically mistreat any of the following:
      (1)   Any public monument;
      (2)   Any historical or commemorative marker, or any structure, Indian
mound or earthwork, cemetery, thing, or site of great historical or
archaeological interest;
      (3)   A place of worship, its furnishings, or religious artifacts or
sacred texts within the place of worship or within the grounds upon which the
place of worship is located;
      (4)   A work of art or museum piece;
      (5)   Any other object of reverence or sacred devotion.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of desecration. A violation of
division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the second degree. A violation of division (A)(3) of this section is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (C)   As used in this section, “cemetery” means any place of burial and
includes burial sites that contain American Indian burial objects placed with
or containing American Indian human remains.
(R.C. § 2927.11)
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
Section
   
132.01   Riot
   
132.02   Failure to disperse
   
132.03   Justifiable use of force to suppress riot
   
132.04   Disorderly conduct
   
132.05   Disturbing a lawful meeting
   
132.06   Misconduct at an emergency
   
132.07   Telecommunications harassment
   
132.08   Inducing panic
   
132.09   Making false alarms
   
132.10   Inciting to violence
   
132.11   Unlawful display of law enforcement emblem
   
132.12   Impersonating a peace officer
   
132.13   Safety of crowds attending live entertainment performances
   
132.14   Misconduct involving a public transportation system
   
132.15   Impeding public passage of an emergency service responder
   
132.16   Daytime curfew
   
132.17   Evening curfew
   
132.18   Unlawful congregation
Statutory reference:
   Misuse of “Block Parent” or “McGruff House” symbol, see R.C. § 2917.46
§ 132.01 RIOT.
   (A)   No person shall participate with four or more others in a course of
disorderly conduct in violation of R.C. § 2917.11 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance:
      (1)   With purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of a
misdemeanor, other than disorderly conduct;
      (2)   With purpose to intimidate a public official or employee into
taking or refraining from official action, or with purpose to hinder, impede,
or obstruct a function of government;
      (3)   With purpose to hinder, impede, or obstruct the orderly process of
administration or instruction at an educational institution, or to interfere
with or disrupt lawful activities carried on at the institution.
   (B)   No person shall participate with four or more others with purpose to
do an act with unlawful force or violence, even though the act might otherwise
be lawful.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of riot, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(R.C. § 2917.03)
   (D)   For the purposes of prosecuting violations of this section, the
prosecution is not required to allege or prove that the offender expressly
agreed with four or more others to commit any act that constitutes a violation
this section prior to or while committing those acts.
(R.C. § 2917.031)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated riot, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2917.02
§ 132.02 FAILURE TO DISPERSE.
   (A)   Where five or more persons are participating in a course of disorderly
conduct in violation of R.C. § 2917.11 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, and there are other persons in the vicinity whose presence creates
the likelihood of physical harm to persons or property or of serious public
inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm, a law enforcement officer or other public
official may order the participants and the other persons to disperse. No
person shall knowingly fail to obey the order.
   (B)   Nothing in this section requires persons to disperse who are peaceably
assembled for a lawful purpose.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to disperse.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3) of this section,
failure to disperse is a minor misdemeanor.
      (3)   Failure to disperse is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the
failure to obey the order described in division (A) of this section creates the
likelihood of physical harm to persons or is committed at the scene of a fire,
accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind.
(R.C. § 2917.04)
§ 132.03 JUSTIFIABLE USE OF FORCE TO SUPPRESS RIOT.
   A law enforcement officer or firefighter engaged in suppressing a riot or in
protecting persons or property during a riot:
   (A)   Is justified in using force, other than deadly force, when and to the
extent he or she has probable cause to believe such force is necessary to
disperse or apprehend rioters;
   (B)   Is justified in using force, including deadly force, when and to the
extent he or she has probable cause to believe such force is necessary to
disperse or apprehend rioters whose conduct is creating a substantial risk of
serious physical harm to persons.
(R.C. § 2917.05)
§ 132.04 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   No person shall recklessly cause inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm to
another, by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Engaging in fighting, in threatening harm to persons or property,
or in violent or turbulent behavior;
      (2)   Making unreasonable noise or an offensively coarse utterance,
gesture, or display, or communicating unwarranted and grossly abusive language
to any person;
      (3)   Insulting, taunting, or challenging another, under circumstances in
which that conduct is likely to provoke a violent response;
      (4)   Hindering or preventing the movement of persons on a public street,
road, highway, or right-of-way, or to, from, within, or upon public or private
property, so as to interfere with the rights of others, and by any act that
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender;
      (5)   Creating a condition that is physically offensive to persons or
that presents a risk of physical harm to persons or property, by any act that
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender.
   (B)   No person while voluntarily intoxicated shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   In a public place or in the presence of two or more persons, engage
in conduct likely to be offensive or to cause inconvenience, annoyance, or
alarm to persons of ordinary sensibilities, which conduct the offender, if he
or she were not intoxicated, should know is likely to have such effect on
others;
      (2)   Engage in conduct or create a condition that presents a risk of
physical harm to himself, herself or another, or to the property of another.
   (C)   Violation of any statute or ordinance of which an element is operating
a motor vehicle, locomotive, watercraft, aircraft, or other vehicle while under
the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse is not a violation of division
(B) of this section.
   (D)   If a person appears to an ordinary observer to be intoxicated, it is
probable cause to believe that the person is voluntarily intoxicated for
purposes of division (B) of this section.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disorderly conduct.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (E)(2) and (E)(3) of this
section, disorderly conduct is a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Disorderly conduct is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if any of
the following applies:
         (a)   The offender persists in disorderly conduct after reasonable
warning or request to desist.
         (b)   The offense is committed in the vicinity of a school or in a
school safety zone.
         (c)   The offense is committed in the presence of any law enforcement
officer, firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services
person, or other authorized person who is engaged in the person’s duties at the
scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind.
         (d)   The offense is committed in the presence of any emergency
facility person who is engaged in the person’s duties in an emergency facility.
      (3)   If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to three or more violations of division (B) of this section, R.C. § 2917.11(B),
or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation
of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (F)   As used in this section:
      COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SCHOOL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2925.01.
      EMERGENCY FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.04.
      EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.
      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency medical
services personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.
(R.C. § 2917.11)
§ 132.05 DISTURBING A LAWFUL MEETING.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting,
procession, or gathering, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Do any act which obstructs or interferes with the due conduct of
the meeting, procession, or gathering.
      (2)   Make any utterance, gesture, or display which outrages the
sensibilities of the group.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disturbing a lawful
meeting. Except as otherwise provided in this division, disturbing a lawful
meeting is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Disturbing a lawful meeting is a
misdemeanor of the first degree if either of the following applies:
      (1)   The violation is committed with the intent to disturb or disquiet
any assemblage of people met for religious worship at a tax-exempt place of
worship, regardless of whether the conduct is within the place at which the
assemblage is held or is on the property on which that place is located and
disturbs the order and solemnity of the assemblage.
      (2)   The violation is committed with the intent to prevent, disrupt, or
interfere with a virtual meeting or gathering of people for religious worship,
through use of a computer, computer system, telecommunications device, or other
electronic device or system, or in any other manner.
   (C)   As used in this section:
      COMPUTER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      COMPUTER SYSTEM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      VIRTUAL MEETING OR GATHERING. A meeting or gathering by interactive video
conference or teleconference, or by a combination thereof.
(R.C. § 2917.12)
§ 132.06 MISCONDUCT AT AN EMERGENCY.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Hamper the lawful operations of any law enforcement officer,
firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services person, or
other authorized person engaged in the person’s duties at the scene of a fire,
accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind;
      (2)   Hamper the lawful activities of any emergency facility person who
is engaged in the person’s duties in an emergency facility;
      (3)   Fail to obey the lawful order of any law enforcement officer
engaged in the law enforcement officer’s duties at the scene of or in
connection with a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit access or deny
information to any news media representative in the lawful exercise of the news
media representative’s duties.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misconduct at an emergency.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, misconduct at an emergency is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If violation of this section creates a risk
of physical harm to persons or property, misconduct at an emergency is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (D)   As used in this section:
      EMERGENCY FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.04.
      EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.
      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency medical
services personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.
(R.C. § 2917.13)
§ 132.07 TELECOMMUNICATIONS HARASSMENT.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a
telecommunication, or knowingly permit a telecommunication to be made from a
telecommunications device under the person’s control, to another, if the caller
does any of the following:
      (1)   Makes the telecommunication with purpose to harass, intimidate, or
abuse any person at the premises to which the telecommunication is made,
whether or not actual communication takes place between the caller and a
recipient;
      (2)   Describes, suggests, requests, or proposes that the caller, the
recipient of the telecommunication, or any other person engage in sexual
activity, and the recipient or another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made has requested, in a previous telecommunication or in
the immediate telecommunication, that the caller not make a telecommunication
to the recipient or to the premises to which the telecommunication is made;
      (3)   During the telecommunication, violates R.C. § 2903.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (4)   Knowingly states to the recipient of the telecommunication that the
caller intends to cause damage to or destroy public or private property, and
the recipient, any member of the recipient’s family, or any other person who
resides at the premises to which the telecommunication is made owns, leases,
resides, or works in, will at the time of the destruction or damaging be near
or in, has the responsibility of protecting, or insures the property that will
be destroyed or damaged;
      (5)   Knowingly makes the telecommunication to the recipient of the
telecommunication, to another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made, or to those premises, and the recipient or another
person at those premises previously has told the caller not to make a
telecommunication to those premises or to any persons at those premises;
      (6)   Knowingly makes any comment, request, suggestion, or proposal to
the recipient of the telecommunication that is threatening, intimidating,
menacing, coercive, or obscene with the intent to abuse, threaten, or harass
the recipient;
      (7)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly interrupts the
telecommunication service of any person;
      (8)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly transmits to any
person, regardless of whether the telecommunication is heard in its entirety,
any file, document, or other communication that prevents that person from using
the person’s telephone service or electronic communication device;
      (9)   Knowingly makes any false statement concerning the death, injury,
illness, disfigurement, reputation, indecent conduct, or criminal conduct of
the recipient of the telecommunication or family or household member of the
recipient with purpose to abuse, threaten, intimidate, or harass the recipient;
      (10)   Knowingly incites another person through a telecommunication or
other means to harass or participate in the harassment of a person;
      (11)   Knowingly alarms the recipient by making a telecommunication
without a lawful purpose at an hour or hours known to be inconvenient to the
recipient and in an offensive or repetitive manner.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall make or cause to be made a telecommunication or
permit a telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under
the person’s control, with purpose to abuse, threaten, or harass another
person.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly post a text or audio statement or an
image on an internet web site or web page for the purpose of abusing,
threatening, or harassing another person.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of telecommunications
harassment.
      (2)   A violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(5), (A)(6), (A)
(7), (A)(8), (A)(9), (A)(10), or (A)(11) or (B) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a felony on each
subsequent offense, which shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(3), a violation
of division (A)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree on a
first offense and a felony on each subsequent offense, to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If a violation of division (A)(4) of this section
results in economic harm of $1,000 or more, telecommunications harassment is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (D)   No cause of action may be asserted in any court of this municipality
against any provider of a telecommunications service, interactive computer
service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, or against any
officer, employee, or agent of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, for any
injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly arises out of the
provider’s, officer’s, employee’s, or agent’s provision of information,
facilities, or assistance in accordance with the terms of a court order that is
issued in relation to the investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation
of this section. A provider of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, or an
officer, employee, or agent of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, is
immune from any civil or criminal liability for injury, death, or loss to
person or property that allegedly arises out of the provider’s, officer’s,
employee’s, or agent’s provision of information, facilities, or assistance in
accordance with the terms of a court order that is issued in relation to the
investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation of this section.
   (E)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person solely because the
person provided access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control, including
having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing access or
connection to or from the electronic method of remotely transferring the
information, and that do not include the creation of the content of the
material that is the subject of the access or connection. In addition, any
person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control shall not be
liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the receipt or
transmission through its service of any information that the person believes
is, or will be sent, in violation of this section.
      (2)   Division (E)(1) of this section does not create an affirmative duty
for any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method
of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control to block
the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that it
believes is, or will be sent, in violation of this section except as otherwise
provided by law.
      (3)   Division (E)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of this section or who knowingly
advertises the availability of material of that nature.
      (4)   A provider or user of an interactive computer service, as defined
in 47 U.S.C. § 230, shall neither be treated as the publisher or speaker of any
information provided by another information content provider, as defined in 47
U.S.C. § 230, nor held civilly or criminally liable for the creation or
development of information provided by another information content provider, as
defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230. Nothing in this division shall be construed to
protect a person from liability to the extent that the person developed or
created any content in violation of this section.
   (F)   Divisions (A)(5) to (A)(11) and (B)(2) of this section do not apply to
a person who, while employed or contracted by a newspaper, magazine, press
association, news agency, news wire service, cable channel or cable operator,
or radio or television station, is gathering, processing, transmitting,
compiling, editing, or disseminating information for the general public within
the scope of the person’s employment in that capacity or the person’s
contractual authority in that capacity.
   (G)   As used in divisions (A) through (D) of this section:
      CABLE OPERATOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
      CALLER. Means the person described in division (A) of this section who
makes or causes to be made a telecommunication or who permits a
telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under that
person’s control.
      ECONOMIC HARM. Means all direct, incidental and consequential pecuniary
harm suffered by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct. The term
includes but is not limited to all of the following:
         (a)   All wages, salaries or other compensation lost as a result of
the criminal conduct;
         (b)   The cost of all wages, salaries or other compensation paid to
employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of
the criminal conduct;
         (c)   The overhead costs incurred from the time that a business is
shut down as a result of the criminal conduct;
         (d)   The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was
damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.
      FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in division
(A)(9) of this section is committed:
            1.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a former spouse of
the recipient;
            2.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the recipient, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the recipient;
            3.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse, or
former spouse of the recipient, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
recipient.
         (b)   The natural parent of any child of whom the recipient of the
telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in division (A)(9) of this
section is committed is the other natural parent or is the putative other
natural parent.
      PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. Means a person who is living or has lived with
the recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in
division (A)(9) of this section is committed in a common law marital
relationship, who otherwise is cohabiting with the recipient, or who otherwise
has cohabited with the recipient within five years prior to the date of the
alleged commission of the act in question.
      SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
      TELECOMMUNICATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   (H)   Nothing in this section prohibits a person from making a
telecommunication to a debtor that is in compliance with the “Fair Debt
Collection Practices Act”, 15 U.S.C. § 1692, as amended, or the “Telephone
Consumer Protection Act”, 47 U.S.C. § 227, as amended.
(R.C. § 2917.21)
§ 132.08 INDUCING PANIC.
   (A)   No person shall cause the evacuation of any public place, or otherwise
cause serious public inconvenience or alarm, by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Initiating or circulating a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false.
      (2)   Threatening to commit any offense of violence.
      (3)   Committing any offense, with reckless disregard of the likelihood
that its commission will cause serious public inconvenience or alarm.
   (B)   Division (A)(1) of this section does not apply to any person
conducting an authorized fire or emergency drill.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inducing panic.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3), inducing panic is
a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   If a violation of this section results in physical harm to any
person, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law. If a violation of this section results in economic harm of $1,000 or more,
inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the
public place involved in a violation of division (A)(1) is a school or an
institution of higher education, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law. If a violation of this section pertains to a
purported, threatened or actual use of a weapon of mass destruction, inducing
panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (D)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section that pertains
to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass destruction that the
offender did not possess or have the ability to use a weapon of mass
destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of mass destruction was
not a weapon of mass destruction.
      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section
of the Ohio Revised Code or this code may be prosecuted under this section, the
other section, or both sections.
   (E)   As used in this section:
      BIOLOGICAL AGENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2917.33.
      ECONOMIC HARM. Means any of the following:
         (a)   All direct, incidental and consequential pecuniary harm suffered
by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct. “Economic harm” as described
in this division includes but is not limited to all of the following:
            1.   All wages, salaries or other compensation lost as a result of
the criminal conduct;
            2.   The cost of all wages, salaries or other compensation paid to
employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of
the criminal conduct;
            3.   The overhead costs incurred from the time that a business is
shut down as a result of the criminal conduct;
            4.   The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was
damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.
         (b)   All costs incurred by the state or any political subdivision as
a result of, or in making any response to, the criminal conduct that
constituted the violation of this section or R.C. § 2917.32, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, including but not limited to all
costs so incurred by any law enforcement officers, firefighters, rescue
personnel, or emergency medical services personnel of the state or the
political subdivision.
      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSONNEL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2133.21.
      INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION. Means any of the following:
         (a)   A state university or college as defined in R.C. § 3345.12(A)
(1), community college, state community college, university branch, or
technical college;
         (b)   A private, nonprofit college, university or other post-secondary
institution located in this state that possesses a certificate of authorization
issued by the Chancellor of Higher Education pursuant to R.C. Chapter 1713;
         (c)   A post-secondary institution with a certificate of registration
issued by the State Board of Career Colleges and Schools pursuant to R.C.
Chapter 3332.
      SCHOOL. Means any school operated by a board of education or any school
for which the Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum standards
under R.C. § 3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular
activities, or training provided by the school is being conducted at the time a
violation of this section is committed.
      WEAPON OF MASS DESTRUCTION. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Any weapon that is designed or intended to cause death or
serious physical harm through the release, dissemination, or impact of toxic or
poisonous chemicals, or other precursors;
         (b)   Any weapon involving a disease organism or biological agent;
         (c)   Any weapon that is designed to release radiation or
radioactivity at a level dangerous to human life;
         (d)   Any of the following, except to the extent that the item or
device in question is expressly excepted from the definition of “destructive
device” pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(4) and regulations issued under that
section:
            1.   Any explosive, incendiary, or poison gas bomb, grenade, rocket
having a propellant charge of more than four ounces, missile having an
explosive or incendiary charge of more than one-quarter ounce, mine, or similar
device;
            2.   Any combination of parts either designed or intended for use
in converting any item or device into any item or device described in division
(d)1. of this definition and from which an item or device described in that
division may be readily assembled.
(R.C. § 2917.31)
§ 132.09 MAKING FALSE ALARMS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false and likely to cause public inconvenience or alarm.
      (2)   Knowingly cause a false alarm of fire or other emergency to be
transmitted to or within any organization, public or private, for dealing with
emergencies involving a risk of physical harm to persons or property.
      (3)   Report to any law enforcement agency an alleged offense or other
incident within its concern, knowing that the offense did not occur;
      (4)   Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false and likely to impede the operation of a critical
infrastructure facility.
   (B)   This section does not apply to any person conducting an authorized
fire or emergency drill.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making false alarms. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, making false alarms is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If a violation of this section results in economic harm of
$1,000 or more, making false alarms is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If a violation of this section pertains to a purported,
threatened, or actual use of a weapon of mass destruction, making false alarms
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (D)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section that pertains
to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass destruction that the
offender did not possess or have the ability to use a weapon of mass
destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of mass destruction was
not a weapon of mass destruction.
      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section
of the Ohio Revised Code or this code may be prosecuted under this section, the
other section, or both sections.
   (E)   As used in this section:
      CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2911.21.
      ECONOMIC HARM and WEAPON OF MASS DESTRUCTION. Have the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2917.31.
(R.C. § 2917.32)
§ 132.10 INCITING TO VIOLENCE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly engage in conduct designed to urge or incite
another to commit any offense of violence when either of the following apply:
      (1)   The conduct takes place under circumstances that create a clear and
present danger that any offense of violence will be committed.
      (2)   The conduct proximately results in the commission of any offense of
violence.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inciting to violence. If
the offense of violence that the other person is being urged or incited to
commit is a misdemeanor, inciting to violence is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offense of violence that the other person is being urged or
incited to commit is a felony, inciting to violence is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2917.01)
§ 132.11 UNLAWFUL DISPLAY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT EMBLEM.
   (A)   No person who is not entitled to do so shall knowingly display on a
motor vehicle the emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law
enforcement officers.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of the unlawful display of the
emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law enforcement
officers, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2913.441)
§ 132.12 IMPERSONATING A PEACE OFFICER.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Means an employee of the United States
who serves in a position the duties of which are primarily the investigation,
apprehension, or detention of individuals suspected or convicted of offenses
under the criminal laws of the United States.
      IMPERSONATE. Means to act the part of, assume the identity of, wear the
uniform or any part of the uniform of, or display the identification of a
particular person or of a member of a class of persons with purpose to make
another person believe that the actor is that particular person or is a member
of that class of persons.
      INVESTIGATOR OF THE BUREAU OF CRIMINAL IDENTIFICATION AND INVESTIGATION.
Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.11.
      PEACE OFFICER. A Sheriff, deputy sheriff, Marshal, deputy marshal, member
of the organized police department of a municipal corporation, or township
constable, who is employed by a political subdivision of this state; a member
of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under R.C. §
3735.31(D); a member of a police force employed by a regional transit authority
under R.C. § 306.35(Y); a state university law enforcement officer appointed
under R.C. § 3345.04; a veterans’ home police officer appointed under R.C. §
5907.02; a special police officer employed by a port authority under R.C. §
4582.04 or 4582.28; an officer, agent, or employee of the state or any of its
agencies, instrumentalities, or political subdivisions, upon whom, by statute,
a duty to conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is imposed and
the authority to arrest violators is conferred, within limits of that statutory
duty and authority; or a state highway patrol trooper whose primary duties are
to preserve the peace, to protect life and property, and to enforce the laws,
ordinances, or rules of the state or any of its political subdivisions.
      PRIVATE POLICE OFFICER. Means any security guard, special police officer,
private detective, or other person who is privately employed in a police
capacity.
   (B)   No person shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation, or
federal law enforcement officer.
   (C)   No person, by impersonating a peace officer, private police officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation, or
federal law enforcement officer, shall arrest or detain any person, search any
person, or search the property of any person.
   (D)   No person, with purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of an
offense, shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer, federal law
enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the municipality or the
state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation.
   (E)   No person shall commit a felony while impersonating a peace officer,
private police officer, federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or
employee of the municipality or of the state, or investigator of the Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation.
   (F)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B) of this
section that the impersonation of the peace officer, private police officer,
federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the
municipality or of the state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal
Identification and Investigation was for a lawful purpose.
   (G)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the purpose of a
violation of division (D) of this section is to commit or facilitate the
commission of a felony, a violation of division (D) is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. Whoever violates division (E) of this
section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.51)
§ 132.13 SAFETY OF CROWDS ATTENDING LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCES.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      CONCERT. Means a musical performance of which the primary component is a
presentation by persons singing or playing musical instruments, that is
intended by its sponsors mainly, but not necessarily exclusively, for the
listening enjoyment of the audience, and that is held in a facility. The term
does not include any performance in which music is a part of the presentation
and the primary component of which is acting, dancing, a motion picture, a
demonstration of skills or talent other than singing or playing an instrument,
an athletic event, an exhibition or a speech.
      FACILITY. Means any structure that has a roof or partial roof and that
has walls that wholly surround the area on all sides, including but not limited
to a stadium, hall, arena, armory, auditorium, ballroom, exhibition hall,
convention center or music hall.
      LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCE. Means any live speech; any live musical
performance, including a concert; any live dramatic performance; any live
variety show; and any other live performance with respect to which the primary
intent of the audience can be construed to be viewing the performers. The term
does not include any form of entertainment with respect to which the person
purchasing a ticket routinely participates in amusements as well as views
performers.
      PERSON. Includes, in addition to an individual or entity specified in
R.C. § 1.59(C), any governmental entity.
      RESTRICTED ENTERTAINMENT AREA. Means any wholly or partially enclosed
area, whether indoors or outdoors, that has limited access through established
entrances or established turnstiles or similar devices.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall sell, offer to sell, or offer in return for a
donation, any ticket that is not numbered and that does not correspond to a
specific seat for admission to either of the following:
         (a)   A live entertainment performance that is not exempted under
division (D) of this section, that is held in a restricted entertainment area,
and for which more than 8,000 tickets are offered to the public;
         (b)   A concert that is not exempted under division (D) of this
section and for which more than 3,000 tickets are offered to the public.
      (2)   No person shall advertise any live entertainment performance as
described in division (B)(1)(a) of this section or any concert as described in
division (B)(1)(b) of this section, unless the advertisement contains the words
“Reserved Seats Only”.
   (C)   Unless exempted by division (D)(1) of this section, no person who owns
or operates any restricted entertainment area shall fail to open, maintain and
properly staff at least the number of entrances designated under division (E)
of this section for a minimum of 90 minutes prior to the scheduled start of any
live entertainment performance that is held in the restricted entertainment
area and for which more than 3,000 tickets are sold, offered for sale or
offered in return for a donation.
   (D)   (1)   A live entertainment performance, other than a concert, is
exempted from the provisions of divisions (B) and (C) of this section if both
of the following apply:
         (a)   The restricted entertainment area in which the performance is
held has at least eight entrances or, if both entrances and separate admission
turnstiles or similar devices are used, has at least eight turnstiles or
similar devices.
         (b)   The eight entrances or, if applicable, the eight turnstiles or
similar devices, are opened, maintained and properly staffed at least one hour
prior to the scheduled start of the performance.
      (2)   (a)   The officer responsible for public safety in the municipality
may, upon application of the sponsor of a concert covered by division (B) of
this section, exempt the concert from the provisions of that division if such
officer finds that the health, safety and welfare of the participants and
spectators would not be substantially affected by failure to comply with the
provisions of that division. In determining whether to grant an exemption, the
officer shall consider the following factors: the size and design of the
facility in which the concert is scheduled; the size, age and anticipated
conduct of the crowd expected to attend the concert; and the ability of the
sponsor to manage and control the expected crowd. If the sponsor of any concert
desires to obtain an exemption under this division, the sponsor shall apply to
the appropriate official on a form prescribed by that official. The official
shall issue an order that grants or denies the exemption within five days after
receipt of the application. The sponsor may appeal any order that denies an
exemption to the Court of Common Pleas of the county in which the facility is
located.
         (b)   If an official grants an exemption under division (D)(2)(a) of
this section, the official shall designate an on-duty law enforcement officer
to be present at the concert. The designated officer has authority to issue
orders to all security personnel at the concert to protect the health, safety
and welfare of the participants and spectators.
      (3)   Notwithstanding division (D)(2) of this section, in the case of a
concert held in a facility located on the campus of an educational institution
covered by R.C. § 3345.04, a state university law enforcement officer appointed
pursuant to R.C. §§ 3345.04 and 3345.21 shall do both of the following:
         (a)   Exercise the authority to grant exemptions provided by division
(D)(2)(a) of this section in lieu of an official designated in that division;
         (b)   If the officer grants an exemption under division (D)(3)(a) of
this section, designate an on-duty state university law enforcement officer to
be present at the concert. The designated officer has authority to issue orders
to all security personnel at the concert to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the participants and spectators.
   (E)   (1)   Unless a live entertainment performance is exempted by division
(D)(1) of this section, the officer responsible for public safety within the
municipality shall designate, for purposes of division (C) of this section, the
minimum number of entrances required to be opened, maintained and staffed at
each live entertainment performance so as to permit crowd control and reduce
congestion at the entrances. The designation shall be based on such factors as
the size and nature of the crowd expected to attend the live entertainment
performance, the length of time prior to the live entertainment performance
that crowds are expected to congregate at the entrances and the amount of
security provided at the restricted entertainment area.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (E)(1) of this section, a state university
law enforcement officer appointed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3345.04 and 3345.21 shall
designate the number of entrances required to be opened, maintained and staffed
in the case of a live entertainment performance that is held at a restricted
entertainment area located on the campus of an educational institution covered
by R.C. § 3345.04.
   (F)   No person shall enter into any contract for a live entertainment
performance that does not permit or require compliance with this section.
   (G)   (1)   This section does not apply to a live entertainment performance
held in a restricted entertainment area if one admission ticket entitles the
holder to view or participate in three or more different games, rides,
activities or live entertainment performances occurring simultaneously at
different sites within the restricted entertainment area and if the initial
admittance entrance to the restricted entertainment area, for which the ticket
is required, is separate from the entrance to any specific live entertainment
performance and an additional ticket is not required for admission to the
particular live entertainment performance.
      (2)   This section does not apply to a symphony orchestra performance, a
ballet performance, horse races, dances or fairs.
   (H)   This section does not prohibit the Legislative Authority from imposing
additional requirements, not in conflict with the section, for the promotion or
holding of live entertainment performances.
   (I)   Whoever violates division (B), (C) or (F) of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If any individual suffers physical harm to
the individual’s person as a result of a violation of this section, the
sentencing court shall consider this factor in favor of imposing a term of
imprisonment upon the offender.
(R.C. § 2917.40)
§ 132.14 MISCONDUCT INVOLVING A PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM.
   (A)   As used in this section, PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM means a county
transit system operated in accordance with R.C. §§ 306.01 through 306.13, a
regional transit authority operated in accordance with R.C. §§ 306.30 through
306.71, or a regional transit commission operated in accordance with R.C. §§
306.80 through 306.90.
   (B)   No person shall evade the payment of the known fares of a public
transportation system.
   (C)   No person shall alter any transfer, pass, ticket or token of a public
transportation system with the purpose of evading the payment of fares or of
defrauding the system.
   (D)   No person shall do any of the following while in any facility or on
any vehicle of a public transportation system:
      (1)   Play sound equipment without the proper use of a private earphone;
      (2)   Smoke, eat or drink in any area where the activity is clearly
marked as being prohibited; or
      (3)   Expectorate upon a person, facility or vehicle.
   (E)   No person shall write, deface, draw or otherwise mark on any facility
or vehicle of a public transportation system.
   (F)   No person shall fail to comply with a lawful order of a public
transportation system police officer, and no person shall resist, obstruct or
abuse a public transportation police officer in the performance of the
officer’s duties.
   (G)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of
misconduct involving a public transportation system.
      (1)   A violation of division (B), (C), or (F) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   A violation of division (D) of this section is a minor misdemeanor
on a first offense. If a person previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of any division of this section or of a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any division of this section, a
violation of division (D) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (3)   A violation of division (E) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
   (H)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, 75% of each fine paid to
satisfy a sentence imposed for a violation of any of the provisions of this
section shall be deposited into the treasury of the County and 25% shall be
deposited with the county transit board, regional transit authority or regional
transit commission that operates the public transportation system involved in
the violation, unless the Board of County Commissioners operates the public
transportation system, in which case 100% of each fine shall be deposited into
the treasury of the County.
(R.C. § 2917.41)
§ 132.15 IMPEDING PUBLIC PASSAGE OF AN EMERGENCY SERVICE RESPONDER.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly obstruct any
highway, street, sidewalk, or any other public passage in such a manner as to
render the highway, street, sidewalk, or passage impassable without
unreasonable inconvenience or hazard if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The obstruction prevents an emergency vehicle from accessing a
highway or street, prevents an emergency service responder from responding to
an emergency, or prevents an emergency vehicle or an emergency service
responder from having access to an exit from an emergency.
      (2)   Upon receipt of a request or order from an emergency service
responder to remove or cease the obstruction, the person refuses to remove or
cease the obstruction.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not limit or affect the application
of R.C. § 2921.31 or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code. Any conduct
that is a violation of division (A) of this section and that also is a
violation of R.C. § 2921.31 or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code may
be prosecuted under this section, the other section of the Ohio Revised Code,
or both sections.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawfully impeding public
passage of an emergency service responder, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (D)   As used in this section, EMERGENCY SERVICE RESPONDER has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2903.13.
(R.C. § 2917.14)
§ 132.16 DAYTIME CURFEW.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CURFEW HOURS. The hours between 7:01 a.m. through 2:30 p.m. on scheduled
school days of the school in which the person is enrolled.
      EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting
state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited
to, fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
      ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately owned place of business operated for a
profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place
of amusement or entertainment, and any church or other religious establishment.
      GUARDIAN. A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person
of a minor, or a public or private agency with which a minor has been placed by
a court.
      MINOR. Any person under 18 years of age who is not married or otherwise
emancipated.
      PARENT. A person who is a biological parent, adoptive parent or
stepparent of another person, or at least 18 years of age and specifically
authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor
prior to any act which is prohibited by this section.
      REMAIN. To linger, stay behind, tarry or stay about any establishment or
public place, including any public right-of-way, street, road, lane, alley,
highway, sidewalk, playground, park, plaza, building or other place used by or
open to the public, or to fail to leave the premises of any establishment or
any public place when requested to do so by a law enforcement office or the
owner, operator or other person in control of an establishment.
   (B)   Curfew violations.
      (1)   A minor violates the curfew regulations if he or she remains in any
public place or on the premises of any establishment within the village during
curfew hours.
      (2)   A minor violates the curfew regulations if he or she remains in any
public place on the premises of any establishment within the village at any
time when that minor is required to be in attendance at an elementary or
secondary school.
      (3)   A minor violates the curfew regulations if he or she:
         (a)   Is under suspension from or has been expelled by, any elementary
or secondary school; and
         (b)   Remains within 1,000 feet of any school building within the New
Richmond School District between the hours of 6:30 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. on any
day when school is in session in that school building.
   (C)   Defenses. It is full defense under division (B) above that the minor
was:
      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian,
without any detour;
      (3)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour;
      (4)   Involved in an emergency which commenced prior to curfew hours, or
which arose in the minor’s dwelling place after curfew hours had been
commenced;
      (5)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting an
adjacent residence if an adult resident of the adjacent residence has not
communicated an objection about the minor’s presence to any law enforcement
officer;
      (6)   Attending any activity organized by one or more adults and
sponsored by the village, another municipality or township, a park district, a
school district, a civic organization, a church or other similar organization,
or attending a religious activity;
      (7)   Going to or coming from, without detour, these activities
identified in division (C)(6) above; or
      (8)   Exercising any right protected by the state or United States
Constitutions.
   (D)   Violation.
      (1)   Any minor who violates the curfew adopted hereby shall be charged
as being an unruly child, and taken before juvenile court as provided in R.C.
Chapter 2151, except as may be otherwise permitted or required by applicable
law.
      (2)   Parental penalties shall include a fine of $25 for the first
offense, $50 for the second offense and $100 for the third offense and each
offense thereafter.
(Prior Code, § 132.50) (Ord. 1998-02, passed 4-14-1998)
§ 132.17 EVENING CURFEW.
   (A)   No minor under the age of 18 years shall ride in a motor vehicle, or
be on the public streets, other public places, places of amusement and
entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places, between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. on the following day, Sunday through Thursday, and
between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday nights,
official village time; provided, however, that the provisions of this section
do not apply to a minor accompanied by his or her parents, guardian or other
adult person having the care and custody of the minor, or when the minor is
upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his or her parents,
guardian or other adult person having the care or custody of the minor.
   (B)   No parent, guardian or other adult person having the care or custody
of any minor under the age of 18 years shall allow or permit such minor to
loiter, idle, wander, stroll, play or ride a motor vehicle on the public
streets, other public places, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant
lots or other unsupervised places between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.
on the following day, Sunday through Thursday, and between the hours of 12:00
a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday nights, official village time;
provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to a
minor accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other person having the
care and custody of such minor, or where the minor is upon an emergency errand
or legitimate business directed by his or her parents, guardian or other adult
person having the care or custody of the minor.
   (C)   The time limits set forth in divisions (A) and (B) above are subject
to a 30-minute grace period for any minor covered by such provisions who is
returning home by a direct route to the minor’s residence from the location of
an organized school, church or civic activity or event after the termination of
such organized school, church or civic activity or event. In the event that any
such organized school, church or civic activity or event is scheduled to
terminate later than 12:00 a.m. on Friday or Saturday night, notification
thereof shall be given in writing to the Chief of Police, or his or her
designee, at least two weeks prior thereto, stating the anticipated termination
time of such activity or event, the place and date thereof, and the name of the
parent or adult over 21 years of age supervising such activity or event; which
activity or event when approved by the Chief of Police shall enable any minor
attending such activity or event a grace period of 30 minutes after the
termination of such event to return home as aforesaid.
   (D)   (1)   Any minor violating division (A) above shall be dealt with in
accordance with Juvenile Court law and procedure.
      (2)   Whoever violates divisions (B) or (C) above is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 132.51) (Ord. 2006-40, passed 12-12-2006)
§ 132.18 UNLAWFUL CONGREGATION.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any street, alley, park, public building, any place of
business or assembly open to or frequented by the public, and any other place
which is open to the public view, or to which the public has access.
      UNLAWFULLY CONGREGATE. Remaining idle in essentially one location.
Includes the colloquial expression “hanging around”.
   (B)   Act prohibited. No person shall recklessly unlawfully congregate in a
public place and do any of the following:
      (1)   Breach the peace; or create a disturbance or unreasonable annoyance
to the comfort and repose of any person;
      (2)   Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles;
      (3)   Obstruct, molest or physically interfere with any person;
      (4)   Engage in conduct which creates an unreasonable risk of physical
harm, including making remarks of an offensive, disgusting or insulting nature
to any person; and/or
      (5)   Solicit others for the purpose of engaging in illicit sexual
conduct.
   (C)   Violation. Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.
   (D)   Order and refusal to leave.
      (1)   Whenever a police officer observes a person unlawfully congregating
in a public place, in violation of this section, in addition to issuing a
citation for violating this section, the police officer may order the person to
leave the public place.
      (2)   Any person who refuses to leave a public place after being ordered
to do so by a police officer under division (D)(1) above, is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 132.52) (Ord. 2007-20, passed 7-24-2007)
CHAPTER 133: SEX OFFENSES
Section
   
133.01   Definitions
   
133.02   Unlawful sexual conduct with a minor
   
133.03   Sexual imposition
   
133.04   Public indecency
   
133.05   Voyeurism
   
133.06   Polygraph examinations for victims: restrictions on use
   
133.07   Procuring; engagement in sexual activity for hire
   
133.08   Soliciting; loitering to engage in
   
133.09   Prostitution
   
133.10   Disseminating matter harmful to juveniles
   
133.11   Displaying matter harmful to juveniles
   
133.12   Deception to obtain matter harmful to juveniles
   
133.13   Rules of evidence
   
133.14   Declaratory judgment
   
133.15   Injunction; abatement of nuisance
   
133.16   Unlawful operation of viewing booths depicting sexual conduct
   
133.17   Juveniles on the premises of adult entertainment establishments
prohibited
   
133.18   Sexually oriented businesses; illegal operation and activity
   
133.19   Unlawful advertising of massage
   
133.20   Nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images
 
   
133.99   Sentencing for sexually oriented offenses; sexual predators;
registration
Statutory reference:
   Assistance to victims of sexual assault, see R.C. §§ 2907.28 et seq.
   Child victim, disposition of, see R.C. § 2945.481
   Suppression of information at trial, see R.C. § 2907.11
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27
§ 133.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.
   HARMFUL TO JUVENILES. That quality of any material or performance describing
or representing nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sado-masochistic
abuse in any form to which all of the following apply:
      (1)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole, appeals to
the prurient interest of juveniles in sex.
      (2)   The material or performance is patently offensive to prevailing
standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable
for juveniles.
      (3)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole, lacks
serious literary, artistic, political, and scientific value for juveniles.
   JUVENILE. Any unmarried person under 18 years of age.
   MATERIAL. Any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print, picture,
figure, image, description, motion picture film, video cassette, laser disc,
phonograph record, cassette tape, compact disc, or other tangible thing capable
of arousing interest through sight, sound, or touch and includes an image or
text appearing on a computer monitor, television screen, liquid crystal
display, or similar display device or an image or text recorded on a computer
hard disk, computer floppy disk, compact disk, magnetic tape, or similar data
storage device.
   MENTAL HEALTH CLIENT OR PATIENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.51.
   MENTAL HEALTH PROFESSIONAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.115.
   MINOR. A person under the age of 18.
   NUDITY. The showing, representation, or depiction of human male or female
genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a full, opaque covering, or of
a female breast with less than a full, opaque covering of any portion thereof
below the top of the nipple, or of covered male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state.
   OBSCENE. When considered as a whole, and judged with reference to ordinary
adults or, if it is designed for sexual deviates or other specially susceptible
group, judged with reference to that group, any material or performance is
“obscene” if any of the following apply:
      (1)   Its dominant appeal is to prurient interest.
      (2)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting
sexual activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, or nudity in a way that tends
to represent human beings as mere objects of sexual appetite.
      (3)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting
bestiality or extreme or bizarre violence, cruelty, or brutality.
      (4)   Its dominant tendency is to appeal to scatological interest by
displaying or depicting human bodily functions of elimination in a way that
inspires disgust or revulsion in persons with ordinary sensibilities, without
serving any genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral, or artistic
purpose.
      (5)   It contains a series of displays or descriptions of sexual
activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, nudity, bestiality, extreme or
bizarre violence, cruelty, or brutality, or human bodily functions of
elimination, the cumulative effect of which is a dominant tendency to appeal to
prurient or scatological interest, when the appeal to such an interest is
primarily for its own sake or for commercial exploitation, rather than
primarily for a genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral, or
artistic purpose.
   PERFORMANCE. Any motion picture, preview, trailer, play, show, skit, dance,
or other exhibition performed before an audience.
   PLACE WHERE A PERSON HAS A REASONABLE EXPECTATION OF PRIVACY. A place where
a reasonable person would believe that the person could fully disrobe in
private.
   PRIVATE AREA. The genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or female breast below the
top of the areola, where nude or covered by an undergarment.
   PROSTITUTE. A male or female who promiscuously engages in sexual activity
for hire, regardless of whether the hire is paid to the prostitute or to
another.
   SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person or the
condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained.
   SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Sexual conduct or sexual contact, or both.
   SEXUAL CONDUCT. Vaginal intercourse between a male and female; anal
intercourse, fellatio, and cunnilingus between persons regardless of sex; and,
without privilege to do so, the insertion, however slight, of any part of the
body or any instrument, apparatus, or other object into the vaginal or anal
opening of another. Penetration, however slight, is sufficient to complete
vaginal or anal intercourse.
   SEXUAL CONTACT. Any touching of an erogenous zone of another, including
without limitation the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region, or, if the
person is a female, a breast, for the purpose of sexually arousing or
gratifying either person.
   SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals when in a
state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   SPOUSE. A person married to an offender at the time of an alleged offense,
except that such person shall not be considered the spouse when any of the
following apply:
      (1)   When the parties have entered into a written separation agreement
pursuant to R.C. § 3103.06.
      (2)   When an action is pending between the parties for annulment,
divorce, dissolution of marriage, or legal separation.
      (3)   In the case of an action for legal separation, after the effective
date of the judgment for legal separation.
(R.C. § 2907.01)
§ 133.02 UNLAWFUL SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH A MINOR.
   (A)   No person who is 18 years of age or older shall engage in sexual
conduct with another when the offender knows the other person is 13 years of
age or older but less than 16 years of age, or the offender is reckless in that
regard.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful sexual conduct
with a minor.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2), unlawful sexual
conduct with a minor is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(3) of this section, if
the offender is less than four years older than the other person, unlawful
sexual conduct with a minor is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03 or 2907.04, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of former R.C. § 2907.12, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, unlawful sexual conduct with a
minor is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.04)
§ 133.03 SEXUAL IMPOSITION.
   (A)   No person shall have sexual contact with another; cause another to
have sexual contact with the offender; or cause two or more other persons to
have sexual contact when any of the following applies:
      (1)   The offender knows that the sexual contact is offensive to the
other person, or one of the other persons, or is reckless in that regard.
      (2)   The offender knows that the other person’s, or one of the other
person’s ability to appraise the nature of or control the offender’s or
touching person’s conduct is substantially impaired.
      (3)   The offender knows that the other person, or one of the other
persons, submits because of being unaware of the sexual contact.
      (4)   The other person, or one of the other persons, is 13 years of age
or older but less than 16 years of age, whether or not the offender knows the
age of the person, and the offender is at least 18 years of age and four or
more years older than the other person.
      (5)   The offender is a mental health professional, the other person or
one of the other persons is a mental health client or patient of the offender,
and the offender induces the other person who is the client or patient to
submit by falsely representing to the other person who is the client or patient
that the sexual contact is necessary for mental health treatment purposes.
   (B)   No person shall be convicted of a violation of this section solely
upon the victim’s testimony unsupported by other evidence.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of sexual imposition, a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section, R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03,
2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, former R.C. § 2907.12, or a substantially equivalent
state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this section, R.C. § 2907.02,
2907.03, 2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, former R.C. § 2907.12, or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any combination of those
sections, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree and,
notwithstanding the range of jail terms prescribed in R.C. § 2929.24, the court
may impose on the offender a definite jail term of not more than one year.
(R.C. § 2907.06)
Statutory reference:
   Gross sexual imposition, felony, see R.C. § 2907.05
   Notice to licensing board or agency upon indictment, conviction or guilty
plea of mental health professional, see R.C. §§ 2907.17 and 2907.18
§ 133.04 PUBLIC INDECENCY.
   (A)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following, under
circumstances in which the person’s conduct is likely to be viewed by and
affront others who are in the person’s physical proximity and who are not
members of the person’s household:
      (1)   Expose the persons’s private parts.
      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct or masturbation.
      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be
sexual conduct or masturbation.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following, under circumstances
in which the person’s conduct is likely to be viewed by and affront another
person who is in the person’s physical proximity, who is a minor, and who is
not the spouse of the offender:
      (1)   Engage in masturbation.
      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct.
      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be
sexual conduct or masturbation.
      (4)   Expose the person’s private parts with the purpose of personal
sexual arousal or gratification or to lure the minor into sexual activity.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public indecency and
shall be punished as provided in divisions (C)(2), (C)(3), (C)(4), and (C)(5)
of this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(2), a violation
of division (A)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, a violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the third degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by
the offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations
of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
a violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by the
offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more
violations of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, a violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by
the offender’s conduct was a minor, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(3), a violation
of division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section
is a misdemeanor of the second degree or, if any person who was likely to view
and be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section or a substantially equivalent
state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if any person who was
likely to view and be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor, a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(4), a violation
of division (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
second degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law
or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) of this section is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(5), a violation
of division (B)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation of
this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (B)(4) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (D)   (1)   If either of the following applies, the court may determine at
the time of sentencing whether to classify the offender as a tier I sex
offender/child-victim offender for a violation of division (B)(4) of this
section:
         (a)   The offender is less than ten years older than the other person.
         (b)   The offender is ten or more years older than the other person
and the offender has not previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any
violation of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance.
      (2)   If the offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (B)(4) of this section, is ten or more years older than the other
person, and previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation
of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the court shall issue an order at the time of sentencing that
classifies the offender as a tier I sex offender/child-victim offender subject
to registration under R.C. §§ 2950.04, 2950.041, 2950.05, and 2950.06.
(R.C. § 2907.09)
   (E)   A mother is entitled to breast-feed her baby in any location of a
place of public accommodation, as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, wherein the mother
otherwise is permitted.
(R.C. § 3781.55)
Statutory reference:
   Bail considerations for persons charged, see R.C. § 2907.41
§ 133.05 VOYEURISM.
   (A)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying himself
or herself, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade the
privacy of another, to spy or eavesdrop upon another.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly commit trespass or otherwise secretly or
surreptitiously videotape, film, photograph, broadcast, stream, or otherwise
record another person, in a place where a person has a reasonable expectation
of privacy, for the purpose of viewing the private areas of that person.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly commit trespass or otherwise secretly or
surreptitiously videotape, film, photograph, broadcast, stream, or otherwise
record a minor, in a place where a person has a reasonable expectation of
privacy, for the purpose of viewing the private areas of the minor.
   (D)   No person shall secretly or surreptitiously videotape, film,
photograph, or otherwise record another person above, under, or through the
clothing being worn by that other person for the purpose of viewing the body
of, or the undergarments worn by, that other person.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of voyeurism.
      (1)   A violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
      (2)   A violation of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
second degree.
      (3)   A violation of division (D) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (4)   A violation of division (C) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.08)
§ 133.06 POLYGRAPH EXAMINATIONS FOR VICTIMS: RESTRICTIONS ON USE.
   (A)   (1)   A peace officer, prosecutor, other public official, defendant,
defendant’s attorney, alleged juvenile offender, or alleged juvenile offender’s
attorney shall not ask or require a victim of an alleged sex offense to submit
to a polygraph examination as a condition for proceeding with the investigation
or prosecution of the alleged sex offense.
      (2)   The refusal of the victim of an alleged sex offense to submit to a
polygraph examination shall not prevent the investigation of the alleged sex
offense, the filing of criminal charges with respect to the alleged sex
offense, or the prosecution of the alleged perpetrator of the alleged sex
offense.
   (B)   As used in this section:
      ALLEGED JUVENILE OFFENDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2930.01.
      PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.51.
      POLYGRAPH EXAMINATION. Means any mechanical or electrical instrument or
device of any type used or allegedly used to examine, test, or question an
individual for the purpose of determining the individual’s truthfulness.
      PROSECUTION. Means the prosecution of criminal charges in a criminal
prosecution or the prosecution of a delinquent child complaint in a delinquency
proceeding.
      PROSECUTOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
      PUBLIC OFFICIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 117.01.
      SEX OFFENSE. Means a violation of any provision of §§
133.02 to
133.05 or R.C. §§ 2907.02 to 2907.09.
(R.C. § 2907.10)
§ 133.07 PROCURING; ENGAGEMENT IN SEXUAL ACTIVITY FOR HIRE.
   (A)   Procuring.
      (1)   No person, knowingly and for gain, shall do either of the
following:
         (a)   Entice or solicit another to patronize a prostitute or brothel;
         (b)   Procure a prostitute for another to patronize, or take or direct
another at the other’s request to any place for the purpose of patronizing a
prostitute.
      (2)   No person, having authority or responsibility over the use of
premises, shall knowingly permit the premises to be used for the purpose of
engaging in sexual activity for hire.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(1)(a) or (A)(1)(b) of this section is
guilty of procuring. Except as otherwise provided in this division, procuring
is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the prostitute who is procured,
patronized, or otherwise involved in a violation of division (A)(1)(b) of this
section is under 18 years of age at the time of the violation, regardless of
whether the offender who violates division (A)(1)(b) of this section knows the
prostitute’s age, or if a prostitute who engages in sexual activity for hire in
premises used in violation of division (A)(2) of this section is under 18 years
of age at the time of the violation, regardless of whether the offender who
violates division (A)(2) of this section knows the prostitute’s age, procuring
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.23)
   (B)   Engagement in sexual activity for hire.
      (1)   As used in this division (B):
         PERSON WITH A DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2905.32.
         SEXUAL ACTIVITY FOR HIRE. An implicit or explicit agreement to provide
sexual activity in exchange for anything of value paid to the person engaging
in such sexual activity, to any person trafficking that person, or to any
person associated with either such person.
      (2)   No person shall recklessly induce, entice, or procure another to
engage in sexual activity for hire in exchange for the person giving anything
of value to the other person.
      (3)   No person shall recklessly induce, entice, or procure another to
engage in sexual activity for hire in exchange for the person giving anything
of value to the other person if the other person is a person with a
developmental disability and the offender knows or has reasonable cause to
believe that the other person is a person with a developmental disability.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (B)(2) of this section is guilty of
engaging in prostitution, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever violates
division (B)(3) of this section is guilty of engaging in prostitution with a
person with a developmental disability, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. In sentencing an offender under this division for a
violation of division (B)(2) of this section, the court shall require the
offender to attend an education or treatment program aimed at preventing
persons from inducing, enticing, or procuring another to engage in sexual
activity for hire in exchange for the person giving anything of value to the
other person. Notwithstanding the fine specified in R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a) for
a misdemeanor of the first degree, in sentencing an offender under this
division for a violation of division (B)(2) of this section, the court may
impose upon the offender a fine of not more than $1,500.
(R.C. § 2907.231)
§ 133.08 SOLICITING; LOITERING TO ENGAGE IN.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly solicit another to engage in sexual activity
for hire in exchange for the person receiving anything of value from the other
person.
   (B)   No person, with knowledge that the person has tested positive as a
carrier of a virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, shall engage
in conduct in violation of division (A) of this section.
   (C)   As used in division (A) of this section, SEXUAL ACTIVITY FOR HIRE
means an implicit or explicit agreement to provide sexual activity in exchange
for anything of value paid to the person engaging in such sexual activity, to
any person trafficking that person, or to any person associated with either
such person.
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
soliciting. Soliciting is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of engaging
in solicitation after a positive HIV test, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.24)
   (E)   No person, with purpose to solicit another to engage in sexual
activity for hire and while in or near a public place, shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Beckon to, stop or attempt to stop another;
      (2)   Engage or attempt to engage another in conversation;
      (3)   Stop or attempt to stop the operator of a vehicle or approach a
stationary vehicle;
      (4)   If the offender is the operator of or a passenger in a vehicle,
stop, attempt to stop, beckon to, attempt to beckon to, or entice another to
approach or enter the vehicle of which the offender is the operator or in which
the offender is the passenger;
      (5)   Interfere with the free passage of another.
   (F)   No person, with knowledge that the person has tested positive as a
carrier of a virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, shall engage
in conduct in violation of division (E) of this section.
   (G)   As used in division (E) of this section:
      PUBLIC PLACE. Means any of the following:
         (a)   A street, road, highway, thoroughfare, bikeway, walkway,
sidewalk, bridge, alley, alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking lot or
transportation facility.
         (b)   A doorway or entrance way to a building that fronts on a place
described in division (a) of this definition.
         (c)   A place not described in division (a) or (b) of this definition
that is open to the public.
      VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   (H)   (1)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section is guilty of
loitering to engage in solicitation, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (F) of this section is guilty of
loitering to engage in solicitation after a positive HIV test, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.241)
Statutory reference:
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27
§ 133.09 PROSTITUTION.
   (A)   No person shall engage in sexual activity for hire.
   (B)   No person, with knowledge that the person has tested positive as a
carrier of a virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, shall engage
in sexual activity for hire.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
prostitution, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of engaging
in prostitution after a positive HIV test, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.25)
Statutory reference:
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27
§ 133.10 DISSEMINATING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (A)   No person, with knowledge of its character or content, shall
recklessly do any of following:
      (1)   Directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit,
rent, or present to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles;
      (2)   Directly offer or agree to sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate,
provide, exhibit, rent, or present to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law
enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement
officers posing as juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or
harmful to juveniles;
      (3)   While in the physical proximity of the juvenile or law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, allow any juvenile or law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile to review or peruse any material or view any live
performance that is harmful to juveniles.
   (B)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section
that involves material or a performance that is harmful to juveniles but not
obscene:
      (1)   The defendant is the parent, guardian, or spouse of the juvenile
involved.
      (2)   The juvenile involved, at the time of the conduct in question, was
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian who, with knowledge of its
character, consented to the material or performance being furnished or
presented to the juvenile.
      (3)   The juvenile exhibited to the defendant or his or her agent or
employee a draft card, driver’s license, birth record, marriage license, or
other official or apparently official document purporting to show that the
juvenile was 18 years of age or over or married, and the person to whom the
document was exhibited did not otherwise have reasonable cause to believe that
the juvenile was under the age of 18 and unmarried.
   (C)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section,
involving material or a performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles,
that the material or performance was furnished or presented for a bona fide
medical, scientific, educational, governmental, judicial, or other proper
purpose, by a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher,
librarian, clergy, prosecutor, judge, or other proper person.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) of this section, mistake of
age is not a defense to a charge under this section.
   (D)   (1)   A person directly sells, delivers, furnishes, disseminates,
provides, exhibits, rents, or presents or directly offers or agrees to sell,
deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present material or a
performance to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles in violation of this section by means of an electronic method of
remotely transmitting information if the person knows or has reason to believe
that the person receiving the information is a juvenile or the group of persons
receiving the information are juveniles.
      (2)   A person remotely transmitting information by means of a method of
mass distribution does not directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate,
provide, exhibit, rent, or present or directly offer or agree to sell, deliver,
furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present the material or
performance in question to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles in violation of this section if either of the following applies:
         (a)   The person has inadequate information to know or have reason to
believe that a particular recipient of the information or offer is a juvenile.
         (b)   The method of mass distribution does not provide the person the
ability to prevent a particular recipient from receiving the information.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disseminating matter
harmful to juveniles. If the material or performance involved is harmful to
juveniles except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the material or performance
involved is obscene, violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.31)
   (F)   Presumptions, notice and defense.
      (1)   An owner or manager, or agent or employee of an owner or manager,
of a bookstore, newsstand, theater, or other commercial establishment engaged
in selling material or exhibiting performances, who, in the course of business
does any of the acts prohibited by this section is presumed to have knowledge
of the character of the material or performance involved if the owner, manager,
or agent or employee of the owner or manager has actual notice of the nature of
such material or performance, whether or not the owner, manager, or agent or
employee of the owner or manager has precise knowledge of its contents.
      (2)   Without limitation on the manner in which such notice may be given,
actual notice of the character of material or a performance may be given in
writing by the chief legal officer of the municipality. Such notice, regardless
of the manner in which it is given, shall identify the sender, identify the
material or performance involved, state whether it is obscene or harmful to
juveniles, and bear the date of such notice.
      (3)   This §
133.10 does not apply to a motion picture operator or projectionist acting
within the scope of employment as an employee of the owner or manager of the
theater or other place for the showing of motion pictures to the general
public, and having no managerial responsibility or financial interest in the
operator’s or projectionist’s place of employment, other than wages.
      (4)   (a)   The provisions of §§
133.10,
133.11 and
133.12(A) do not apply to a person solely because the person provided access or
connection to or from an electronic method of remotely transferring information
not under that person’s control, including having provided capabilities that
are incidental to providing access or connection to or from the electronic
method of remotely transferring the information, and that do not include the
creation of the content of the material that is the subject of the access or
connection.
         (b)   Division (F)(4)(a) of this section does not apply to a person
who conspires with an entity actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of §
133.10,
133.11 and
133.12 or who knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.
         (c)   Division (F)(4)(a) of this section does not apply to a person
who provides access or connection to an electronic method of remotely
transferring information that is engaged in the violation of §
1133.10,
133.11 and
133.12d of remotely transferring information or content over which that person
exercises editorial control.
      (5)   An employer is not guilty of a violation of §
133.10,
133.11 and
133.12 based on the actions of an employee or agent of the employer unless the
employee’s or agent’s conduct is within the scope of the employee’s or agent’s
employment or agency, and the employer does either of the following:
         (a)   With knowledge of the employee’s or agent’s conduct, the
employer authorizes or ratifies the conduct.
         (b)   The employer recklessly disregards the employee’s or agent’s
conduct.
      (6)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under §
133.10 or
133.11 as the section applies to an image transmitted through the internet or
other electronic method of remotely transmitting information that the person
charged with violating the section has taken, in good faith, reasonable,
effective, and appropriate actions under the circumstances to restrict or
prevent access by juveniles to material that is harmful to juveniles, including
any method that is feasible under available technology.
(R.C. § 2907.35)
§ 133.11 DISPLAYING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (A)   No person who has custody, control, or supervision of a commercial
establishment, with knowledge of the character or content of the material
involved, shall display at the establishment any material that is harmful to
juveniles and that is open to view by juveniles as part of the invited general
public.
   (B)   It is not a violation of division (A) of this section if the material
in question is displayed by placing it behind “blinder racks” or similar
devices that cover at least the lower two-thirds of the material, if the
material in question is wrapped or placed behind the counter, or if the
material in question otherwise is covered or located so that the portion that
is harmful to juveniles is not open to the view of juveniles.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of displaying matter harmful
to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day during which the
offender is in violation of this section constitutes a separate offense.
(R.C. § 2907.311)
§ 133.12 DECEPTION TO OBTAIN MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (A)   No person, for the purpose of enabling a juvenile to obtain any
material or gain admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles,
shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is the parent, guardian, or spouse
of the juvenile.
      (2)   Furnish the juvenile with any identification or document purporting
to show that the juvenile is 18 years of age or over or married.
   (B)   No juvenile, for the purpose of obtaining any material or gaining
admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles, shall do either of
the following:
      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is 18 years of age or over or
married.
      (2)   Exhibit any identification or document purporting to show that he
or she is 18 years of age or over or married.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of deception to obtain matter
harmful to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the second degree. A juvenile who
violates division (B) of this section shall be adjudged an unruly child, with
the disposition of the case as may be appropriate under R.C. Chapter 2151.
(R.C. § 2907.33)
Statutory reference:
   Juvenile Court, see R.C. Chapter 2151
§ 133.13 RULES OF EVIDENCE.
   (A)   In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a place is a
brothel, evidence as to the reputation of such place and as to the reputation
of the persons who inhabit or frequent it is admissible on the question of
whether such place is or is not a brothel.
   (B)   In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a person is a
prostitute, evidence as to the reputation of such person is admissible on the
question of whether such person is or is not a prostitute.
   (C)   In any prosecution for a violation of §§
133.07 through
133.09, proof of a prior conviction of the accused of any such offense or
substantially equivalent offense is admissible in support of the charge.
   (D)   The prohibition contained in R.C. § 2317.02(D) against testimony by a
husband or wife concerning communications between them does not apply, and the
accused’s spouse may testify concerning any such communication in any of the
following cases:
      (1)   When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of §
133.07 and the spouse testifying was the prostitute involved in the offense or
the person who used the offender’s premises to engage in sexual activity for
hire;
      (2)   When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of §
133.08(A) or §
133.09.
(R.C. § 2907.26)
§ 133.14 DECLARATORY JUDGMENT.
   (A)   Without limitation on the persons otherwise entitled to bring an
action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2721, involving the
same issue, the following persons have standing to bring a declaratory judgment
action to determine whether particular materials or performances are obscene or
harmful to juveniles:
      (1)   The chief legal officer of the municipality if and when there is
reasonable cause to believe that R.C. § 2907.31 or R.C. § 2907.32, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, is being or is about to be
violated;
      (2)   Any person who, pursuant to R.C. § 2907.35(B) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, has received notice in writing from the chief
legal officer stating that particular materials or performances are obscene or
harmful to juveniles.
   (B)   Any party to an action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to division
(A) of this section is entitled, upon the party’s request, to trial on the
merits within five days after joinder of the issues, and the court shall render
judgment within five days after trial is concluded.
   (C)   An action for a declaratory judgement pursuant to division (A) of this
section shall not be brought during the pendency of any civil action or
criminal prosecution when the character of the particular materials or
performances involved is at issue in the pending case, and either of the
following applies:
      (1)   Either of the parties to the action for a declaratory judgment is a
party to the pending case;
      (2)   A judgment in the pending case will necessarily constitute res
judicata as to the character of the materials or performances involved.
   (D)   A civil action or criminal prosecution in which the character of
particular materials or performances is at issue, brought during the pendency
of an action for a declaratory judgment involving the same issue, shall be
stayed during the pendency of the action for a declaratory judgment.
   (E)   The fact that a violation of R.C. § 2907.31 or R.C. § 2907.32, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, occurs prior to a judicial
determination of the character of the material or performance involved in the
violation does not relieve the offender of criminal liability for the
violation, even though prosecution may be stayed pending the judicial
determination.
(R.C. § 2907.36)
§ 133.15 INJUNCTION; ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   (A)   Where it appears that R.C. § 2907.31 or R.C. § 2907.32, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, is being or is about to be
violated, the chief legal officer of the municipality may bring an action to
enjoin the violation. The defendant, upon his or her request, is entitled to
trial on the merits within five days after the joinder of the issues, and the
court shall render judgment within five days after the trial is concluded.
   (B)   Premises used or occupied for repeated violations of R.C. § 2907.31 or
R.C. § 2907.32, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, constitute a
nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2907.37)
Statutory reference:
   Disseminating matter harmful to juveniles, felony, see R.C. § 2907.31
   Pandering obscenity, felony, see R.C. § 2907.32
§ 133.16 UNLAWFUL OPERATION OF VIEWING BOOTHS DEPICTING SEXUAL CONDUCT.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. Means an entity that is open to the public and
to which either of the following applies:
         (a)   It has a substantial or significant portion of its stock in
trade of the sale, rental, or viewing of visual materials or performances
depicting sexual conduct.
         (b)   It has as a principal business purpose the sale, rental, or
viewing of visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct.
      VISUAL MATERIALS OR PERFORMANCES. Means films, videos, CD-ROM discs,
streaming video, or other motion pictures.
   (B)   No person who has custody, control, or supervision of a commercial
establishment, with knowledge of the character of the visual material or
performance involved, shall knowingly permit the use of, or offer the use of,
viewing booths, stalls, or partitioned portions of a room located in the
commercial establishment for the purpose of viewing visual materials or
performances depicting sexual conduct unless both of the following apply:
      (1)   The inside of each booth, stall, or partitioned room is visible
from, and at least one side of each booth, stall, or partitioned room is open
to, a continuous and contiguous main aisle or hallway that is open to the
public areas of the commercial establishment and is not obscured by any
curtain, door, or other covering or enclosure.
      (2)   No booth, stall, or partitioned room is designed, constructed,
pandered, or allowed to be used for the purpose of encouraging or facilitating
nudity or sexual activity on the part of or between patrons or members of the
public, and no booth, stall, or partitioned room has any aperture, hole, or
opening for the purpose of encouraging or facilitating nudity or sexual
activity.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that
either of the following applies to the involved visual materials or
performances:
      (1)   The visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct are
disseminated or presented for a bona fide medical, scientific, educational,
religious, governmental, judicial, or other proper purpose and by or to a
physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher, person pursuing bona
fide studies or research, librarian, member of the clergy, prosecutor, judge,
or other person having a proper interest in the visual materials or
performances.
      (2)   The visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct,
taken as a whole, would be found by a reasonable person to have serious
literary, artistic, political, or scientific value or are presented or
disseminated in good faith for a serious literary, artistic, political, or
scientific purpose and are not pandered for their prurient appeal.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting unlawful
operation of viewing booths depicting sexual conduct, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(R.C. § 2907.38)
§ 133.17 JUVENILES ON THE PREMISES OF ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
PROHIBITED.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      ADULT ARCADE. Means any place to which the public is permitted or invited
in which coin-operated, slug-operated, or electronically, electrically, or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other
image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five or
fewer persons per machine at any one time, and in which the images so displayed
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting or
describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE, or ADULT VIDEO STORE.
         (a)   Means a commercial establishment that, for any form of
consideration, has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-
trade in, derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues from,
devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or
advertising to, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display
space for the sale or rental of any of the following:
            1.   Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides, or
other visual representations, that are characterized by their emphasis upon the
exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas;
            2.   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for
use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of self or others.
         (b)   Includes a commercial establishment as defined in R.C. §
2907.38. An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do
not involve the offering for sale, rental, or viewing of materials exhibiting
or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and
still be categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video
store. The existence of other principal business purposes does not exempt an
establishment from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes
is offering for sale or rental, for some form of consideration, such materials
that exhibit or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
      ADULT CABARET. Means a nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle
club, or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages
are served, that regularly features any of the following:
         (a)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity;
         (b)   Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities;
         (c)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
      ADULT ENTERTAINMENT. Means the sale, rental, or exhibition, for any form
of consideration, of books, films, video cassettes, magazines, periodicals, or
live performances that are characterized by an emphasis on the exposure or
display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activity.
      ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT. Means an adult arcade, adult
bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, nude or seminude model studio, or sexual
encounter establishment. An establishment in which a medical practitioner,
psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the
state engages in medically approved and recognized therapy, including but not
limited to massage therapy, as regulated pursuant to R.C. § 4731.15, is not an
“adult entertainment establishment”.
      ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. Means a commercial establishment where
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon
the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas are regularly shown for any form of consideration.
      ADULT THEATER. Means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment that, for any form of consideration, regularly
features persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity or live
performances that are characterized by their emphasis upon the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
      DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY THEIR EMPHASIS UPON. Means the dominant
or principal character and theme of the object described by this phrase. For
instance, when the phrase refers to films “that are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas”, the films so described are
those whose dominant or principal character and theme are the exhibition or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      NUDE OR SEMINUDE MODEL STUDIO. Means any place where a person, who
regularly appears in a state of nudity or seminudity, is provided for money or
any other form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. A modeling
class or studio is not a nude or seminude model studio and is not subject to
this chapter if it is operated in any of the following ways:
         (a)   By a college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation;
         (b)   By a private college or university that maintains and operates
educational programs, the credits for which are transferable to a college or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
         (c)   In a structure that has no sign visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising indicating that a person appearing in a
state of nudity or seminudity is available for viewing, if in order to
participate in a class in the structure, a student must enroll at least three
days in advance of the class and if not more than one nude or seminude model is
on the premises at any one time.
      NUDITY, NUDE, or STATE OF NUDITY. Means the showing of the human male or
female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft, or cleavage with less
than a fully opaque covering; or the showing of the female breasts with less
than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple.
      REGULARLY FEATURES or REGULARLY SHOWN. Means a consistent or substantial
course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a
substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a part of the
ongoing business of the adult entertainment establishment.
      SEMINUDE or STATE OF SEMINUDITY. Means a state of dress in which opaque
clothing covers not more than the genitals, pubic region, and nipple of the
female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or
devices.
      SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT.
         (a)   Means a business or commercial establishment that, as one of its
principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration a place where
either of the following occur:
            1.   Two or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for
the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities.
            2.   Two or more persons appear nude or seminude for the purpose of
displaying their nude or seminude bodies for their receipt of consideration or
compensation in any type or form.
         (b)   An establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist,
psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in
medically approved and recognized therapy, including but not limited to massage
therapy, as regulated pursuant to R.C. § 4731.15, is not a “sexual encounter
establishment”.
      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Means the cleft of the buttocks, anus, male
or female genitals, or the female breast.
      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, or actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy;
         (b)   Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of
the activities described in division (a) of this definition.
   (B)   No person knowingly shall allow an individual, including but not
limited to a patron, customer, or employee, who is under 18 years of age on the
premises of an adult entertainment establishment.
   (C)   No individual who is under 18 years of age knowingly shall show or
give false information concerning the individual’s name or age, or other false
identification, for the purpose of gaining entrance to an adult entertainment
establishment.
   (D)   A person shall not be found guilty of a violation of division (B) of
this section if the person raises as an affirmative defense and if the jury or,
in a nonjury trial, the court finds the person has established by a
preponderance of the evidence, all of the following:
      (1)   The individual gaining entrance to the adult entertainment
establishment exhibited to an operator, employee, agent, or independent
contractor of the adult entertainment establishment a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 and
4507.52 showing that the individual was then at least 18 years of age.
      (2)   The operator, employee, agent, or independent contractor made a
bona fide effort to ascertain the true age of the individual gaining entrance
to the adult entertainment establishment by checking the identification
presented, at the time of entrance, to ascertain that the description on the
identification compared with the appearance of the individual and that the
identification had not been altered in any way.
      (3)   The operator, employee, agent, or independent contractor had reason
to believe that the individual gaining entrance to the adult entertainment
establishment was at least 18 years of age.
   (E)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense described in
division (D) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or the
deputy registrar who issued a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50 and 4507.52 shall be permitted to
submit certified copies of the records, in the Registrar’s or deputy
registrar’s possession, of the issuance
of the license or identification card in question, in lieu of the testimony of
the personnel of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
permitting a juvenile on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment,
a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day a person violates this division
constitutes a separate offense.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of use by a
juvenile of false information to enter an adult entertainment establishment, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if committed by
an adult.
(R.C. § 2907.39)
§ 133.18 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES; ILLEGAL OPERATION AND ACTIVITY.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE. Means a commercial establishment
that has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock in trade or
inventory in, derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues
from, devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or
advertising to, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display
space for the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of books,
magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides, or other visual
representations, that are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      ADULT CABARET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
      ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. Means a commercial establishment where
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions that are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown
to more than five individuals for any form of consideration.
      CHARACTERIZED BY. Describing the essential character or quality of an
item.
      EMPLOYEE. Means any individual who performs any service on the premises
of a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis,
regardless of whether the individual is denominated an employee, independent
contractor, agent, or otherwise, but does not include an individual exclusively
on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery
of goods to the premises.
      NUDE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
      NUDITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
      OPERATOR. Means any individual on the premises of a sexually oriented
business who causes the business to function or who puts or keeps in operation
the business or who is authorized to manage the business or exercise overall
operational control of the business premises.
      PATRON. Means any individual on the premises of a sexually oriented
business except for any of the following:
         (a)   An operator or an employee of the sexually oriented business;
         (b)   An individual who is on the premises exclusively for repair or
maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises;
         (c)   A public employee or a volunteer firefighter emergency medical
services worker acting within the scope of the public employee’s or volunteer’s
duties as a public employee or volunteer.
      PREMISES. Means the real property on which the sexually oriented business
is located and all appurtenances to the real property, including, but not
limited, to the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways, and
parking lots or parking garages adjacent to the real property under the
ownership, control, or supervision of the owner or operator of the sexually
oriented business.
      REGULARLY. Means consistently or repeatedly.
      SEMINUDE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
      SEXUAL DEVICE. Means any three-dimensional object designed and marketed
for stimulation of the male or female human genitals or anus or female breasts
or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others, including but not
limited to dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, and physical representations of the
human genital organs, but not including devices primarily intended for
protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy.
      SEXUAL DEVICE SHOP. Means a commercial establishment that regularly
features sexual devices, but not including any pharmacy, drug store, medical
clinic, or establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or healthcare
products or services, and not including any commercial establishment that does
not restrict access to its premises by reason of age.
      SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. Means a business or commercial enterprise that,
as one of its principal business purposes, purports to offer for any form of
consideration physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
individuals of the opposite sex when one or more of the individuals is nude or
seminude.
      SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Means an adult bookstore, adult video store,
adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, sexual device shop, or sexual
encounter center, but does not include a business solely by reason of its
showing, selling, or renting materials that may depict sex.
      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Includes human genitals, pubic region, and
buttocks and the human female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola.
      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Means sexual intercourse, oral copulation,
masturbation, or sodomy, or excretory functions as a part of or in connection
with any of these activities.
      STATE OF NUDITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
      STATE OF SEMINUDITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
   (B)   No sexually oriented business shall be or remain open for business
between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day, except that a sexually
oriented business that holds a liquor permit pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4303 may
remain open until the hour specified in that permit if it does not conduct,
offer, or allow sexually oriented entertainment activity in which the
performers appear nude.
   (C)   (1)   No patron who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family
shall knowingly touch any employee while that employee is nude or seminude or
touch the clothing of any employee while that employee is nude or seminude.
      (2)   No employee who regularly appears nude or seminude on the premises
of a sexually oriented business, while on the premises of that sexually
oriented business and while nude or seminude, shall knowingly touch a patron
who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who
is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or the clothing of a patron
who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who
is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or allow a patron who is not
a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who is not a
member of the employee’s immediate family to touch the employee or the clothing
of the employee.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of illegally
operating a sexually oriented business, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (E)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of illegal
sexually oriented activity in a sexually oriented business. If the offender
touches a specified anatomical area of the patron or employee, or the clothing
covering a specified anatomical area, a violation of division (C) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender does not touch a
specified anatomical area of the patron or employee, or the clothing covering a
specified anatomical area, a violation of division (C) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2907.40)
Statutory reference:
   State indemnification for certain municipal liability stemming from local
adult business regulations, see R.C. § 715.55
§ 133.19 UNLAWFUL ADVERTISING OF MASSAGE.
   (A)   No person, by means of a statement, solicitation, or offer in a print
or electronic publication, sign, placard, storefront display, or other medium,
shall advertise massage, relaxation massage, any other massage technique or
method, or any related service, with the suggestion or promise of sexual
activity.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful advertising of
massage, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (C)   Nothing in this section prevents the municipality from enacting any
regulation of the advertising of massage further than and in addition to the
provisions of divisions (A) and (B) of this section.
   (D)   As used in this section, SEXUAL ACTIVITY has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2907.01.
(R.C. § 2927.17)
§ 133.20 NONCONSENSUAL DISSEMINATION OF PRIVATE SEXUAL IMAGES.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      CABLE SERVICE PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.01.
      DIRECT-TO-HOME SATELLITE SERVICE. Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C. §
303, as amended.
      DISSEMINATE. Means to post, distribute, or publish on a computer device,
computer network, web site, or other electronic device or medium of
communication.
      IMAGE. Means a photograph, film, videotape, digital recording, or other
depiction or portrayal of a person.
      INTERACTIVE COMPUTER SERVICE. Has the meaning defined in the
“Telecommunications Act of 1996”, 47 U.S.C. § 230, as amended.
      INTERNET PROVIDER. Means a provider of internet service, including all of
the following:
         (a)   Broadband service, however defined or classified by the Federal
Communications Commission;
         (b)   Information service or telecommunications service, both as
defined in the “Telecommunications Act of 1996”, 47 U.S.C. § 153, as amended;
         (c)   Internet protocol-enabled services, as defined in R.C. §
4927.01.
      MOBILE SERVICE. Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153, as amended.
      SEXUAL ACT. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Sexual activity;
         (b)   Masturbation;
         (c)   An act involving a bodily substance that is performed for the
purpose of sexual arousal or gratification;
         (d)   Sado-masochistic abuse.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER. Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153,
as amended.
      VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly disseminate an image of another person if
all of the following apply:
      (1)   The person in the image is 18 years of age or older.
      (2)   The person in the image can be identified from the image itself or
from information displayed in connection with the image and the offender
supplied the identifying information.
      (3)   The person in the image is in a state of nudity or is engaged in a
sexual act.
      (4)   The image is disseminated without consent from the person in the
image.
      (5)   The image is disseminated with intent to harm the person in the
image.
   (C)   This section does not prohibit the dissemination of an image if any of
the following apply:
      (1)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of a criminal
investigation that is otherwise lawful.
      (2)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of, or in connection
with, the reporting of unlawful conduct.
      (3)   The image is part of a news report or commentary or an artistic or
expressive work, such as a performance, work of art, literary work, theatrical
work, musical work, motion picture, film, or audiovisual work.
      (4)   The image is disseminated by a law enforcement officer, or a
corrections officer or guard in a detention facility, acting within the scope
of the person’s official duties.
      (5)   The image is disseminated for another lawful public purpose.
      (6)   The person in the image is knowingly and willingly in a state of
nudity or engaged in a sexual act and is knowingly and willingly in a location
in which the person does not have a reasonable expectation of privacy.
      (7)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of medical treatment or
examination.
   (D)   The following entities are not liable for a violation of this section
solely as a result of an image or other information provided by another person:
      (1)   A provider of interactive computer service;
      (2)   A mobile service;
      (3)   A telecommunications carrier;
      (4)   An internet provider;
      (5)   A cable service provider;
      (6)   A direct-to-home satellite service;
      (7)   A video service provider.
   (E)   Any conduct that is a violation of this section and any other section
of this code or the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, the
other section, or both sections.
   (F)   (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (F)(1)(b), (F)(1)
(c), or (F)(1)(d) of this section, whoever violates this section is guilty of
nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images, a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of this section or any substantially equivalent state law
or municipal ordinance, nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images is
a misdemeanor of the second degree.
         (c)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section or any substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, nonconsensual dissemination of
private sexual images is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (d)   If the offender is under 18 years of age and the person in the
image is not more than five years older than the offender, the offender shall
not be prosecuted under this section.
      (2)   In addition to any other penalty or disposition authorized or
required by law, the court may order any person who is convicted of a violation
of this section or who is adjudicated delinquent by reason of a violation of
this section to criminally forfeit all of the following property to the state
under R.C. Chapter 2981:
         (a)   Any profits or proceeds and any property the person has acquired
or maintained in violation of this section that the sentencing court determines
to have been acquired or maintained as a result of the violation;
         (b)   Any interest in, securities of, claim against, or property or
contractual right of any kind affording a source of influence over any
enterprise that the person has established, operated, controlled, or conducted
in violation of this section that the sentencing court determines to have been
acquired or maintained as a result of the violation.
   (G)   A victim of a violation of this section may commence a civil cause of
action against the offender, as described in R.C. § 2307.66.
(R.C. § 2917.211)
§ 133.99 SENTENCING FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED OFFENSES; SEXUAL PREDATORS;
REGISTRATION.
   (A)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented offense or
child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on or after
January 1, 1997, and the offender is a tier III sex offender/child-victim
offender relative to the offense or the offense is any offense listed in R.C. §
2901.07(D)(1) to (D)(3), the judge shall include in the offender’s sentence a
statement that the offender is a tier III sex offender/child-victim offender,
shall comply with the requirements of R.C. § 2950.03, and shall require the
offender to submit to a DNA specimen collection procedure pursuant to R.C. §
2901.07.
   (B)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented offense or a
child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on or after
January 1, 1997, the judge shall include in the sentence a summary of the
offender’s duties imposed under R.C. §§ 2950.04, 2950.041, 2950.05, and
2950.06, and the duration of the duties. The judge shall inform the offender,
at the time of sentencing, of those duties and of their duration. If required
under R.C. § 2950.03(A)(2), the judge shall perform the duties specified in
that section or, if required under R.C. § 2950.03(A)(6), the judge shall
perform the duties specified in that division.
(R.C. § 2929.23)
CHAPTER 134: GAMBLING OFFENSES
Section
   
134.01   Definitions
   
134.02   Prohibitions against gambling; exception
   
134.03   Operating a gambling house
   
134.04   Public gaming
   
134.05   Cheating
   
134.06   Regulations concerning operation of licensed bingo game
   
134.07   Records to be kept
   
134.08   Requirements for bingo game operators
   
134.09   Bingo games for amusement only
   
134.10   Prohibitions where instant bingo game is conducted
   
134.11   Raffle drawings
   
134.12   Instant bingo other than at bingo sessions
   
134.13   Restrictions on owner or lessor of location at instant bingo
   
134.14   Skill-based amusement machines; prohibited conduct
   
134.15   Electronic instant bingo; prohibited conduct
Statutory reference:
   Conducting an illegal bingo game, felony, see R.C. § 2915.07
   Licensing bingo games, distributors of bingo supplies, and manufacturers of
bingo supplies by Attorney General, see R.C. §§ 2915.08, 2915.081, and 2915.082
§ 134.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BET. The hazarding of anything of value upon the result of an event,
undertaking, or contingency, but does not include a bona fide business risk.
   BINGO. Either of the following:
      (1)   A game with all of the following characteristics:
         (a)   The participants use bingo cards or sheets, including paper
formats and electronic representation or image formats, that are divided into
25 spaces arranged in five horizontal and five vertical rows of spaces, with
each space, except the central space, being designated by a combination of a
letter and a number and with the central space being designated as a free
space;
         (b)   The participants cover the spaces on the bingo cards or sheets
that correspond to combinations of letters and numbers that are announced by a
bingo game operator;
         (c)   A bingo game operator announces combinations of letters and
numbers that appear on objects that a bingo game operator selects by chance,
either manually or mechanically, from a receptacle that contains 75 objects at
the beginning of each game, each object marked by a different combination of a
letter and a number that corresponds to one of the 75 possible combinations of
a letter and a number that can appear on the bingo cards or sheets;
         (d)   The winner of the bingo game includes any participant who
properly announces during the interval between the announcements of letters and
numbers, as described in division (1)(c) of this definition, that a
predetermined and pre-announced pattern of spaces has been covered on a bingo
card or sheet being used by the participant.
      (2)   Instant bingo, electronic instant bingo, and raffles.
   BINGO GAME OPERATOR. Any person, except security personnel, who performs
work or labor at the site of bingo including but not limited to collecting
money from participants, handing out bingo cards or sheets or objects to cover
spaces on bingo cards or sheets, selecting from a receptacle the objects that
contain the combination of letters and numbers that appear on bingo cards or
sheets, calling out the combinations of letters and numbers, distributing
prizes, selling or redeeming instant bingo tickets or cards, selling or
redeeming electronic instant bingo tickets, credits, or vouchers, accessing an
electronic instant bingo system other than as a participant, supervising the
operation of a punch board, selling raffle tickets, selecting raffle tickets
from a receptacle and announcing the winning numbers in a raffle, and
preparing, selling, and serving food or beverages. “Bingo game operator” does
not include a person who is installing, maintaining, updating, or repairing an
electronic instant bingo system.
   BINGO SESSION. A period that includes both of the following:
      (1)   Not to exceed five continuous hours for the conduct of one or more
games described in division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in this section,
instant bingo, and electronic instant bingo;
      (2)   A period for the conduct of instant bingo and electronic instant
bingo for not more than two hours before and not more than two hours after the
period described in division (1) of this definition.
   BINGO SUPPLIES. Bingo cards or sheets; instant bingo tickets or cards;
electronic bingo aids; raffle tickets; punch boards; seal cards; instant bingo
ticket dispensers; electronic instant bingo systems; and devices for selecting
or displaying the combination of bingo letters and numbers or raffle tickets.
Items that are “bingo supplies” are not gambling devices if sold or otherwise
provided, and used, in accordance with this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915. For
purposes of this chapter, “bingo supplies” are not to be considered equipment
used to conduct a bingo game.
   BOOKMAKING. The business of receiving or paying off bets.
   CHAMBER OF COMMERCE. Any organization of individuals, professionals, and
businesses that has the purpose to advance the commercial, financial,
industrial, and civic interests of the community and that is, and has received
from the Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that currently is in
effect stating that the organization is, exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(6).
   CHARITABLE BINGO GAME. Any bingo game described in divisions (1) or (2) of
the definition of “bingo” in this section that is conducted by a charitable
organization that has obtained a license pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08 and the
proceeds of which are used for a charitable purpose.
   CHARITABLE INSTANT BINGO ORGANIZATION. An organization that is exempt from
federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3) and
is a charitable organization as defined in this section. The term does not
include a charitable organization that is exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3) and that is created by a
veteran’s organization, a fraternal organization, or a sporting organization in
regards to bingo conducted or assisted by a veteran’s organization, a fraternal
organization, or a sporting organization pursuant to R.C. § 2915.13, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, “charitable
organization” means either of the following:
         (a)   An organization that is exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3);
         (b)   A volunteer rescue service organization, volunteer firefighter’s
organization, veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC §§ 501(c)
(4), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10) or 501(c)(19).
      (2)   To qualify as a charitable organization, an organization shall have
been in continuous existence as such in this state for a period of two years
immediately preceding either the making of an application for a bingo license
under R.C. § 2915.08 or the conducting of any game of chance as provided in
R.C. § 2915.02(D), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   CHARITABLE PURPOSE. Means that the net profit of bingo, other than instant
bingo or electronic instant bingo, is used by, or is given, donated, or
otherwise transferred to, any of the following:
      (1)   Any organization that is described in IRC §§ 509(a)(1), 509(a)(2),
or 509(a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an organization that is tax
exempt under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3);
      (2)   A veteran’s organization that is a post, chapter, or organization
of veterans, or an auxiliary unit or society of, or a trust or foundation for,
any such post, chapter, or organization organized in the United States or any
of its possessions, at least 75% of the members of which are veterans and
substantially all of the other members of which are individuals who are
spouses, widows, or widowers of veterans, or such individuals, provided that no
part of the net earnings of such post, chapter, or organization inures to the
benefit of any private shareholder or individual, and further provided that the
net profit is used by the post, chapter, or organization for the charitable
purposes set forth in R.C. § 5739.02(B)(12), is used for awarding scholarships
to or for attendance at an institution mentioned in that division of the Ohio
Revised Code, is donated to a governmental agency, or is used for nonprofit
youth activities, the purchase of United States or Ohio flags that are donated
to schools, youth groups, or other bona fide nonprofit organizations, promotion
of patriotism, or disaster relief;
      (3)   A fraternal organization that has been in continuous existence in
this state for 15 years and that uses the net profit exclusively for religious,
charitable, scientific, literary, or educational purposes, or for the
prevention of cruelty to children or animals, if contributions for such use
would qualify as a deductible charitable contribution under IRC § 170;
      (4)   A volunteer firefighter’s organization that uses the net profit for
the purposes set forth in the definition of “volunteer firefighter’s
organization” in this section.
   COMMUNITY ACTION AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 122.66.
   CONDUCT. To back, promote, organize, manage, carry on, sponsor, or prepare
for the operation of bingo or a game of chance, a scheme of chance, or a
sweepstakes.
   DEAL. A single game of instant bingo tickets, or a single game of electronic
instant bingo tickets, all with the same serial number.
   DISTRIBUTOR. Any person who purchases or obtains bingo supplies and who does
either of the following:
      (1)   Sells, offers for sale, or otherwise provides or offers to provide
the bingo supplies to another person for use in this state;
      (2)   Modifies, converts, adds to, or removes parts from the bingo
supplies to further their promotion or sale for use in this state.
   ELECTRONIC BINGO AID.
      (1)   An electronic device used by a participant to monitor bingo cards
or sheets purchased at the time and place of a bingo session and that does all
of the following:
         (a)   It provides a means for a participant to input numbers and
letters announced by a bingo caller.
         (b)   It compares the numbers and letters entered by the participant
to the bingo faces previously stored in the memory of the device.
         (c)   It identifies a winning bingo pattern.
      (2)   The term does not include any device into which a coin, currency,
token, or an equivalent is inserted to activate play.
   ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO.
      (1)   A form of bingo that consists of an electronic or digital
representation of instant bingo in which a participant wins a prize if the
participant’s electronic instant bingo ticket contains a combination of numbers
or symbols that was designated in advance as a winning combination, and to
which all of the following apply:
         (a)   Each deal has a predetermined, finite number of winning and
losing tickets and a predetermined prize amount and deal structure, provided
that there may be multiple winning combinations in each deal and multiple
winning tickets.
         (b)   Each electronic instant bingo ticket within a deal has a unique
serial number that is not regenerated.
         (c)   Each electronic instant bingo ticket within a deal is sold for
the same price.
         (d)   After a participant purchases an electronic instant bingo
ticket, the combination of numbers or symbols on the ticket is revealed to the
participant.
         (e)   The reveal of numbers or symbols on the ticket may incorporate
an entertainment or bonus theme, provided that the reveal does not include
spinning reels that resemble a slot machine.
         (f)   The reveal theme, if any, does not require additional
consideration or award any prize other than any predetermined prize associated
with the electronic instant bingo ticket.
      (2)   The term shall not include any of the following:
         (a)   Any game, entertainment, or bonus theme that replicates or
simulates any of the following:
            1.   The gambling games of keno, blackjack, roulette, poker, craps,
other casino-style table games;
            2.   Horse racing;
            3.   Gambling games offered in this state on slot machines or video
lottery terminals. As used in this division, “video lottery terminal” has the
same meaning as in R.C. § 3770.21.
         (b)   Any device operated by dropping one or more coins or tokens into
a slot and pulling a handle or pushing a button or touchpoint on a touchscreen
to activate one to three or more rotating reels marked into horizontal segments
by varying symbols, where the predetermined prize amount depends on how and how
many of the symbols line up when the rotating reels come to a rest;
         (c)   Any device that includes a coin or token slot, tray, or hopper
and the ability to dispense coins, cash, tokens, or anything of value other
than a credit ticket voucher.
   ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO SYSTEM. Means both of the following:
      (1)   A mechanical, electronic, digital, or video device and associated
software to which all of the following apply:
         (a)   It is used by not more than one player at a time to play
electronic instant bingo on a single screen that is physically connected to the
device;
         (b)   It is located on the premises of the principal place of business
of a veteran’s or fraternal organization that holds a type II or type III bingo
license to conduct electronic instant bingo at that location issued under R.C.
§ 2915.08.
      (2)   Any associated equipment or software used to manage, monitor, or
document any aspect of electronic instant bingo.
   EXPENSES. The reasonable amount of gross profit actually expended for all of
the following:
      (1)   The purchase or lease of bingo supplies;
      (2)   The annual license fee required under R.C. § 2915.08;
      (3)   Bank fees and service charges for a bingo session or game account
described in R.C. § 2915.10;
      (4)   Audits and accounting services;
      (5)   Safes;
      (6)   Cash registers;
      (7)   Hiring security personnel;
      (8)   Advertising bingo;
      (9)   Renting premises in which to conduct a bingo session;
      (10)   Tables and chairs;
      (11)   Expenses for maintaining and operating a charitable organization’s
facilities, including but not limited to a post home, club house, lounge,
tavern, or canteen and any grounds attached to the post home, club house,
lounge, tavern, or canteen;
      (12)   Payment of real property taxes and assessments that are levied on
a premises on which bingo is conducted;
      (13)   Any other product or service directly related to the conduct of
bingo that is authorized in rules adopted by the Attorney General under R.C. §
2915.08(F)(1).
   FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION. Any society, order, state headquarters, or
association within this state, except a college or high school fraternity, that
is not organized for profit, that is a branch, lodge, or chapter of a national
or state organization, that exists exclusively for the common business or
sodality of its members.
   GAMBLING DEVICE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A book, totalizer, or other equipment used for recording bets;
      (2)   A ticket, token, or other device representing a chance, share, or
interest in a scheme of chance or evidencing a bet;
      (3)   A deck of cards, dice, gaming table, roulette wheel, slot machine,
or other apparatus designed for use in connection with a game of chance;
      (4)   Any equipment, device, apparatus, or paraphernalia specially
designed for gambling purposes;
      (5)   Bingo supplies sold or otherwise provided, or used, in violation of
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.
   GAMBLING OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. Chapter 2915;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States substantially equivalent to any
provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 or a violation of R.C. § 2915.06
as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law
of this or any other state or of the United States, of which gambling is an
element;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing, any
offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
   GAME FLARE. The board or placard, or electronic representation of a board or
placard, that accompanies each deal of instant bingo or electronic instant
bingo tickets and that includes the following information for the game:
      (1)   The name of the game;
      (2)   The manufacturer’s name or distinctive logo;
      (3)   The form number;
      (4)   The ticket count;
      (5)   The prize structure, including the number of winning tickets by
denomination and the respective winning symbol or number combinations for the
winning tickets;
      (6)   The cost per play;
      (7)   The serial number of the game.
   GAME OF CHANCE. Poker, craps, roulette, or other game in which a player
gives anything of value in the hope of gain, the outcome of which is determined
largely by chance, but does not include bingo.
   GAME OF CHANCE CONDUCTED FOR PROFIT. Any game of chance designed to produce
income for the person who conducts or operates the game of chance, but does not
include bingo.
   GROSS ANNUAL REVENUES. The annual gross receipts derived from the conduct of
bingo described in division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in this section
plus the annual net profit derived from the conduct of bingo described in
division (2) of the definition of “bingo” in this section.
   GROSS PROFIT. Gross receipts minus the amount actually expended for the
payment of prize awards.
   GROSS RECEIPTS. All money or assets, including admission fees, that a person
receives from bingo without the deduction of any amounts for prizes paid out or
for the expenses of conducting bingo. The term does not include any money
directly taken in from the sale of food or beverages by a charitable
organization conducting bingo, or by a bona fide auxiliary unit or society of a
charitable organization conducting bingo, provided all of the following apply:
      (1)   The auxiliary unit or society has been in existence as a bona fide
auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization for at least two years
prior to conducting bingo.
      (2)   The person who purchases the food or beverage receives nothing of
value except the food or beverage and items customarily received with the
purchase of that food or beverage.
      (3)   The food and beverages are sold at customary and reasonable prices.
   HISTORIC RAILROAD. All or a portion of the tracks and right-of-way of a
railroad that was owned and operated by a for profit common carrier in this
state at any time prior to January 1, 1950.
   INSTANT BINGO. A form of bingo that shall use folded or banded tickets or
paper cards with perforated break-open tabs, a face of which is covered or
otherwise hidden from view to conceal a number, letter, or symbol, or set of
numbers, letters, or symbols, some of which have been designated in advance as
prize winners, and may also include games in which some winners are determined
by the random selection of one or more bingo numbers by the use of a seal card
or bingo blower. “Instant bingo” also includes a punch board game. In all
“instant bingo” the prize amount and structure shall be predetermined. The term
does not include electronic instant bingo or any device that is activated by
the insertion of a coin, currency, token, or an equivalent, and that contains
as one of its components a video display monitor that is capable of displaying
numbers, letters, symbols, or characters in winning or losing combinations.
   INSTANT BINGO TICKET DISPENSER. A mechanical device that dispenses an
instant bingo ticket or card as the sole item of value dispensed and that has
the following characteristics:
      (1)   It is activated upon the insertion of United States currency.
      (2)   It performs no gaming functions.
      (3)   It does not contain a video display monitor or generate noise.
      (4)   It is not capable of displaying any numbers, letters, symbols, or
characters in winning or losing combinations.
      (5)   It does not simulate or display rolling or spinning reels.
      (6)   It is incapable of determining whether a dispensed bingo ticket or
card is a winning or non-winning ticket or card and requires a winning ticket
or card to be paid by a bingo game operator.
      (7)   It may provide accounting and security features to aid in
accounting for the instant bingo tickets or cards it dispenses.
      (8)   It is not part of an electronic network and is not interactive.
   INTERNAL REVENUE CODE (IRC). The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 100 Stat.
2085, 26 U.S.C. §§ 1 et seq., as now or hereafter amended.
   MANUFACTURER. Any person who assembles completed bingo supplies from raw
materials, other items, or subparts or who modifies, converts, adds to, or
removes parts from bingo supplies to further their promotion or sale.
   MERCHANDISE PRIZE. Any item of value, but shall not include any of the
following:
      (1)   Cash, gift cards, or any equivalent thereof;
      (2)   Plays on games of chance, state lottery tickets, or bingo;
      (3)   Firearms, tobacco, or alcoholic beverages; or
      (4)   A redeemable voucher that is redeemable for any of the items listed
in division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
   NET PROFIT. Gross profit minus expenses.
   NET PROFIT FROM THE PROCEEDS OF THE SALE OF INSTANT BINGO OR ELECTRONIC
INSTANT BINGO. Gross profit minus the ordinary, necessary, and reasonable
expense expended for the purchase of bingo supplies for the purpose of
conducting instant bingo or electronic instant bingo, and, in the case of
instant bingo or electronic instant bingo conducted by a veteran’s, fraternal,
or sporting organization, minus the payment by that organization of real
property taxes and assessments levied on a premises on which instant bingo or
electronic instant bingo is conducted.
   PARTICIPANT. Any person who plays bingo.
   PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1.59 and includes any firm or any
other legal entity, however organized.
   POOL NOT CONDUCTED FOR PROFIT. A scheme in which a participant gives a
valuable consideration for a chance to win a prize and the total amount of
consideration wagered is distributed to a participant or participants.
   PUNCH BOARD. A form of instant bingo that uses a board containing a number
of holes or receptacles of uniform size in which are placed, mechanically and
randomly, serially numbered slips of paper that may be punched or drawn from
the hole or receptacle. A player may punch or draw the numbered slips of paper
from the holes or receptacles and obtain the prize established for the game if
the number drawn corresponds to a winning number or, if the punch board
includes the use of a seal card, a potential winning number.
   RAFFLE. A form of bingo in which the one or more prizes are won by one or
more persons who have purchased a raffle ticket. The one or more winners of the
raffle are determined by drawing a ticket stub or other detachable section from
a receptacle containing ticket stubs or detachable sections corresponding to
all tickets sold for the raffle. The term does not include the drawing of a
ticket stub or other detachable section of a ticket purchased to attend a
professional sporting event if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The ticket stub or other detachable section is used to select the
winner of a free prize given away at the professional sporting event; and
      (2)   The cost of the ticket is the same as the cost of a ticket to the
professional sporting event on days when no free prize is given away.
   REDEEMABLE VOUCHER. Any ticket, token, coupon, receipt, or other noncash
representation of value.
   RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION. Any church, body of communicants, or group that is
not organized or operated for profit and that gathers in common membership for
regular worship and religious observances.
   REVOKE. To void permanently all rights and privileges of the holder of a
license issued under R.C. § 2915.08, 2915.081, or 2915.082 or a charitable
gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
   SCHEME OF CHANCE.
      (1)   A slot machine unless authorized under R.C. Chapter 3772, lottery
unless authorized under R.C. Chapter 3770, numbers game, pool conducted for
profit, or other scheme in which a participant gives a valuable consideration
for a chance to win a prize, but does not include bingo, a skill-based
amusement machine, or a pool not conducted for profit. “Scheme of chance”
includes the use of an electronic device to reveal the results of a game entry
if valuable consideration is paid, directly or indirectly, for a chance to win
a prize. Valuable consideration is deemed to be paid for a chance to win a
prize in the following instances:
         (a)   Less than 50% of the goods or services sold by a scheme of
chance operator in exchange for game entries are used or redeemed by
participants at any one location;
         (b)   Less than 50% of participants who purchase goods or services at
any one location do not accept, use, or redeem the goods or services sold or
purportedly sold;
         (c)   More than 50% of prizes at any one location are revealed to
participants through an electronic device simulating a game of chance or a
“casino game” as defined in R.C. § 3772.01;
         (d)   The good or service sold by a scheme of chance operator in
exchange for a game entry cannot be used or redeemed in the manner advertised;
         (e)   A participant pays more than fair market value for goods or
services offered by a scheme of chance operator in order to receive one or more
game entries;
         (f)   A participant may use the electronic device to purchase
additional game entries;
         (g)   A participant may purchase additional game entries by using
points or credits won as prizes while using the electronic device;
         (h)   A scheme of chance operator pays out in prize money more than
20% of the gross revenue received at one location; or
         (i)   A participant makes a purchase or exchange in order to obtain
any good or service that may be used to facilitate play on the electronic
device.
      (2)   As used in this division, “electronic device” means a mechanical,
video, digital, or electronic machine or device that is capable of displaying
information on a screen or other mechanism and that is owned, leased, or
otherwise possessed by any person conducting a scheme of chance, or by that
person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or contractors. “Electronic
device” does not include an electronic instant bingo system.
   SEAL CARD. A form of instant bingo that uses instant bingo tickets in
conjunction with a board or placard that contains one or more seals that, when
removed or opened, reveal predesignated winning numbers, letters, or symbols.
   SECURITY PERSONNEL. Includes any person who either is a Sheriff, deputy
sheriff, Marshal, deputy marshal, township constable, or member of an organized
police department of a municipal corporation or has successfully completed a
peace officer’s training course pursuant to R.C. §§ 109.71 through 109.79 and
who is hired to provide security for the premises on which bingo is conducted.
   SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINE.
      (1)   (a)   A mechanical, video, digital, or electronic device that
rewards the player or players, if at all, only with merchandise prizes or with
redeemable vouchers redeemable only for merchandise prizes, provided that with
respect to rewards for playing the game all of the following apply:
            1.   The wholesale value of a merchandise prize awarded as a result
of the single play of a machine does not exceed $10;
            2.   Redeemable vouchers awarded for any single play of a machine
are not redeemable for a merchandise prize with a wholesale value of more than
$10;
            3.   Redeemable vouchers are not redeemable for a merchandise prize
that has a wholesale value of more than $10 times the fewest number of single
plays necessary to accrue the redeemable vouchers required to obtain that
prize; and
            4.   Any redeemable vouchers or merchandise prizes are distributed
at the site of the skill-based amusement machine at the time of play.
         (b)   A card for the purchase of gasoline is a redeemable voucher for
purposes of division (1) of this definition even if the skill-based amusement
machine for the play of which the card is awarded is located at a place where
gasoline may not be legally distributed to the public or the card is not
redeemable at the location of, or at the time of playing, the skill-based
amusement machine.
      (2)   A device shall not be considered a skill-based amusement machine
and shall be considered a slot machine if it pays cash or one or more of the
following apply:
         (a)   The ability of a player to succeed at the game is impacted by
the number or ratio of prior wins to prior losses of players playing the game;
         (b)   Any reward of redeemable vouchers is not based solely on the
player achieving the object of the game or the player’s score;
         (c)   The outcome of the game, or the value of the redeemable voucher
or merchandise prize awarded for winning the game, can be controlled by a
source other than any player playing the game;
         (d)   The success of any player is or may be determined by a chance
event that cannot be altered by player actions;
         (e)   The ability of any player to succeed at the game is determined
by game features not visible or known to the player;
         (f)   The ability of the player to succeed at the game is impacted by
the exercise of a skill that no reasonable player could exercise.
      (3)   All of the following apply to any machine that is operated as
described in division (1) of this definition:
         (a)   As used in this definition of “skill-based amusement machine”,
GAME and PLAY mean one event from the initial activation of the machine until
the results of play are determined without payment of additional consideration.
An individual utilizing a machine that involves a single game, play, contest,
competition, or tournament may be awarded redeemable vouchers or merchandise
prizes based on the results of play.
         (b)   Advance play for a single game, play, contest, competition, or
tournament participation may be purchased. The cost of the contest,
competition, or tournament participation may be greater than a single non-
contest, competition, or tournament play.
         (c)   To the extent that the machine is used in a contest,
competition, or tournament, that contest, competition, or tournament has a
defined starting and ending date and is open to participants in competition for
scoring and ranking results toward the awarding of redeemable vouchers or
merchandise prizes that are stated prior to the start of the contest,
competition, or tournament.
      (4)   For purposes of division (1) of this definition, the mere presence
of a device, such as a pin-setting, ball-releasing, or scoring mechanism, that
does not contribute to or affect the outcome of the play of the game does not
make the device a skill-based amusement machine.
   SLOT MACHINE.
      (1)   Either of the following:
         (a)   Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital device that is
capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on
behalf of a player who gives the thing of value in the hope of gain;
         (b)   Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital device that is
capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on
behalf of a player to conduct bingo or a scheme or game of chance.
      (2)   The term does not include a skill-based amusement machine, an
instant bingo ticket dispenser, or an electronic instant bingo system.
   SPORTING ORGANIZATION. A hunting, fishing, or trapping organization, other
than a college or high school fraternity or sorority, that is not organized for
profit, that is affiliated with a state or national sporting organization,
including but not limited to the League of Ohio Sportsmen, and that has been in
continuous existence in this state for a period of three years.
   SUSPEND. To interrupt temporarily all rights and privileges of the holder of
a license issued under R.C. § 2915.08, 2915.081, or 2915.082 or a charitable
gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
   SWEEPSTAKES. Any game, contest, advertising scheme or plan, or other
promotion where consideration is not required for a person to enter to win or
become eligible to receive any prize, the determination of which is based upon
chance. “Sweepstakes” does not include bingo as authorized under R.C. Chapter
2915, pari-mutuel wagering as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3769, lotteries
conducted by the State Lottery Commission as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3770,
and casino gaming as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3772.
   SWEEPSTAKES TERMINAL DEVICE.
      (1)   A mechanical, video, digital, or electronic machine or device that
is owned, leased, or otherwise possessed by any person conducting a
sweepstakes, or by that person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or
contractors, that is intended to be used by a sweepstakes participant, and that
is capable of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism. A device
is a sweepstakes terminal device if any of the following apply:
         (a)   The device uses a simulated game terminal as a representation of
the prizes associated with the results of the sweepstakes entries.
         (b)   The device utilizes software such that the simulated game
influences or determines the winning of or value of the prize.
         (c)   The device selects prizes from a predetermined finite pool of
entries.
         (d)   The device utilizes a mechanism that reveals the content of a
predetermined sweepstakes entry.
         (e)   The device predetermines the prize results and stores those
results for delivery at the time the sweepstakes entry results are revealed.
         (f)   The device utilizes software to create a game result.
         (g)   The device reveals the prize incrementally, even though the
device does not influence the awarding of the prize or the value of any prize
awarded.
         (h)   The device determines and associates the prize with an entry or
entries at the time the sweepstakes is entered.
      (2)   As used in this definition and in §
134.02:
         ENTER. The act by which a person becomes eligible to receive any prize
offered in a sweepstakes.
         ENTRY. One event from the initial activation of the sweepstakes
terminal device until all the sweepstakes prize results from that activation
are revealed.
         PRIZE. Any gift, award, gratuity, good, service, credit, reward, or
any other thing of value that may be transferred to a person, whether
possession of the prize is actually transferred, or placed on an account or
other record as evidence of the intent to transfer the prize.
         SWEEPSTAKES TERMINAL DEVICE FACILITY. Any location in this state where
a sweepstakes terminal device is provided to a sweepstakes participant, except
as provided in §
134.02(G) and R.C. § 2915.02(G).
   VETERAN’S ORGANIZATION. Any individual post or state headquarters of a
national veteran’s association or an auxiliary unit of any individual post of a
national veteran’s association, which post, state headquarters, or auxiliary
unit is incorporated as a nonprofit corporation and either has received a
letter from the state headquarters of the national veteran’s association
indicating that the individual post or auxiliary unit is in good standing with
the national veteran’s association or has received a letter from the national
veteran’s association indicating that the state headquarters is in good
standing with the national veteran’s association. As used in this definition,
NATIONAL VETERAN’S ASSOCIATION means any veteran’s association that has been in
continuous existence as such for a period of at least five years and either is
incorporated by an act of the United States Congress or has a national dues-
paying membership of at least 5,000 persons.
   VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER’S ORGANIZATION. Any organization of volunteer
firefighters, as defined in R.C. § 146.01, that is organized and operated
exclusively to provide financial support for a volunteer fire department or a
volunteer fire company and that is recognized or ratified by a county,
municipal corporation, or township.
   VOLUNTEER RESCUE SERVICE ORGANIZATION. Any organization of volunteers
organized to function as an emergency medical service organization, as defined
in R.C. § 4765.01.
   YOUTH ATHLETIC ORGANIZATION. Any organization, not organized for profit,
that is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial support to, or
to operate, athletic activities for persons who are 21 years of age or younger
by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating, or contributing to the support
of an athletic team, club, league, or association.
   YOUTH ATHLETIC PARK ORGANIZATION. Any organization, not organized for
profit, that satisfies both of the following:
      (1)   It owns, operates, and maintains playing fields that satisfy both
of the following:
         (a)   The playing fields are used for athletic activities by one or
more organizations, not organized for profit, each of which is organized and
operated exclusively to provide financial support to, or to operate, athletic
activities for persons who are 18 years of age or younger by means of
sponsoring, organizing, operating, or contributing to the support of an
athletic team, club, league, or association.
         (b)   The playing fields are not used for any profit-making activity
at any time during the year.
      (2)   It uses the proceeds of bingo it conducts exclusively for the
operation, maintenance, and improvement of its playing fields of the type
described in division (1) of this definition.
(R.C. § 2915.01)
§ 134.02 PROHIBITIONS AGAINST GAMBLING; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Engage in bookmaking, or knowingly engage in conduct that
facilitates bookmaking.
      (2)   Establish, promote, or operate or knowingly engage in conduct that
facilitates any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance.
      (3)   Knowingly procure, transmit, exchange, or engage in conduct that
facilitates the procurement, transmission, or exchange of information for use
in establishing odds or determining winners in connection with bookmaking or
with any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance.
      (4)   Engage in betting or in playing any scheme or game of chance as a
substantial source of income or livelihood.
      (5)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the
use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility
and either:
         (a)   Give to another person any item described in R.C. § 2915.01(VV)
(1), (VV)(2), (VV)(3), or (VV)(4) as a prize for playing or participating in a
sweepstakes; or
         (b)   Give to another person any merchandise prize, or a redeemable
voucher for a merchandise prize, the wholesale value of which is in excess of
$10 and which is awarded as a single entry for playing or participating in a
sweepstakes. Redeemable vouchers shall not be redeemable for a merchandise
prize that has a wholesale value of more than $10.
      (6)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the
use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility
without first obtaining a current annual “certificate of registration” from the
Attorney General as required by R.C. § 2915.02(F).
      (7)   With purpose to violate division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4),
(A)(5), or (A)(6) of this section, acquire, possess, control, or operate any
gambling device.
   (B)   For purposes of division (A)(1) of this section, a person facilitates
bookmaking if the person in any way knowingly aids an illegal bookmaking
operation, including, without limitation, placing a bet with a person engaged
in or facilitating illegal bookmaking. For purposes of division (A)(2) of this
section, a person facilitates a game of chance conducted for profit or a scheme
of chance if the person in any way knowingly aids in the conduct or operation
of any such game or scheme, including, without limitation, playing any such
game or scheme.
   (C)   This section does not prohibit conduct in connection with gambling
expressly permitted by law.
   (D)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   Games of chance, if all of the following apply:
         (a)   The games of chance are not craps for money or roulette for
money.
         (b)   The games of chance are conducted by a charitable organization
that is and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a determination
letter that is currently in effect, stating that the organization is exempt
from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)
(3).
         (c)   The games of chance are conducted at festivals of the charitable
organization that are conducted not more than a total of five days a calendar
year, and are conducted on premises owned by the charitable organization for a
period of no less than one year immediately preceding the conducting of the
games of chance, on premises leased from a governmental unit, or on premises
that are leased from a veteran’s or fraternal organization and that have been
owned by the lessor veteran’s or fraternal organization for a period of no less
than one year immediately preceding the conducting of the games of chance. A
charitable organization shall not lease premises from a veteran’s or fraternal
organization to conduct a festival described in this division, if the veteran’s
or fraternal organization already has leased the premises 12 times during the
preceding year to charitable organizations for that purpose. If a charitable
organization leases premises from a veteran’s or fraternal organization to
conduct a festival described in this division, the charitable organization
shall not pay a rental rate for the premises per day of the festival that
exceeds the rental rate per bingo session that a charitable organization may
pay under R.C. § 2915.09(B)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance when it leases premises from another charitable organization to
conduct bingo games.
         (d)   All of the money or assets received from the games of chance
after deduction only of prizes paid out during the conduct of the games of
chance are used by, given, donated or otherwise transferred to any organization
that is described in IRC § 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a
governmental unit or an organization that is tax ex-empt under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c)(3).
         (e)   The games of chance are not conducted during or within ten hours
of a bingo game conducted for amusement purposes only pursuant to R.C. §
2915.12 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance. No person shall
receive any commission, wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other
form of compensation, directly or indirectly, for operating or assisting in the
operation of any game of chance.
      (2)   Any tag fishing tournament, as defined in R.C. § 1531.01, operated
under a permit issued under R.C. § 1533.92.
      (3)   Bingo conducted by a charitable organization that holds a license
issued under R.C. § 2915.08.
   (E)   Division (D) of this section shall not be construed to authorize the
sale, lease, or other temporary or permanent transfer of the right to conduct
games of chance, as granted by that division, by any charitable organization
that is granted that right.
   (F)   Any person desiring to conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a
sweepstakes with the use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes
terminal device facility shall first register with the Office of the Attorney
General and obtain an annual certificate of registration by providing a filing
fee of $200 and all information as required by rule adopted under R.C. §
2915.02(H). Not later than the tenth day of each month, each sweepstakes
terminal device operator shall file a sweepstakes terminal device monthly
report with the Attorney General and provide a filing fee of $50 and all
information required by rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.02(H). All information
provided to the Attorney General under this division shall be available to law
enforcement upon request.
   (G)   (1)   A person may apply to the Attorney General, on a form prescribed
by the Attorney General, for a certificate of compliance that the person is not
operating a sweepstakes terminal device facility. The form shall require the
person to include the address of the business location where sweepstakes
terminal devices will be used and to make the following certifications:
         (a)   That the person will not use more than two sweepstakes terminal
devices at the business location;
         (b)   That the retail value of sweepstakes prizes to be awarded at the
business location using
sweepstakes terminal devices during a reporting period will be less than 3% of
the gross revenue received at the business location during the reporting
period;
         (c)   That no other form of gaming except lottery ticket sales as
authorized under R.C. Chapter 3770 will be conducted at the business location
or in an adjoining area of the business location;
         (d)   That any sweepstakes terminal device at the business location
will not allow any deposit of any money, coin, or token, or the use of any
credit card, debit card, prepaid card, or any other method of similar payment
to be used, directly or indirectly, to participate in a sweepstakes;
         (e)   That notification of any prize will not take place on the same
day as a participant’s sweepstakes entry; and
         (f)   That the person consents to provide any other information to the
Attorney General as required by rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.02(H).
      (2)   The filing fee for a certificate of compliance is $250. The
Attorney General may charge up to an additional $250 for reasonable expenses
resulting from any investigation related to an application for a certificate of
compliance.
      (3)   A certificate of compliance is effective for one year. The
certificate holder may reapply for a certificate of compliance. A person issued
a certificate of compliance shall file semiannual reports with the Attorney
General stating the number of sweepstakes terminal devices at the business
location and that the retail value of prizes awarded at the business location
using sweepstakes terminal devices is less than 3% of the gross revenue
received at the business location.
   (H)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of gambling, a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling
offense, gambling is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
Notwithstanding this division, failing to file a sweepstakes terminal device
monthly report as required by division (F) of this section or the semiannual
report required by division (G) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 2915.02(A) - (G), (K))
§ 134.03 OPERATING A GAMBLING HOUSE.
   (A)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control, or
supervision of premises, shall:
      (1)   Use or occupy the premises for gambling in violation of R.C. §
2915.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   Recklessly permit the premises to be used or occupied for gambling
in violation of R.C. § 2915.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of operating a
gambling house, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously
has been convicted of a gambling offense, operating a gambling house is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (C)   Premises used or occupied in violation of this section constitute a
nuisance subject to abatement under R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2915.03)
§ 134.04 PUBLIC GAMING.
   (A)   No person, while at a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall,
or other place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort shall
make a bet or play any game of chance or scheme of chance.
   (B)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control, or
supervision of a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall, or other place
of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort shall recklessly permit
those premises to be used or occupied in violation of division (A) of this
section.
   (C)   Divisions (A) and (B) of this section do not prohibit conduct in
connection with gambling expressly permitted by law.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public gaming. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, public gaming is a minor misdemeanor. If
the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling offense, public
gaming is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (E)   Premises used or occupied in violation of division (B) of this section
constitute a nuisance subject to abatement under R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2915.04)
§ 134.05 CHEATING.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome
of any of the following:
      (1)   The subject of a bet.
      (2)   A contest of knowledge, skill, or endurance that is not an athletic
or sporting event.
      (3)   A scheme or game of chance.
      (4)   Bingo.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Offer, give, solicit, or accept anything of value to corrupt the
outcome of an athletic or sporting event.
      (2)   Engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome of an athletic or
sporting event.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
cheating. Except as otherwise provided in this division, cheating is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the potential gain from the cheating is
$1,000 or more or if the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling
offense or of any theft offense as defined in R.C. § 2913.01, cheating is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
corrupting sports. Corrupting sports is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.05)
§ 134.06 REGULATIONS CONCERNING OPERATION OF LICENSED BINGO GAME.
   (A)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo shall fail to do any of
the following:
      (1)   Own all of the equipment used to conduct bingo or lease that
equipment from a charitable organization that is licensed to conduct bingo, or
from the landlord of a premises where bingo is conducted, for a rental rate
that is not more than is customary and reasonable for that equipment;
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(3) of this section,
use all of the gross receipts from bingo for paying prizes, for reimbursement
of expenses for or for renting premises in which to conduct bingo, for
reimbursement of expenses for or for purchasing or leasing bingo supplies used
in conducting bingo, for reimbursement of expenses for or for hiring security
personnel, for reimbursement of expenses for or for advertising bingo, or for
reimbursement of other expenses or for other expenses listed in the definition
for “expenses” in R.C. § 2915.01, provided that the amount of the receipts so
spent is not more than is customary and reasonable for a similar purchase,
lease, hiring, advertising, or expense. If the building in which bingo is
conducted is owned by the charitable organization conducting bingo and the
bingo conducted includes a form of bingo described in division (1) of the
definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01, the charitable organization may deduct
from the total amount of the gross receipts from each session a sum equal to
the lesser of $600 or 45% of the gross receipts from the bingo described in
that division as consideration for the use of the premises;
      (3)   Use, or give, donate, or otherwise transfer, all of the net profit
derived from bingo described in R.C. § 2915.01(O)(1) for a charitable purpose
listed in its license application and described in R.C. § 2915.01(V), or
distribute all of the net profit from the proceeds of the sale of instant bingo
or electronic instant bingo as stated in its license application and in
accordance with R.C. § 2915.101, as applicable.
   (B)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01 shall fail to do
any of the following:
      (1)   Conduct the bingo game on premises that are owned by the charitable
organization, on premises that are owned by another charitable organization and
leased from that charitable organization for a rental rate not in excess of the
lesser of $650 per bingo session or 45% of the gross receipts of the bingo
session, on premises that are leased from a person other than a charitable
organization for a rental rate that is not more than is customary and
reasonable for premises that are similar in location, size, and quality but not
in excess of $450 per bingo session, or on premises that are owned by a person
other than a charitable organization, that are leased from that person by
another charitable organization, and that are subleased from that other
charitable organization by the charitable organization for a rental rate not in
excess of $450 per bingo session. No charitable organization is required to pay
property taxes or assessments on premises that the charitable organization
leases from another person to conduct bingo sessions. If the charitable
organization leases from a person other than a charitable organization the
premises on which it conducts bingo sessions, the lessor of the premises shall
provide only the premises to the organization and shall not provide the
organization with bingo game operators, security personnel, concessions or
concession operators, bingo supplies, or any other type of service. A
charitable organization shall not lease or sublease premises that it owns or
leases to more than three other charitable organizations per calendar week for
conducting bingo sessions on the premises. A person that is not a charitable
organization shall not lease premises that it owns, leases, or otherwise is
empowered to lease to more than three charitable organizations per calendar
week for conducting bingo sessions on the premises. In no case shall more than
nine bingo sessions be conducted on any premises in any calendar week;
      (2)   Display its license conspicuously at the premises where the bingo
session is conducted;
      (3)   Conduct the bingo session in accordance with division (1) of the
definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01.
   (C)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01 shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for operating a bingo
session that is conducted by the charitable organization or for preparing,
selling, or serving food or beverages at the site of the bingo session, permit
any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to pay
compensation to any bingo game operator who prepares, sells, or serves food or
beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable organization, or
permit any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to prepare,
sell, or serve food or beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable
organization, if the auxiliary unit or society pays any compensation to the
bingo game operators who prepare, sell, or serve the food or beverages;
      (2)   Pay consulting fees to any person for any services performed in
relation to the bingo session;
      (3)   Pay concession fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in the bingo session;
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(4) of this section,
conduct more than three bingo sessions in any seven-day period. A volunteer
firefighter’s organization or a volunteer rescue service organization that
conducts not more than five bingo sessions in a calendar year may conduct more
than three bingo sessions in a seven-day period after notifying the Attorney
General when it will conduct the sessions;
      (5)   Pay out more than $6,000 in prizes for bingo games described in
R.C. § 2915.01(S)(1) during any bingo session that is conducted by the
charitable organization. “Prizes” does not include awards from the conduct of
instant bingo.
      (6)   Conduct a bingo session at any time during the eight-hour period
between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., at any time during, or within ten hours of, a
bingo game conducted for amusement only pursuant to R.C. § 2915.12 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, at any premises not specified on
its license, or on any day of the week or during any time period not specified
on its license. This division does not prohibit the sale of instant bingo
tickets beginning at 9:00 a.m. for a bingo session that begins at 10:00 a.m. If
circumstances make it impractical for the charitable organization to conduct a
bingo session at the premises, or on the day of the week or at the time
specified on its license or if a charitable organization wants to conduct bingo
sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than the day or time specified
on its license, the charitable organization may apply in writing to the
Attorney General for an amended license pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08(J). A
charitable organization may apply twice in each calendar year for an amended
license to conduct bingo sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than
the day or time specified on its license. If the amended license is granted,
the organization may conduct bingo sessions at the premises, on the day of the
week, and at the time specified on its amended license;
      (7)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, is under the age of 18 to work as a bingo game operator;
      (8)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any
jurisdiction to be a bingo game operator;
      (9)   Permit the lessor of the premises on which the bingo session is
conducted, if the lessor is not a charitable organization, to provide the
charitable organization with bingo game operators, security personnel,
concessions, bingo supplies, or any other type of service;
      (10)   Purchase or lease bingo supplies from any person except a
distributor issued a license under R.C. § 2915.081;
      (11)   (a)   Use or permit the use of electronic bingo aids except under
the following circumstances:
            1.   For any single participant, not more than 90 bingo faces can
be played using an electronic bingo aid or aids.
            2.   The charitable organization shall provide a participant using
an electronic bingo aid with corresponding paper bingo cards or sheets.
            3.   The total price of bingo faces played with an electronic bingo
aid shall be equal to the total price of the same number of bingo faces played
with a paper bingo card or sheet sold at the same bingo session but without an
electronic bingo aid.
            4.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be part of an electronic
network other than a network that includes only bingo aids and devices that are
located on the premises at which the bingo is being conducted or be interactive
with any device not located on the premises at which the bingo is being
conducted.
            5.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to participate in bingo
that is conducted at a location other than the location at which the bingo
session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used.
            6.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to provide for the
input of numbers and letters announced by a bingo caller other than the bingo
caller who physically calls the numbers and letters at the location at which
the bingo session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used.
         (b)   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 119 that govern the use of electronic bingo aids. The rules may include
a requirement that an electronic bingo aid be capable of being audited by the
Attorney General to verify the number of bingo cards or sheets played during
each bingo session.
      (12)   Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, to be under 18 years of age to play bingo described in division (1)
of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01.
   (D)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) of this section,
no charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator, and no bingo
game operator shall receive or accept, any commission, wage, salary, reward,
tip, donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation, directly or indirectly,
regardless of the source, for conducting bingo or providing other work or labor
at the site of bingo during a bingo session.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) of this section, no
charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator any commission,
wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation,
directly or indirectly regardless of the source, for conducting instant bingo,
electronic instant bingo, or both other than at a bingo session at the site of
instant bingo, electronic instant bingo, or both other than at a bingo session.
      (3)   Nothing in this division (D) of this section prohibits an employee
of a fraternal organization, veteran’s organization, or sporting organization
from selling instant bingo tickets or cards to the organization’s members or
invited guests, as long as no portion of the employee’s compensation is paid
from any receipts of bingo.
   (E)   Notwithstanding division (B)(1) of this section, a charitable
organization that, prior to December 6, 1977, has entered into written
agreements for the lease of premises it owns to another charitable organization
or other charitable organizations for the conducting of bingo sessions so that
more than two bingo sessions are conducted per calendar week on the premises,
and a person that is not a charitable organization and that, prior to December
6, 1977, has entered into written agreements for the lease of premises it owns
to charitable organizations for the conducting of more than two bingo sessions
per calendar week on the premises, may continue to lease the premises to those
charitable organizations, provided that no more than four sessions are
conducted per calendar week, that the lessor organization or person has
notified the Attorney General in writing of the organizations that will conduct
the sessions and the days of the week and the times of the day on which the
sessions will be conducted, that the initial lease entered into with each
organization that will conduct the sessions was filed with the Attorney General
prior to December 6, 1977, and that each organization that will conduct the
sessions was issued a license to conduct bingo games by the Attorney General
prior to December 6, 1977.
   (F)   This section does not prohibit a bingo licensed charitable
organization or a game operator from giving any person an instant bingo ticket
as a prize.
   (G)   Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of
illegally conducting a bingo game, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A)(1), (A)(3), (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), (C)(1) through (C)(11), or (D)
of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously
has been convicted of a violation of division (A)(1), (A)(3), (B)(1), (B)(2),
(B)(3), (C)(1) through (C)(11), or (D) of this section, a violation of division
(A)(1), (A)(3), (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), (C)(1) through (C)(11), or (D) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever violates division (C)(12)
of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of division (C)(12) of this
section, a violation of division (C)(12) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.09)
§ 134.07 RECORDS TO BE KEPT.
   (A)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo or a game of chance
pursuant to R.C. § 2915.02(D), or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, shall fail to maintain the following records for at least three
years from the date on which the bingo or game of chance is conducted:
      (1)   An itemized list of the gross receipts of each bingo session, each
game of instant bingo by serial number, each electronic instant bingo game by
serial number, each raffle, each punch board game, and each game of chance, and
an itemized list of the gross profits of each game of instant bingo by serial
number and each electronic instant bingo game by serial number;
      (2)   An itemized list of all expenses, other than prizes, that are
incurred in conducting bingo, the name of each person to whom the expenses are
paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses;
      (3)   A list of all prizes awarded during each bingo session, each
raffle, each punch board game, and each game of chance conducted by the
charitable organization, the total prizes awarded from each game of instant
bingo by serial number and each electronic instant bingo game by serial number,
and the name, address, and social security number of all persons who are
winners of prizes of $600 or more in value;
      (4)   An itemized list of the recipients of the net profit of bingo or
game of chance, including the name and address of each recipient to whom the
money is distributed, and if the organization uses the net profit of bingo, or
the money or assets received from a game of chance, for any charitable or other
purpose set forth in R.C. § 2915.01(V), R.C. § 2915.02(D), or R.C. § 2915.101,
a list of each purpose and an itemized list of each expenditure for each
purpose;
      (5)   The number of persons who participate in any bingo session or game
of chance that is conducted by the charitable organization;
      (6)   A list of receipts from the sale of food and beverages by the
charitable organization or one of its auxiliary units or societies, if the
receipts were excluded from “gross receipts” under R.C. § 2915.01(T);
      (7)   An itemized list of all expenses incurred at each bingo session,
each raffle, each punch board game, or each game of instant bingo or electronic
instant bingo conducted by the charitable organization in the sale of food and
beverages by the charitable organization or by an auxiliary unit or society of
the charitable organization, the name of each person to whom the expenses are
paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses.
   (B)   A charitable organization shall keep the records that it is required
to maintain pursuant to division (A) of this section at its principal place of
business in this state or at its headquarters in this state and shall notify
the Attorney General of the location at which those records are kept.
   (C)   The gross profit from each bingo session or game described in division
(1) or (2) of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01 shall be deposited
into a checking account devoted exclusively to the bingo session or game.
Payments for allowable expenses incurred in conducting the bingo session or
game and payments to recipients of some or all of the net profit of the bingo
session or game shall be made only by checks or electronic fund transfers drawn
on the bingo session or game account.
   (D)   Each charitable organization shall conduct and record an inventory of
all of its bingo supplies as of the first day of November of each year.
   (E)   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with R.C. Chapter
119 that establish standards of accounting, record keeping, and reporting to
ensure that gross receipts from bingo or games of chance are properly accounted
for.
   (F)   A distributor shall maintain, for a period of three years after the
date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling
or otherwise providing to another person bingo supplies for use in this state.
The record shall include all of the following for each instance:
      (1)   The name of the manufacturer from which the distributor purchased
the bingo supplies and the date of the purchase;
      (2)   The name and address of the charitable organization or other
distributor to which the bingo supplies were sold or otherwise provided;
      (3)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies;
      (4)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of all paper
bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided
to each charitable organization.
   (G)   A manufacturer shall maintain, for a period of three years after the
date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling
or otherwise providing bingo supplies for use in this state. The record shall
include all of the following for each instance:
      (1)   The name and address of the distributor to whom the bingo supplies
were sold or otherwise provided;
      (2)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies, including
serial numbers;
      (3)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of all paper
bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided
to each distributor.
   (H)   (1)   The Attorney General or any law enforcement agency may do all of
the following:
         (a)   Investigate any charitable organization, distributor, or
manufacturer or any officer, agent, trustee, member, or employee of the
organization, distributor, or manufacturer;
         (b)   Examine the accounts and records of the charitable organization,
distributor, or manufacturer or of any officer, agent, trustee, member, or
employee of the organization, distributor, or manufacturer;
         (c)   Conduct inspections, audits, and observations of bingo or games
of chance;
         (d)   Conduct inspections of the premises where bingo or games of
chance are conducted or where bingo supplies are manufactured or distributed;
         (e)   Take any other necessary and reasonable action to determine if a
violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 has occurred
and to determine whether R.C. § 2915.11, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, has been complied with.
      (2)   If any law enforcement agency has reasonable grounds to believe
that a charitable organization, distributor, or manufacturer or an officer,
agent, trustee, member, or employee of the organization, distributor, or
manufacturer has violated any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915,
the law enforcement agency may proceed by action in the proper court to enforce
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915, provided that the law enforcement agency
shall give written notice to the Attorney General when commencing an action as
described in this division.
   (I)   No person shall destroy, alter, conceal, withhold, or deny access to
any accounts or records of a charitable organization, distributor, or
manufacturer that have been requested for examination, or obstruct, impede, or
interfere with any inspection, audit, or observation of bingo or a game of
chance, of premises where bingo or a game of chance is conducted, or of
premises where bingo supplies are manufactured or distributed, or refuse to
comply with any reasonable request of, or obstruct, impede, or interfere with
any other reasonable action undertaken by, the Attorney General or a law
enforcement agency pursuant to division (H) of this section.
   (J)   Whoever violates division (A) or (I) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2915.10)
§ 134.08 REQUIREMENTS FOR BINGO GAME OPERATORS.
   (A)   No person shall be a bingo game operator unless the person is 18 years
of age or older.
   (B)   No person who has been convicted of a felony or a gambling offense in
any jurisdiction shall be a bingo game operator.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. Whoever violates division (B) of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2915.11)
§ 134.09 BINGO GAMES FOR AMUSEMENT ONLY.
   (A)   Sections
134.06 through
134.13 and
134.15 do not apply to bingo games that are conducted for the purpose of
amusement only. A bingo game is conducted for the purpose of amusement only if
it complies with all of the requirements specified in either division (A)(1) or
(A)(2) of this section.
      (1)   (a)   The participants do not pay any money or any other thing of
value, including an admission fee or any fee, for bingo cards or sheets,
objects to cover the spaces, or other devices used in playing bingo, for the
privilege of participating in the bingo game, or to defray any costs of the
game, or pay tips or make donations during or immediately before or after the
bingo game.
         (b)   All prizes awarded during the course of the game are non-
monetary, and in the form of merchandise, goods, or entitlement to goods or
services only, and the total value of all prizes awarded during the game is
less than $100.
         (c)   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity,
or other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of
the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at
the site of the bingo game.
         (d)   The bingo game is not conducted either during or within ten
hours of any of the following:
            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is
conducted pursuant to R.C. §§ 2915.07 through 2915.11 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
            2.   A scheme or game of chance, or bingo described in R.C. §
2915.01(O)(2).
         (e)   The number of players participating in the bingo game does not
exceed 50.
      (2)   (a)   The participants do not pay money or any other thing of value
as an admission fee, and no participant is charged more than $0.25 to purchase
a bingo card or sheet, objects to cover the spaces, or other devices used in
playing bingo.
         (b)   The total amount of money paid by all of the participants for
bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover the spaces, or other devices used in
playing bingo does not exceed $100.
         (c)   All of the money paid for bingo cards or sheets, objects to
cover spaces, or other devices used in playing bingo is used only to pay
winners monetary and nonmonetary prizes and to provide refreshments.
         (d)   The total value of all prizes awarded during the game does not
exceed $100.
         (e)   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity,
or other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of
the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at
the site of the bingo game.
         (f)   The bingo game is not conducted during or within ten hours of
either of the following:
            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is
conducted pursuant to R.C. §§ 2915.07 through 2915.15 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance;
            2.   A scheme of chance or a game of chance, or bingo described in
R.C. § 2915.01(O)(2).
         (g)   All of the participants reside at the premises where the bingo
game is conducted.
         (h)   The bingo games are conducted on different days of the week and
not more than twice in a calendar week.
   (B)   The Attorney General or any local law enforcement agency may
investigate the conduct of a bingo game that purportedly is conducted for
purposes of amusement only if there is reason to believe that the purported
amusement bingo game does not comply with the requirements of either division
(A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section. A local law enforcement agency may proceed by
action in the proper court to enforce this section if the local law enforcement
agency gives written notice to the Attorney General when commencing the action.
(R.C. § 2915.12)
§ 134.10 PROHIBITIONS WHERE INSTANT BINGO GAME IS CONDUCTED.
   (A)   No charitable organization that conducts instant bingo shall do any of
the following:
      (1)   Fail to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 2915.09(A)(1), (A)
(2), and (A)(3), or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (2)   Conduct instant bingo unless either of the following applies:
         (a)   That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the
organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a), is
described in IRC § 501(c)(3), is a charitable organization as defined in R.C. §
2915.01, is in good standing in the state pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08, and is in
compliance with R.C. Chapter 1716;
         (b)   That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the
organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a), is
described in IRC § 501(c)(7), (c)(8), (c)(10), or (c)(19) or is a veteran’s
organization described in IRC § 501(c)(4), and conducts instant bingo under
R.C. § 2915.13.
      (3)   Conduct instant bingo on any day, at any time, or at any premises
not specified on the organization’s license issued pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08;
      (4)   Permit any person whom the organization knows or should have known
has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any jurisdiction to be a
bingo game operator in the conduct of instant bingo;
      (5)   Purchase or lease supplies used to conduct instant bingo or punch
board games from any person except a distributor licensed under R.C. §
2915.081;
      (6)   Sell or provide any instant bingo ticket or card for a price
different from the price printed on it by the manufacturer on either the
instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare;
      (7)   Sell an instant bingo ticket or card to a person under 18 years of
age;
      (8)   Fail to keep unsold instant bingo tickets or cards for less than
three years;
      (9)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for conducting
instant bingo that is conducted by the organization or for preparing, selling,
or serving food or beverages at the site of the instant bingo game, permit any
auxiliary unit or society of the organization to pay compensation to any bingo
game operator who prepares, sells, or serves food or beverages at an instant
bingo game conducted by the organization, or permit any auxiliary unit or
society of the organization to prepare, sell, or serve food or beverages at an
instant bingo game conducted by the organization, if the auxiliary unit or
society pays any compensation to the bingo game operators who prepare, sell, or
serve the food or beverages;
      (10)   Pay fees to any person for any services performed in relation to
an instant bingo game, except as provided in R.C. § 2915.093(D);
      (11)   Pay fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in an instant bingo game;
      (12)   (a)   Allow instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold to bingo
game operators at a premises at which the organization sells instant bingo
tickets or cards or to be sold to employees of a D permit holder who are
working at a premises at which instant bingo tickets or cards are sold;
         (b)   Division (A)(12)(a) of this section does not prohibit a licensed
charitable organization or a bingo game operator from giving any person an
instant bingo ticket as a prize in place of a cash prize won by a participant
in an instant bingo game. In no case shall an instant bingo ticket or card be
sold or provided for a price different from the price printed on it by the
manufacturer on either the instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare.
      (13)   Fail to display its bingo license, and the serial numbers of the
deal of instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold, conspicuously at each
premises at which it sells instant bingo tickets or cards;
      (14)   Possess a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards that was not
purchased from a distributor licensed under R.C. § 2915.081 as reflected on an
invoice issued by the distributor that contains all of the information required
by R.C. § 2915.10(E);
      (15)   Fail, once it opens a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards, to
continue to sell the tickets or cards in that deal until the tickets or cards
with the top two highest tiers of prizes in that deal are sold;
      (16)   Possess bingo supplies that were not obtained in accordance with
R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (B)   A charitable organization may purchase, lease, or use instant bingo
ticket dispensers to sell instant bingo tickets or cards.
   (C)   Pursuant to R.C. § 2915.091(C), the Attorney General may adopt rules
in accordance with R.C. Chapter 119 that govern the conduct of instant bingo by
charitable organizations.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section or a rule adopted under
division (C) of this section is guilty of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, illegal instant bingo conduct is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of a violation of division (A) of this section or of such a rule adopted under
division (C) of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.091)
§ 134.11 RAFFLE DRAWINGS.
   (A)   (1)   Subject to division (A)(2) of this section, a person or entity
may conduct a raffle to raise money for the person or entity and does not need
a license to conduct bingo in order to conduct a raffle drawing that is not for
profit if the person or entity is any of the following:
         (a)   Exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c)(3);
         (b)   A school district, community school established under R.C.
Chapter 3314, STEM school established under R.C. Chapter 3326, college-
preparatory boarding school established under R.C. Chapter 3328, or chartered
nonpublic school;
         (c)   Exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c)(4), 501(c)(6), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), or
501(c)(19).
      (2)   If a person or entity that is described in division (A)(1)(c) of
this section conducts a raffle, the person or entity shall distribute at least
50% of the net profit from the raffle to a charitable purpose described in R.C.
§ 2915.01(V) or to a department or agency of the federal government, the state,
or any political subdivision.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (A) of this section, no person shall
conduct a raffle drawing that is for profit or a raffle drawing that is not for
profit.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of illegal
conduct of a raffle. Except as otherwise provided in this division, illegal
conduct of a raffle is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of division (B) of this section,
illegal conduct of a raffle is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2915.092)
§ 134.12 INSTANT BINGO OTHER THAN AT BINGO SESSIONS.
   (A)   As used in this section, RETAIL INCOME FROM ALL COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY
means the income that a person receives from the provision of goods, services,
or activities that are provided at the location where instant bingo other than
at a bingo session is conducted, including the sale of instant bingo tickets. A
religious organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC §
501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3), at not more than one location at which
it conducts its charitable programs, may include donations from its members and
guests as retail income.
   (B)   (1)   If a charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant
bingo other than at a bingo session under a type III license issued under R.C.
§ 2915.08, the charitable instant bingo organization shall enter into a written
contract with the owner or lessor of the location at which the instant bingo is
conducted to allow the owner or lessor to assist in the conduct of instant
bingo other than at a bingo session, identify each location where the instant
bingo other than at a bingo session is being conducted, and identify the owner
or lessor of each location.
      (2)   A charitable instant bingo organization that conducts instant bingo
other than at a bingo session under a type III license issued under R.C. §
2915.08 is not required to enter into a written contract with the owner or
lessor of the location at which the instant bingo is conducted provided that
the owner or lessor is not assisting in the conduct of the instant bingo other
than at a bingo session and provided that the conduct of the instant bingo
other than at a bingo session at that location is not more than five days per
calendar year and not more than ten hours per day.
   (C)   Except as provided in division (F) of this section, no charitable
instant bingo organization shall conduct instant bingo other than at a bingo
session at a location where the primary source of retail income from all
commercial activity at that location is the sale of instant bingo tickets.
   (D)   (1)   The owner or lessor of a location that enters into a contract
pursuant to division (B) of this section shall pay the full gross profit to the
charitable instant bingo organization, in return for the deal of instant bingo
tickets. The owner or lessor may retain the money that the owner or lessor
receives for selling the instant bingo tickets, provided, however, that after
the deal has been sold, the owner or lessor shall pay to the charitable instant
bingo organization the value of any unredeemed instant bingo prizes remaining
in the deal of instant bingo tickets.
      (2)   The charitable instant bingo organization shall pay 6% of the total
gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets for the purpose of
reimbursing the owner or lessor for expenses described in this division.
      (3)   As used in this division, EXPENSES means those items provided for
in R.C. § 2915.01(GG)(4), (GG)(5), (GG)(6), (GG)(7), (GG)(8), (GG)(12), and
(GG)(13) and that percentage of the owner’s or lessor’s rent for the location
where instant bingo is conducted. Expenses, in the aggregate, shall not exceed
6% of the total gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets.
      (4)   As used in this division, FULL GROSS PROFIT means the amount by
which the total receipts of all instant bingo tickets, if the deal has been
sold in full, exceeds the amount that would be paid out if all prizes were
redeemed.
   (E)   A charitable instant bingo organization shall provide the Attorney
General with all of the following information:
      (1)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has terminated a
contract entered into pursuant to division (B) of this section with an owner or
lessor of a location;
      (2)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has entered into a
written contract pursuant to division (B) of this section with a new owner or
lessor of a location;
      (3)   That the charitable instant bingo organization is aware of conduct
by the owner or lessor of a location at which instant bingo is conducted that
is in violation of R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (F)   Division (C) of this section does not apply to a volunteer
firefighter’s organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under
IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3), that conducts instant bingo
other than at a bingo session on the premises where the organization conducts
firefighter training, that has conducted instant bingo continuously for at
least five years prior to July 1, 2003, and that, during each of those five
years, had gross receipts of at least $1,500,000.
(R.C. § 2915.093)
   (G)   (1)   Subject to the requirements of R.C. §§ 2915.14 and 2915.15
concerning electronic instant bingo, a veteran’s organization, a fraternal
organization, or a sporting organization authorized to conduct a bingo session
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2915 may conduct instant bingo, electronic instant
bingo, or both other than at a bingo session under a type III license issued
under R.C. § 2915.08 if all of the following apply:
         (a)   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization limits the sale of instant bingo or electronic instant bingo to 12
hours during any day, provided that the sale does not begin earlier than 10:00
a.m. and ends not later than 2:00 a.m.
         (b)   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization limits the sale of instant bingo or electronic instant bingo to
its own premises and to its own members and invited guests.
         (c)   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization is raising money for an organization that is described in IRC §
509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an
organization that maintains its principal place of business in this state, that
is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC
§ 501(c)(3), and that is in good standing in this state and executes a written
contract with that organization as required in division (G)(2) of this section.
      (2)   If a veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization authorized to conduct instant bingo or electronic instant bingo
pursuant to division (G)(1) of this section is raising money for another
organization that is described in IRC § 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is
either a governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal
place of business in this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c), and that is in good standing
in this state, the veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization shall execute a written contract with the organization that is
described in IRC § 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a governmental
unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of business in this
state, that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c), and that is in good standing in this state in order
to conduct instant bingo or electronic instant bingo. That contract shall
include a statement of the percentage of the net proceeds that the veteran’s,
fraternal, or sporting organization will be distributing to the organization
that is described in IRC § 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a
governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of
business in this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC §
501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3), and that is in good standing in this
state.
      (3)   (a)   If a veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or
sporting organization authorized to conduct instant bingo or electronic instant
bingo pursuant to division (G)(1) of this section has been issued a liquor
permit under R.C. Chapter 4303, that permit may be subject to suspension,
revocation, or cancellation if the veteran’s organization, fraternal
organization, or sporting organization violates a provision of this chapter or
R.C. Chapter 2915.
         (b)   No veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization that enters into a written contract pursuant to division (G)(2) of
this section shall violate any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915,
or permit, aid, or abet any other person in violating any provision of this
chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.
      (4)   A veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization shall give all required proceeds earned from the conduct of
instant bingo or electronic instant bingo to the organization with which the
veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting organization has
entered into a written contract.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (G) of this section is guilty of illegal
instant bingo or electronic instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided
in this division, illegal instant bingo or electronic instant bingo conduct is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of division (G) of this section, illegal instant bingo
or electronic instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.13)
§ 134.13 RESTRICTIONS ON OWNER OR LESSOR OF LOCATION AT INSTANT BINGO.
   (A)   No owner or lessor of a location shall assist a charitable instant
bingo organization in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo
session at that location unless the owner or lessor has entered into a written
contract, as described in R.C. § 2915.093, with the charitable instant bingo
organization to assist in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo
session.
   (B)   The location of the lessor or owner shall be designated as a location
where the charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant bingo other
than at a bingo session.
   (C)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract
as prescribed in division (A) of this section shall violate any provision of
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915, or permit, aid, or abet any other person in
violating any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (D)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract
as prescribed in division (A) of this section shall violate the terms of the
contract.
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section is guilty
of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, illegal instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of division (C) or
(D) of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If an owner or lessor of a location knowingly, intentionally, or
recklessly violates division (C) or (D) of this section, any license that the
owner or lessor holds for the retail sale of any goods on the owner’s or
lessor’s premises that is issued by the state or a political subdivision is
subject to suspension, revocation, or payment of a monetary penalty at the
request of the Attorney General.
(R.C. § 2915.094)
§ 134.14 SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINES; PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (A)   No person shall give to another person any item described in division
(1), (2), (3), or (4) of the definition for “merchandise prize” in §
134.01 in exchange for a noncash prize, toy, or novelty received as a reward
for playing or operating a skill-based amusement machine or for a free or
reduced-price game won on a skill-based amusement machine.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of skill-based
amusement machine prohibited conduct. A violation of division (A) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree for each redemption of a prize
that is involved in the violation. If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of division (A) of this section, a violation of that
division is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.06)
   (C)   Any regulation of skill-based amusement machines shall be governed by
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 and not by R.C. Chapter 1345.
(R.C. § 2915.061)
§ 134.15 ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO; PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (A)   No charitable organization shall conduct electronic instant bingo
unless all of the following are true:
      (1)   The organization is a veteran’s organization described in R.C. §
2915.01(J), or is a fraternal organization described in R.C. § 2915.01(L), and
the organization qualified as a veteran’s organization or fraternal
organization, as applicable, on or before June 30, 2021.
      (2)   The organization is a veteran’s organization described in IRC § 501
(c)(4) or is, and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a
determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the organization
is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a), and is described in
IRC § 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), or 501(c)(19).
      (3)   The organization has not conducted a raffle in violation of R.C. §
2915.092(B) using an electronic raffle machine, as described in Ohio Veterans
and Fraternal Charitable Coalition v. DeWine, Case No. 13-CV-13610 (C.P.
Franklin Co. February 23, 2018), at any time on or after January 1, 2022.
   (B)   No charitable organization that conducts electronic instant bingo
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Possess an electronic instant bingo system that was not obtained in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 2915 or with any rule adopted under R.C. Chapter
2915;
      (2)   Conduct electronic instant bingo on any day, at any time, or on any
premises not specified on the organization’s type II or type III license issued
under R.C. § 2915.08;
      (3)   Hold more than one valid license to conduct electronic instant
bingo at any one time;
      (4)   Conduct electronic instant bingo on more than one premises or on
any premises other than the charitable organization’s principal place of
business;
      (5)   Operate more than ten electronic bingo systems at the premises on
which the charitable organization conducts electronic instant bingo under its
license;
      (6)   Fail to display both of the following conspicuously at the premises
on which the charitable organization conducts electronic instant bingo:
         (a)   The charitable organization’s bingo license;
         (b)   The serial number of each deal of electronic instant bingo
tickets being sold.
      (7)   Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or should have
known, to be under 18 years of age to play electronic instant bingo;
      (8)   Sell or provide to any person an electronic instant bingo ticket
for a price different from the price displayed on the game flare for that deal,
except that the charitable organization may give a participant who wins an
electronic instant bingo game an electronic instant bingo ticket as a prize in
place of a cash prize;
      (9)   Fail, once an electronic instant bingo deal is begun, to continue
to sell tickets in that deal until all prizes have been awarded;
      (10)   Permit any person whom the organization knows, or should have
known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any jurisdiction
to be a bingo game operator in the conduct of electronic instant bingo;
      (11)   Permit a bingo game operator to play electronic instant bingo;
      (12)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(12)(b) of this
section, pay compensation to a bingo game operator for conducting electronic
instant bingo.
         (b)   Division (B)(12)(a) of this section does not prohibit an
employee of a veteran’s organization or fraternal organization from redeeming
electronic instant bingo tickets or vouchers for the organization’s members or
invited guests, so long as no portion of the employee’s compensation is paid
from any bingo receipts.
      (13)   Pay consulting fees to any person in relation to electronic
instant bingo.
   (C)   No person shall sell, offer to sell, or otherwise provide or offer to
provide an electronic instant bingo system to any person for use in this
municipality unless the electronic instant bingo system has been approved under
R.C. § 2915.15.
   (D)   Whoever knowingly violates division (A), (B), or (C) of this section
or a rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.14(D) is guilty of illegal electronic
instant bingo conduct. Illegal electronic instant bingo conduct is a
misdemeanor of the first degree, except that if the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or state law, or of a rule adopted
under R.C. § 2915.14(D), illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.14)
CHAPTER 135: OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
Section
   
135.01   Definitions
   
135.02   Negligent homicide
   
135.03   Vehicular homicide; vehicular manslaughter; vehicular assault
   
135.04   Assault; negligent assault
   
135.05   Injury to persons by hunters
   
135.06   Menacing; aggravated menacing; menacing by stalking
   
135.07   Unlawful restraint
   
135.08   Unlawful collection of bodily substances
   
135.09   Coercion
   
135.10   Bigamy
   
135.11   Reserved
   
135.12   Misrepresentation relating to provision of child care
   
135.13   Nonsupport of dependents
   
135.14   Endangering children
   
135.15   Interference with custody; interference with support orders
   
135.16   Domestic violence
   
135.17   Hazing prohibited
   
135.18   Contributing to unruliness or delinquency of a child
   
135.19   Failure to provide for a person with a functional impairment
   
135.20   Patient abuse or neglect; patient endangerment; exceptions; false
statements; retaliation
   
135.21   Interference with right of person to engage in housing transactions
because of race, religion, or the like
   
135.22   Ethnic intimidation
   
135.23   Violating a protection order, consent agreement, anti-stalking
protection order or order issued by a court of another state
   
135.24   Adulteration of food
   
135.25   Illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products; transaction scans
   
135.26   Nonsmoking areas in places of public assembly
   
135.27   Spreading contagion
   
135.28   Abuse of a corpse
   
135.29   Smoking restrictions
Statutory reference:
   Child care, misrepresentations by providers and failure to disclose death or
serious injuries, misdemeanors, see R.C. §§ 2919.223 et seq.
   Extortionate extension of credit, see R.C. §§ 2905.21 through 2905.24
   Failure to send child to school, see R.C. § 3321.38
   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.15
   Reckless homicide, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.041
   Rights of victims of crimes, see R.C. Chapter 2930
§ 135.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of §§
135.01 through
135.06, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ANOTHER’S UNBORN or OTHER PERSON’S UNBORN. A member of the species Homo
sapiens who is or was carried in the womb of another during a period that
begins with fertilization and that continues unless and until live birth
occurs.
      UNLAWFUL TERMINATION OF ANOTHER’S PREGNANCY. Causing the death of an
unborn member of the species Homo sapiens who is or was carried in the womb of
another, as a result of injuries inflicted during the period that begins with
fertilization and that continues unless and until live birth occurs.
   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A) of this section, in no case shall the
definitions of the terms “another’s unborn”, “other person’s unborn” and
“unlawful termination of another’s pregnancy” that are set forth in division
(A) of this section be applied or construed in any of the following manners:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(1) of this section, in
a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as prohibiting any
pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion with the consent of
the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant woman implied by law in a
medical emergency, or with the approval of one otherwise authorized by law to
consent to medical treatment on behalf of the pregnant woman. An abortion that
violates the conditions described in the immediately preceding sentence may be
punished as any violation of R.C. § 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04,
2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.14, 2903.21 or
2903.22, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, as applicable. An
abortion that does not violate the conditions described in the second
immediately preceding sentence but that does violate R.C. § 2919.12, 2919.13
(B), 2919.15, 2919.151, 2919.17 or 2919.18, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, may be punished as a violation of such section, as
applicable.
      (2)   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as
applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman that occurs while
she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the following:
         (a)   Her delivery of a stillborn baby.
         (b)   Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a
viable, unborn human that she is carrying.
         (c)   Her causing the death of her child who is born alive but who
dies from one or more injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable,
unborn human.
         (d)   Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more
injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human.
         (e)   Her causing, threatening to cause, or attempting to cause, in
any other manner, an injury, illness, or other psychological illness or
condition, regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable, unborn human
that she is carrying.
(R.C. § 2903.09)
§ 135.02 NEGLIGENT HOMICIDE.
   (A)   No person shall negligently cause the death of another or the unlawful
termination of another’s pregnancy by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance, as defined in R.C. § 2923.11.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent homicide, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2903.05)
Statutory reference:
   Reckless homicide, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.041
§ 135.03 VEHICULAR HOMICIDE; VEHICULAR MANSLAUGHTER; VEHICULAR ASSAULT.
   (A)   No person, while operating or participating in the operation of a
motor vehicle, motorcycle, utility vehicle, mini-truck, snowmobile, locomotive,
watercraft, or aircraft, shall cause the death of another or the unlawful
termination of another’s pregnancy in any of the following ways:
      (1)   (a)   As the proximate result of committing a violation of R.C. §
4511.19(A) or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
         (b)   As the proximate result of committing a violation of R.C. §
1547.11(A), or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
         (c)   As the proximate result of committing a violation of R.C. §
4561.15(A)(3), or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   In one of the following ways:
         (a)   Recklessly;
         (b)   As the proximate result of committing, while operating or
participating in the operation of a motor vehicle, utility vehicle, mini-truck,
or motorcycle in a construction zone, a reckless operation offense, provided
that this division applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose
pregnancy is unlawfully terminated is in the construction zone at the time of
the offender’s commission of the reckless operation offense in the construction
zone and does not apply as described in division (D) of this section.
      (3)   In one of the following ways:
         (a)   Negligently;
         (b)   As the proximate result of committing, while operating or
participating in the operation of a motor vehicle, utility vehicle, mini-truck,
or motorcycle in a construction zone, a speeding offense, provided that this
division applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose pregnancy is
unlawfully terminated is in the construction zone at the time of the offender’s
commission of the speeding offense in the construction zone and does not apply
as described in division (D) of this section.
      (4)   As the proximate result of committing a violation of any provision
of any section contained in R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor or of a
municipal ordinance that, regardless of the penalty set by ordinance for the
violation, is substantially equivalent to any provision of any section
contained in R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section is
guilty of aggravated vehicular homicide, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A)(3) of this section is guilty of
vehicular homicide. Except as otherwise provided in this division, vehicular
homicide is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Vehicular homicide committed in
violation of division (A)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving
under a suspension or cancellation imposed under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other
provision of the Ohio Revised Code or was operating a motor vehicle or
motorcycle, did not have a valid driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege, and was not eligible for renewal of the offender’s driver’s license
or commercial driver’s license without examination under R.C. § 4507.10 or if
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation
of this section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault
offense.
         (b)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to this
division, the court shall impose upon the offender a class four suspension of
the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) of this section is guilty of
vehicular manslaughter. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
vehicular manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the second degree. Vehicular
manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the first degree if, at the time of the
offense, the offender was driving under a suspension or cancellation imposed
under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code or was
operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle, did not have a valid driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege, and was not eligible for renewal
of the offender’s driver’s license or commercial driver’s license without
examination under R.C. § 4507.10 or if the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or any traffic-
related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense.
         (b)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to this
division, the court shall impose upon the offender a class six suspension of
the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6) or, if the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section, any
traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense, or a traffic-
related murder, felonious assault, or attempted murder offense, a class four
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
   (C)   The court shall impose a mandatory jail term of at least 15 days on an
offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation of
division (A)(3)(b) of this section and may impose upon the offender a longer
jail term as authorized pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24.
   (D)   Divisions (A)(2)(b) and (A)(3)(b) of this section do not apply in a
particular construction zone unless signs of the type described in R.C. §
2903.081 are erected in that construction zone in accordance with the
guidelines and design specifications established by the Director of
Transportation under R.C. § 5501.27. The failure to erect signs of the type
described in R.C. § 2903.081 in a particular construction zone in accordance
with those guidelines and design specifications does not limit or affect the
application of division (A)(1), (A)(2)(a), (A)(3)(a), or (A)(4) of this section
in that construction zone or the prosecution of any person who violates any of
those divisions in that construction zone.
   (E)   (1)   As used in this section:
         CONSTRUCTION ZONE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5501.27.
         MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
         MANDATORY PRISON TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
         MINI-TRUCK. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
         MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
         RECKLESS OPERATION OFFENSE. Means a violation of R.C. § 4511.20 or a
municipal ordinance substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.20.
         SPEEDING OFFENSE. Means a violation of R.C. § 4511.21 or a municipal
ordinance pertaining to speed.
         TRAFFIC-RELATED HOMICIDE, MAN-SLAUGHTER, OR ASSAULT OFFENSE. Means a
violation of R.C. § 2903.04 in circumstances in which division (D) of that
section applies, a violation of R.C. § 2903.06 or 2903.08, or a violation of
R.C. § 2903.06, 2903.07, or 2903.08 as they existed prior to March 23, 2000.
         TRAFFIC-RELATED MURDER, FELONIOUS ASSAULT, OR ATTEMPTED MURDER
OFFENSE. Means a violation of R.C. § 2903.01 or R.C. § 2903.02 in circumstances
in which the offender used a motor vehicle as the means to commit the
violation, a violation of R.C. § 2903.11(A)(2) in circumstances in which the
deadly weapon used in the commission of the violation is a motor vehicle, or an
attempt to commit aggravated murder or murder in violation of R.C. § 2923.02 in
circumstances in which the offender used a motor vehicle as the means to
attempt to commit the aggravated murder or murder.
         UTILITY VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, when a penalty or suspension is
enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified law or a prior
or current specified offense, the reference to the violation of the specified
law or the specified offense includes any violation of any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this state, or current or former
law of this or another state or the United States.
(R.C. § 2903.06)
   (F)   Vehicular assault.
      (1)   No person, while operating or participating in the operation of a
motor vehicle, motorcycle, utility vehicle, or mini-truck, shall cause serious
physical harm to another person or another’s unborn as the proximate result of
committing, while operating or participating in the operation of a motor
vehicle, utility vehicle, mini-truck, or motorcycle in a construction zone, a
speeding offense, provided that this division applies only if the person to
whom the serious physical harm is caused or to whose unborn the serious
physical harm is caused is in the construction zone at the time of the
offender’s commission of the speeding offense in the construction zone and does
not apply as described in division (F)(4) of this section.
      (2)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, vehicular
assault committed in violation of division (F)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Vehicular assault committed in violation of
division (F)(1) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving under a
suspension imposed under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Ohio
Revised Code or if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (F)(1) of this section, R.C. § 2903.08, or
any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense.
         (b)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed, the court shall
impose upon the offender a class four suspension of the offender’s driver’s
license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
      (3)   The court shall impose a mandatory jail term of at least seven days
on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation
of division (F)(1) of this section and may impose upon the offender a longer
jail term as authorized pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24.
      (4)   Division (F)(1) of this section does not apply in a particular
construction zone unless signs of the type described in R.C. § 2903.081 are
erected in that construction zone in accordance with the guidelines and design
specifications established by the Director of Transportation under R.C. §
5501.27.
      (5)   As used in this division (F):
         CONSTRUCTION ZONE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5501.27.
         MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
         SPEEDING OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.06.
         TRAFFIC-RELATED HOMICIDE, MANSLAUGHTER, OR ASSAULT OFFENSE. Has the
same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.06.
      (6)   For the purposes of this division (F), when a penalty or suspension
is enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified law or a
prior or current specified offense, the reference to the violation of the
specified law or the specified offense includes any violation of any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this state, or
current or former law of another state or the United States.
(R.C. 2903.08(A)(3), (C)(3), (D)(3), (E) - (G))
Statutory reference:
   Court to suspend driver’s license, see R.C. §§ 4510.05 and 4510.07
   Vehicular assault and aggravated vehicular assault, felony offenses, see
R.C. § 2903.08
§ 135.04 ASSAULT; NEGLIGENT ASSAULT.
   (A)   Assault.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm
to another or to another’s unborn.
      (2)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to another
or to another’s unborn.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section is
guilty of assault. Except as provided in R.C. § 2903.13(C), assault is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (4)   If an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to assault when
it is a misdemeanor also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a specification as
described in R.C. § 2941.1423 (victim of the offense was a woman whom the
defendant knew was pregnant at the time of the offense) that was included in
the indictment, count in the indictment, or information charging the offense,
the court shall sentence the offender to a mandatory jail term as provided in
R.C. § 2929.24(F).
      (5)   A prosecution for a violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this
section does not preclude a prosecution of a violation of any other section of
the Ohio Revised Code. One or more acts, a series of acts, or a course of
behavior that can be prosecuted under division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section
or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under division
(A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section, the other section of the Ohio Revised Code,
or both sections. However, if an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section and also is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of R.C. § 2903.22, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, based on the same conduct involving the same
victim that was the basis of the violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this
section, the offenses are allied offenses of similar import under R.C. §
2941.25.
(R.C. § 2903.13)
   (B)   Negligent assault.
      (1)   No person shall negligently, by means of a deadly weapon or
dangerous ordnance as defined in R.C. § 2923.11, cause physical harm to another
or to another’s unborn.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section is guilty of
negligent assault, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 2903.14)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated and felonious assault, see R.C. §§ 2903.11 and 2903.12
   Felony assault offenses, see R.C. § 2903.13(C)
   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.15
   Persons who may seek relief under anti-stalking protection order; ex parte
orders, see R.C. § 2903.214
   Protection order as pretrial condition of release, see R.C. § 2903.213
   Strangulation, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.18
   Vehicular assault and aggravated vehicular assault, felony offenses, see
R.C. § 2903.08
§ 135.05 INJURY TO PERSONS BY HUNTERS.
   (A)   No person in the act of hunting, pursuing, taking, or killing a wild
animal shall act in a negligent, careless, or reckless manner so as to injure
persons.
(R.C. § 1533.171(A))
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(R.C. § 1533.99(C))
Statutory reference:
   Violation, license revocation, see R.C. § 1533.171(B) through (E)
§ 135.06 MENACING; AGGRAVATED MENACING; MENACING BY STALKING.
   (A)   Menacing.
      (1)   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the
offender will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other
person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other person’s immediate
family. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief that the
offender will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other
person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other person’s immediate
family, the other person’s belief may be based on words or conduct of the
offender that are directed at or identify a corporation, association, or other
organization that employs the other person or to which the other person
belongs.
         (b)   No person shall knowingly place or attempt to place another in
reasonable fear of physical harm or death by displaying a deadly weapon,
regardless of whether the deadly weapon displayed is operable or inoperable, if
either of the following applies:
            1.   The other person is an emergency service responder, the person
knows or reasonably should know that the other person is an emergency service
responder, and it is the person’s specific purpose to engage in the specified
conduct against an emergency service responder.
            2.   The other person is a family or household member or co-worker
of an emergency service responder, the person knows or reasonably should know
that the other person is a family or household member or co-worker of an
emergency service responder, and it is the person’s specific purpose to engage
in the specified conduct against a family or household member or co-worker of
an emergency service responder.
      (2)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of menacing. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, menacing is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If the victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a public
children services agency or a private child placing agency and the offense
relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated performance
of official responsibilities or duties or if the victim of the offense is an
emergency service responder in the performance of the responder’s official
duties, menacing is one of the following:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(2)(b) of this
section, a misdemeanor of the first degree;
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an
officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child
placing agency or an emergency service responder, and that prior offense
related to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated performance
of official responsibilities or duties or to the responder’s performance of the
responder’s official duties, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (3)   A prosecution for a violation of division (A) of this section does
not preclude a prosecution of a violation of any other section of the Ohio
Revised Code. One or more acts, a series of acts, or a course of behavior that
can be prosecuted under division (A) of this section or any other section of
the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under division (A) of this section, the
other section of the Ohio Revised Code, or both sections. However, if an
offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (A) of
this section and also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of R.C. §
2903.13, or any substantially similar municipal ordinance, based on the same
conduct involving the same victim that was the basis of the violation of
division (A) of this section, the offenses are allied offenses of similar
import under R.C. § 2941.25.
      (4)   As used in this section:
         CO-WORKER. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 2903.13.
         EMERGENCY SERVICE RESPONDER. Has the same meanings as in R.C. §
2903.13.
         FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
2903.13.
         ORGANIZATION. Includes an entity that is a governmental employer.
(R.C. § 2903.22)
   (B)   Aggravated menacing.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the
offender will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of the
other person, such other person’s unborn, or a member of such other person’s
immediate family. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief
that the offender will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of
the other person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other person’s
immediate family, the other person’s belief may be based on words or conduct of
the offender that are directed at or identify a corporation, association, or
other organization that employs the other person or to which the other person
belongs.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section is guilty of
aggravated menacing. Except as otherwise provided in this division (B)(2),
aggravated menacing is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the victim of the
offense is an officer or employee of a public children services agency or a
private child placing agency and the offense relates to the officer’s or
employee’s performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities
or duties, aggravated menacing is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an
officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child
placing agency, and that prior offense related to the officer’s or employee’s
performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties,
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   As used in this division (B), ORGANIZATION includes an entity that
is a governmental employer.
(R.C. § 2903.21)
   (C)   Menacing by stalking.
      (1)   (a)   No person by engaging in a pattern of conduct shall knowingly
cause another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to
the other person or a family or household member of the other person or cause
mental distress to the other person or a family or household member of the
other person. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief that
the offender will cause physical harm to the other person or the other person’s
family or household member or mental distress to the other person or the other
person’s family or household member, the other person’s belief or mental
distress may be based on words or conduct of the offender that are directed at
or identify a corporation, association, or other organization that employs the
other person or to which the other person belongs.
         (b)   No person, through the use of any form of written communication
or any electronic method of remotely transferring information, including but
not limited to any computer, computer network, computer program, computer
system, or telecommunication device, shall post a message or use any
intentionally written or verbal graphic gesture with purpose to do either of
the following:
            1.   Violate division (C)(1)(a) of this section;
            2.   Urge or incite another to commit a violation of division (C)
(1)(a) of this section.
         (c)   No person, with a sexual motivation, shall violate division (C)
(1)(a) or (C)(1)(b) of this section.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (C)(1) of this section is guilty of
menacing by stalking.
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2)(b) of this
section, menacing by stalking is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   Menacing by stalking is a felony, to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law, if any of the following applies:
            1.   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of R.C. § 2903.211 or a violation of R.C. § 2911.211, or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to either of these offenses.
            2.   In committing the offense under division (C)(1)(a), (C)(1)(b)
or (C)(1)(c) of this section, the offender made a threat of physical harm to or
against the victim, or as a result of an offense committed under division (C)
(1)(b) or (C)(1)(c) of this section, a third person induced by the offender’s
posted message made a threat of physical harm to or against the victim.
            3.   In committing the offense under division (C)(1)(a), (C)(1)(b)
or (C)(1)(c) of this section, the offender trespassed on the land or premises
where the victim lives, is employed, or attends school, or as a result of an
offense committed under division (C)(1)(b) or (C)(1)(c) of this section, a
third person induced by the offender’s posted message trespassed on the land or
premises where the victim lives, is employed, or attends school.
            4.   The victim of the offense is a minor.
            5.   The offender has a history of violence towards the victim or
any other person or a history of other violent acts towards the victim or any
other person.
            6.   While committing the offense under division (C)(1)(a) of this
section or a violation of division (C)(1)(c) of this section based on conduct
in violation of division (C)(1)(a) of this section, the offender had a deadly
weapon on or about the offender’s person or under the offender’s control.
Division (C)(2)(b)6. of this section does not apply in determining the penalty
for a violation of division (C)(1)(b) of this section or a violation of
division (C)(1)(c) of this section based on conduct in violation of division
(C)(1)(b) of this section.
            7.   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
the subject of a protection order issued under R.C. § 2903.213 or R.C. §
2903.214, regardless of whether or not the person to be protected under the
order is the victim of the offense or another person.
            8.   In committing the offense under division (C)(1)(a), (C)(1)(b)
or (C)(1)(c) of this section, the offender caused serious physical harm to the
premises at which the victim resides, to the real property on which that
premises is located, or to any personal property located on that premises, or
as a result of an offense committed under division (C)(1)(b) of this section or
an offense committed under division (C)(1)(c) of this section based on a
violation of division (C)(1)(b) of this section, a third person induced by the
offender’s posted message caused serious physical harm to that premises, that
real property, or any personal property on that premises.
            9.   Prior to committing the offense, the offender had been
determined to represent a substantial risk of physical harm to others as
manifested by evidence of then-recent homicidal or other violent behavior,
evidence of then-recent threats that placed another in reasonable fear of
violent behavior and serious harm, or other evidence of then-present
dangerousness.
            10.   The victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a
public children services agency or a private child placing agency and the
offense relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated
performance of official responsibilities or duties.
            11.   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an
officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child
placing agency, and that prior offense related to the officer’s or employee’s
performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties.
      (3)   R.C. § 2919.271 applies in relation to a defendant charged with a
violation of this section.
      (4)   As used in division (C) of this section:
         COMPUTER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
         COMPUTER NETWORK. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
         COMPUTER PROGRAM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
         COMPUTER SYSTEM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
         EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.
         EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency
medical services personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.
         FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Means any of the following:
            1.   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
person against whom the act prohibited in division (C)(1)(a) of this section is
committed:
               a.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a former spouse
of the person;
               b.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the person, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the person;
               c.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse,
or former spouse of the person, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
person.
            2.   The natural parent of any child of whom the person against
whom the act prohibited in division (C)(1)(a) of this section is committed is
the other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.
         MENTAL DISTRESS. Means any of the following:
            1.   Any mental illness or condition that involves some temporary
substantial incapacity;
            2.   Any mental illness or condition that would normally require
psychiatric treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health
services, whether or not any person requested or received psychiatric
treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health services.
         ORGANIZATION. Includes an entity that is a governmental employer.
         PATTERN OF CONDUCT. Means two or more actions or incidents closely
related in time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based on any
of those actions or incidents, or two or more actions or incidents closely
related in time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based on any
of those actions or incidents, directed at one or more persons employed by or
belonging to the same corporation, association, or other organization. Actions
or incidents that prevent, obstruct, or delay the performance by a public
official, firefighter, rescuer, emergency medical services person, or emergency
facility person of any authorized act within the public official’s,
firefighter’s, rescuer’s, emergency medical services person’s, or emergency
facility person’s official capacity, or the posting of messages, use of
intentionally written or verbal graphic gestures, or receipt of information or
data through the use of any form of written communication or an electronic
method of remotely transferring information, including but not limited to a
computer, computer network, computer program, computer system, or
telecommunications device, may constitute a “pattern of conduct”.
         PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. Means a person who is living or has lived
with the person against whom the act prohibited in division (C)(1)(a) of this
section is committed in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise is
cohabiting with that person, or who otherwise has cohabited with the person
within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in
question.
         POST A MESSAGE. Means transferring, sending, posting, publishing,
disseminating, or otherwise communicating, or attempting to transfer, send,
post, publish, disseminate, or otherwise communicate, any message or
information, whether truthful or untruthful, about an individual, and whether
done under one’s own name, under the name of another, or while impersonating
another.
         PUBLIC OFFICIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.01.
         SEXUAL MOTIVATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2971.01.
         TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
         THIRD PERSON. Means, in relation to conduct as described in division
(C)(1)(b) of this section, an individual who is neither the offender nor the
victim of the conduct.
      (5)   The prosecution does not need to prove in a prosecution under
division (C) of this section that a person requested or received psychiatric
treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health services in order to
show that the person was caused mental distress as described in division (2) of
the definition for “mental distress” in this section.
      (6)   (a)   Division (C) of this section does not apply to a person
solely because the person provided access or connection to or from an
electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s
control, including having provided capabilities that are incidental to
providing access or connection to or from the electronic method of remotely
transferring the information, and that do not include the creation of the
content of the material that is the subject of the access or connection. In
addition, any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic
method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control
shall not be liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the
receipt or transmission through its service of any information that it believes
is or will be sent in violation of division (C) of this section.
         (b)   Division (C)(6)(a) of this section does not create an
affirmative duty for any person providing access or connection to or from an
electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s
control to block the receipt or transmission through its service of any
information that it believes is or will be sent in violation of division (C) of
this section except as otherwise provided by law.
         (c)   Division (C)(6)(a) of this section does not apply to a person
who conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of division (C) of this section or who
knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.
(R.C. § 2903.211)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of corporations to seek protection orders in certain
circumstances, see R.C. § 2903.215
   Conditions of bail for violators, see R.C. § 2903.212
   Persons who may seek relief under anti-stalking protection order; ex parte
orders, see R.C. § 2903.214
   Protection order as pretrial condition of release, see R.C. § 2903.213
§ 135.07 UNLAWFUL RESTRAINT.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly restrain
another of the other person’s liberty.
   (B)   No person, without privilege to do so and with a sexual motivation,
shall knowingly restrain another of the other person’s liberty.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful restraint, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   As used in this section, SEXUAL MOTIVATION has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2971.01.
(R.C. § 2905.03)
§ 135.08 UNLAWFUL COLLECTION OF BODILY SUBSTANCES.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly collect any blood, urine, tissue, or other
bodily substance of another person without privilege or consent to do so.
   (B)   (1)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
         (a)   The collection of any bodily substance of a person by a law
enforcement officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction or advice
of a law enforcement officer, for purposes of a chemical test or tests of the
substance under R.C. § 1547.111(A)(1) or R.C. § 4511.191(A)(2) to determine the
alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination content of the bodily substance;
         (b)   The collection of any bodily substance of a person by a peace
officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction or advice of a peace
officer, for purposes of a test or tests of the substance as provided in R.C. §
4506.17(A) to determine the person’s alcohol concentration or the presence of
any controlled substance or metabolite of a controlled substance.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section shall not be construed as implying
that the persons identified in divisions (B)(1)(a) and (b) of this section do
not have privilege to collect the bodily substance of another person as
described in those divisions or as limiting the definition of “privilege” set
forth in R.C. § 2901.01.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of unlawful
collection of a bodily substance. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, unlawful collection of a bodily substance is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (A) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, unlawful collection of a bodily
substance is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2927.15)
§ 135.09 COERCION.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to coerce another into taking or refraining
from action concerning which the other person has a legal freedom of choice,
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Threaten to commit any offense.
      (2)   Utter or threaten any slander against any person.
      (3)   Expose or threaten to expose any matter tending to subject any
person to hatred, contempt, or ridicule, or to damage any person’s personal or
business repute, or to impair any person’s credit.
      (4)   Institute or threaten criminal proceedings against any person.
      (5)   Take or withhold, or threaten to take or withhold official action,
or cause or threaten to cause official action to be taken or withheld.
   (B)   Divisions (A)(4) and (A)(5) of this section shall not be construed to
prohibit a prosecutor or court from doing any of the following in good faith
and in the interests of justice:
      (1)   Offering or agreeing to grant, or granting immunity from
prosecution pursuant to R.C. § 2945.44.
      (2)   In return for a plea of guilty to one or more offenses charged or
to one or more other or lesser offenses, or in return for the testimony of the
accused in a case to which the accused is not a party, offering or agreeing to
dismiss, or dismissing one or more charges pending against an accused, or
offering or agreeing to impose, or imposing a certain sentence or modification
of sentence.
      (3)   Imposing a community control sanction on certain conditions,
including without limitation requiring the offender to make restitution or
redress to the victim of the offense.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(3), (A)
(4), or (A)(5) of this section that the actor’s conduct was a reasonable
response to the circumstances which occasioned it, and that the actor’s purpose
was limited to any of the following:
      (1)   Compelling another to refrain from misconduct or to desist from
further misconduct.
      (2)   Preventing or redressing a wrong or injustice.
      (3)   Preventing another from taking action for which the actor
reasonably believed the other person to be disqualified.
      (4)   Compelling another to take action which the actor reasonably
believed the other person to be under a duty to take.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of coercion, a misdemeanor of
the second degree.
   (E)   As used in this section:
      COMMUNITY CONTROL SANCTION has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      THREAT includes a direct threat and a threat by innuendo.
(R.C. § 2905.12)
§ 135.10 BIGAMY.
   (A)   No married person shall marry another or continue to cohabit with such
other person in this municipality.
   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
actor’s spouse was continuously absent for five years immediately preceding the
purported subsequent marriage, and was not known by the actor to be alive
within that time.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of bigamy, a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
(R.C. § 2919.01)
§ 135.11 RESERVED.
Editor’s note: In November 2023, voters approved Issue 1, enacting Article 1,
Section 22 to the Ohio Constitution relating to reproductive rights. To ensure
that there are no conflicts with this Constitutional amendment, this section,
relating to unlawful abortion, failure to perform viability testing, and
abortion trafficking, has been removed from this code.
§ 135.12 MISREPRESENTATION RELATING TO PROVISION OF CHILD CARE.
   (A)   No child care provider shall knowingly misrepresent any factor or
condition that relates to the provision of child care and that substantially
affects the health or safety of any child or children in that provider’s
facility or receiving child care from that provider to any of the following:
      (1)   A parent, guardian, custodian, or other person responsible for the
care of a child in the provider’s facility or receiving child care from the
provider;
      (2)   A parent, guardian, custodian, or other person responsible for the
care of a child who is considering the provider as a child care provider for
the child;
      (3)   A public official responsible for issuing the provider a license or
certificate to provide child care;
      (4)   A public official investigating or inquiring about the provision of
child care by the provider;
      (5)   A peace officer.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, “any factor or condition that
relates to the provision of child care” includes, but is not limited to, the
following:
      (1)   The person or persons who will provide child care to the child of
the parent, guardian, custodian, or other person responsible for the care of
the child, or to the children in general;
      (2)   The qualifications to provide child care of the child care
provider, of a person employed by the provider, or of a person who provides
child care as a volunteer;
      (3)   The number of children to whom child care is provided at one time
or the number of children receiving child care in the child care facility at
one time;
      (4)   The conditions or safety features of the child care facility;
      (5)   The area of the child care facility in which child care is
provided.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
misrepresentation by a child care provider, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2919.224)
§ 135.13 NONSUPPORT OF DEPENDENTS.
   (A)   No person shall abandon, or fail to provide adequate support to:
      (1)   The person’s spouse, as required by law;
      (2)   The person’s child who is under age 18, or the persons’s child with
a mental or physical disability who is under age 21;
      (3)   The person’s aged or infirm parent or adoptive parent, who from
lack of ability and means is unable to provide adequately for the parent’s own
support.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall abandon, or fail to provide support as
established by a court order to, another person whom, by court order or decree,
the person:
         (a)   Is legally obligated to support; or
         (b)   Was legally obligated to support, and an amount for support:
            1.   Was due and owing prior to the date the person’s duty to pay
current support terminated; and
            2.   Remains unpaid.
      (2)   The period of limitation under R.C. § 2901.13 applicable to
division (B)(1)(b) of this section shall begin to run on the date the person’s
duty to pay current support terminates.
   (C)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage, or contribute to
a child or a ward of the juvenile court becoming a dependent child, as defined
in R.C. § 2151.04, or a neglected child, as defined in R.C. § 2151.03.
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of failure to provide
adequate support under division (A) of this section or a charge of failure to
provide support established by a court order under division (B) of this section
that the accused was unable to provide adequate support or the established
support, but did provide the support that was within his or her ability and
means.
   (E)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(3) of this
section that the parent abandoned the accused or failed to support the accused
as required by law, while the accused was under age 18, or had a mental or
physical disability and was under age 21.
   (F)   It is not a defense to a charge under division (B) of this section
that the person whom a court has ordered the accused to support is being
adequately supported by someone other than the accused.
   (G)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A) or (B) of this section is guilty of nonsupport of dependents, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (A)(2) or (B) of this section
or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or if the
offender has failed to provide support under division (A)(2) or (B) of this
section for a total accumulated period of 26 weeks out of 104 consecutive
weeks, whether or not the 26 weeks were consecutive, then a violation of
division (A)(2) or (B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a felony violation of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(2) or
(B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the offender is guilty of nonsupport of dependents by reason of
failing to provide support to his or her child as required by a child support
order issued on or after April 15, 1985, pursuant to R.C. § 2151.23, 2151.231,
2151.232, 2151.33, 3105.21, 3109.05, 3111.13, 3113.04, 3113.31, 3115.401, or
former R.C. § 3115.31, the court, in addition to any other sentence imposed,
shall assess all court costs arising out of the charge against the person and
require the person to pay any reasonable attorney’s fees of any adverse party
other than the state, as determined by the court, that arose in relation to the
charge.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of
contributing to the nonsupport of dependents, a misdemeanor of the first
degree. Each day of a violation of division (C) of this section is a separate
offense.
(R.C. § 2919.21)
§ 135.14 ENDANGERING CHILDREN.
   (A)   No person, who is the parent, guardian, custodian, person having
custody or control, or person in loco parentis of a child under 18 years of age
or a child with a mental or physical disability under 21 years of age, shall
create a substantial risk to the health or safety of the child by violating a
duty of care, protection, or support. It is not a violation of a duty of care,
protection, or support under this division when the parent, guardian,
custodian, or person having custody or control of a child treats the physical
or mental illness or disability of the child by spiritual means through prayer
alone, in accordance with the tenets of a recognized religious body.
   (B)   No person shall do any of the following to a child under 18 years of
age or a child with a mental or physical disability under 21 years of age:
      (1)   Abuse the child.
      (2)   Torture or cruelly abuse the child.
      (3)   Administer corporal punishment or other physical disciplinary
measure, or physically restrain the child in a cruel manner or for a prolonged
period, which punishment, discipline or restraint is excessive under the
circumstances and creates a substantial risk of serious physical harm to the
child.
      (4)   Repeatedly administer unwarranted disciplinary measures to a child
when there is a substantial risk that such conduct, if continued, will
seriously impair or retard the child’s mental health or development.
      (5)   Entice, coerce, permit, encourage, compel, hire, employ, use, or
allow the child to act, model, or in any other way participate in, or be
photographed for, the production, presentation, dissemination, or advertisement
of any material or performance that the offender knows or reasonably should
know is obscene, is sexually oriented matter, or is nudity-oriented matter;
      (6)   Allow the child to be on the same parcel of real property and
within 100 feet of, or, in the case of more than one housing unit on the same
parcel of real property, in the same housing unit and within 100 feet of, any
act in violation of R.C. § 2925.04 or 2925.041 when the person knows that the
act is occurring, whether or not any person is prosecuted for or convicted of
the violation of R.C. § 2925.04 or 2925.041 that is the basis of the violation
of this division.
   (C)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle, as defined by R.C. § 4511.01,
within the municipality and in violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, when one or more children under
18 years of age are in the vehicle. Notwithstanding any other provision of law,
a person may be convicted at the same trial or proceeding of a violation of
this division and a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that constitutes the basis of the charge of the
violation of this division. For purposes of R.C. §§ 4511.191 through 4511.197
and all related provisions of law, a person arrested for a violation of this
division shall be considered to be under arrest for operating a vehicle while
under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them or
for operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a
controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine.
      (2)   As used in division (C)(1) of this section:
         CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
         VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   (D)   (1)   Division (B)(5) of this section does not apply to any material
or performance that is produced, presented, or disseminated for a bona fide
medical, scientific, educational, religious, governmental, judicial, or other
proper purpose, by or to a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist,
teacher, person pursuing bona fide studies for research, librarian, member of
the clergy, prosecutor, judge, or other person having a proper interest in the
material or performance.
      (2)   Mistake of age is not a defense to a charge under division (B)(5)
of this section.
      (3)   In a prosecution under division (B)(5) of this section, the trier
of fact may infer that an actor, model, or participant in the material or
performance involved is a juvenile if the material or performance, through its
title, text, visual representation, or otherwise, represents or depicts the
actor, model, or participant as a juvenile.
      (4)   As used in this division and division (B)(5) of this section:
         MATERIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
         NUDITY-ORIENTED MATTER means any material or performance that shows a
minor in a state of nudity and that, taken as a whole by the average person
applying contemporary community standards, appeals to the prurient interest.
         OBSCENE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
         PERFORMANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
         SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
         SEXUALLY ORIENTED MATTER. Means any material or performance that shows
a minor participating or engaging in sexual activity, masturbation, or
bestiality.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of endangering children.
      (1)   If the offender violates division (A) or (B)(1) of this section,
endangering children is one of the following:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (E)(1)(b), (E)(1)(c) or
(E)(1)(d), a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of an offense
under this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, or of any offense involving neglect, abandonment, or contributing to
the delinquency of or physical abuse of a child, except as otherwise provided
in division (E)(1)(c) or (E)(1)(d) of this section, endangering children is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (c)   If the violation is a violation of division (A) of this section
and results in serious physical harm to the child involved, endangering
children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (d)   If the violation is a violation of division (B)(1) of this
section and results in serious physical harm to the child involved, endangering
children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the offender violates division (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(5) or
(B)(6) of this section, endangering children is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the offender violates division (C) of this section, the offender
shall be punished as follows:
         (a)   Except as provided in (E)(3)(b) or (E)(3)(c), endangering
children in violation of division (C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
         (b)   If the violation results in serious physical harm to the child
or if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this section
or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any
offense involving neglect, abandonment, or contributing to the delinquency of
or physical abuse of a child, except as otherwise provided in division (E)(3)
(c) of this section, endangering children in violation of division (C) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (c)   If the violation results in serious physical harm to the child
and if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this
section, R.C. § 2903.06, 2903.08, 2919.22(C) or former R.C. § 2903.07 as it
existed prior to March 23, 2000, or R.C. § 2903.04, in a case in which the
offender was subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that
section, endangering children in violation of division (C) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (d)   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine, or other
sentence, penalty or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to
divisions (E)(3)(a), (E)(3)(b) or (E)(3)(c) of this section or pursuant to any
other provision of law, and in addition to any suspension of the offender’s
driver’s license or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege under R.C. Chapter 4506, 4509, 4510, or 4511, or any other
provision of law, the court also may impose upon the offender a class seven
suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit
or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02
(A)(7).
         (e)   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine, or other
sentence, penalty or sanction imposed upon the offender pursuant to division
(E)(3)(a), (E)(3)(b), (E)(3)(c) or (E)(3)(d) of this section or pursuant to any
other provision of law for the violation of division (C) of this section, if as
a part of the same trial or proceeding the offender also is convicted of or
pleads guilty to a separate charge charging the violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A),
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the
charge of the violation of division (C) of this section, the offender also
shall be sentenced in accordance with R.C. § 4511.19, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, for that violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (F)   (1)   If a person violates division (C) of this section and if, at the
time of the violation, there were two or more children under 18 years of age in
the motor vehicle involved in the violation, the offender may be convicted of a
violation of division (C) of this section for each of the children, but the
court may sentence the offender for only one of the violations.
      (2)   (a)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation
of division (C) of this section but the person is not also convicted of and
does not also plead guilty to a separate charge of violating R.C. § 4511.19(A),
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the
charge of the violation of division (C) of this section, both the following
apply:
            1.   For purposes of the provisions of R.C. § 4511.19, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that set forth the penalties and
sanctions for a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the violation of
division (C) of this section shall not constitute a violation of R.C. § 4511.19
(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
            2.   For purposes of the provisions of law that refers to a
conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and that is not described in
division (F)(2)(a)1. of this section, the conviction of or plea of guilty to
the violation of division (C) of this section shall constitute a conviction or
plea of guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
         (b)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (C) of this section and the person also is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a separate charge of violating R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the charge of the
violation of division (C) of this section, the conviction of or plea of guilty
to the violation of division (C) of this section shall not constitute, for the
purposes of any provision of law that refers to a conviction of or a plea of
guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, a conviction of or a plea of guilty to a violation of R.C.
§ 4511.19(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 2919.22(A) - (E), (H))
Statutory reference:
   Community service, requirements, see R.C. § 2919.22(F)
   License suspension, requirements, see R.C. § 2919.22(G)
   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.15
§ 135.15 INTERFERENCE WITH CUSTODY; INTERFERENCE WITH SUPPORT ORDERS.
   (A)   Interference with custody.
      (1)   No person, knowing that he or she is without privilege to do so or
being reckless in that regard, shall entice, take, keep, or harbor a person
identified in division (A)(1)(a), (A)(1)(b) or (A)(1)(c) of this section from
the parent, guardian, or custodian of the person identified in division (A)(1)
(a), (A)(1)(b) or (A)(1)(c) of this section:
         (a)   A child under the age of 18, or a child with a mental or
physical disability under the age of 21;
         (b)   A person committed by law to an institution for delinquent,
unruly, neglected, abused, or dependent children;
         (c)   A person committed by law to an institution for persons with
mental illnesses or an institution for persons with intellectual disabilities.
      (2)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause, or encourage a child or a
ward of the juvenile court who has been committed to the custody of any person,
department, or public or private institution to leave the custody of that
person, department, or institution without legal consent.
      (3)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of enticing or taking
under division (A)(1)(a) of this section that the actor reasonably believed
that his or her conduct was necessary to preserve the child’s health or safety.
It is an affirmative defense to a charge of keeping or harboring under division
(A)(1) of this section that the actor in good faith gave notice to law
enforcement or judicial authorities within a reasonable time after the child or
committed person came under his or her shelter, protection, or influence.
      (4)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with
custody.
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this subdivision, a violation of
division (A)(1)(a) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the child who
is the subject of a violation of division (A)(1)(a) is removed from the state
or if the offender previously has been convicted of an offense under this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (A)(1)(a) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law. If the child who is the subject of a violation of
division (A)(1)(a) suffers physical harm as a result of the violation, a
violation of division (A)(1)(a) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
         (b)   A violation of division (A)(1)(b) or (A)(1)(c) of this section
is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
         (c)   A violation of division (A)(2) of this section is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. Each day of a violation of division (A)(2) is a separate
offense.
(R.C. § 2919.23)
   (B)   Interference with support orders.
      (1)   No person, by using physical harassment or threats of violence
against another person, shall interfere with the other person’s initiation or
continuance of, or attempt to prevent the other person from initiating or
continuing, an action to issue or modify a support order under R.C. Chapter
3115, or under R.C. § 2151.23, 2151.231, 2151.232, 2151.33, 2151.36, 2151.361,
2151.49, 3105.18, 3105.21, 3109.05, 3109.19, 3111.13, 3113.04, 3113.07, or
3113.31.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of interfering with an
action to issue or modify a support order, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of this division (B) or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, or R.C. § 3111.19, interfering with an action to issue or
modify a support order is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
(R.C. § 2919.231)
§ 135.16 DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm to a
family or household member.
   (B)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to a family or
household member.
   (C)   No person, by threat of force, shall knowingly cause a family or
household member to believe that the offender will cause imminent physical harm
to the family or household member.
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of domestic violence,
and the court shall sentence the offender as provided in divisions (D)(2) to
(D)(5) of this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3), (D)(4) or (D)(5)
of this section, a violation of division (C) of this section is a misdemeanor
of the fourth degree and a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section is
a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(4) of this section, if
the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of domestic
violence, a violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or the United States that is substantially equivalent
to domestic violence, a violation of R.C. § 2903.14, 2909.06, 2909.07, 2911.12,
2911.211, or 2919.22 if the victim of the violation was a family or household
member at the time of the violation, a violation of an existing or former
municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States that
is substantially equivalent to any of those sections if the victim of the
violation was a family or household member at the time of the commission of the
violation, or any offense of violence if the victim of the offense was a family
or household member at the time of the commission of the offense, a violation
of division (A) or (B) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law, and a violation of division (C) is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (4)   If the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted
of two or more offenses of domestic violence or two or more violations or
offenses of the type described in division (D)(3) of this section involving a
person who was a family or household member at the time of the violations or
offenses, a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a violation of division (C) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) or (D)(4) of this
section, if the offender knew that the victim of the violation was pregnant at
the time of the violation, a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a violation of
division (C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no court or unit
of state or local government shall charge any fee, cost, deposit, or money in
connection with the filing of charges against a person alleging that the person
violated this section or a municipal ordinance substantially equivalent to this
section or in connection with the prosecution of any charges so filed.
   (F)   As used in this section:
      FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
offender:
            1.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse as defined below, or a
former spouse of the offender;
            2.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the offender, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the offender;
            3.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse, or
former spouse of the offender, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
offender.
         (b)   The natural parent of any child of whom the offender is the
other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.
      PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. Means a person who is living or has lived with
the offender in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise is cohabiting
with the offender, or who otherwise has cohabited with the offender within five
years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in question.
(R.C. § 2919.25)
Statutory reference:
   Temporary protection orders, see R.C. § 2919.26
   Violation of protection order or consent agreement, factors to consider,
bail, see R.C. § 2919.251
§ 135.17 HAZING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      HAZING. Means doing any act or coercing another, including the victim, to
do any act of initiation into any student or other organization or any act to
continue or reinstate membership in or affiliation with any student or other
organization that causes or creates a substantial risk of causing mental or
physical harm to any person, including coercing another to consume alcohol or a
drug of abuse, as defined in R.C. § 3719.011.
      ORGANIZATION. Includes a national or international organization with
which a fraternity or sorority is affiliated.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall recklessly participate in the hazing of another.
      (2)   No administrator, employee, faculty member, teacher, consultant,
alumnus, or volunteer of any organization, including any primary, secondary, or
post-secondary school or any other educational institution, public or private,
shall recklessly permit the hazing of any person associated with the
organization.
   (C)   (1)   No person shall recklessly participate in the hazing of another
when the hazing includes coerced consumption of alcohol or drugs of abuse
resulting in serious physical harm to the other person.
      (2)   No administrator, employee, faculty member, teacher, consultant,
alumnus, or volunteer of any organization, including any primary, secondary, or
post-secondary school or any other educational institution, public or private,
shall recklessly permit the hazing of any person associated with the
organization when the hazing includes coerced consumption of alcohol or drugs
of abuse resulting in serious physical harm to that person.
   (D)   Whoever violates divisions (B) or (C) of this section is guilty of
hazing. A violation of division (B)(1) or (B)(2) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the second degree. A violation of division (C)(1) or (C)(2) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.31)
   (E)   Reckless failure to immediately report knowledge of hazing.
      (1)   No administrator, employee, faculty member, teacher, consultant,
alumnus, or volunteer of any organization, including any primary, secondary, or
post-secondary school or any other public or private educational institution,
who is acting in an official and professional capacity shall recklessly fail to
immediately report the knowledge of hazing to a law enforcement agency in the
county in which the victim of hazing resides or in which the hazing is
occurring or has occurred.
      (2)   A violation of division (E)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree, except that the violation is a misdemeanor of the first
degree if the hazing causes serious physical harm.
(R.C. § 2903.311(B), (C))
Statutory reference:
   Civil liability for hazing, see R.C. § 2307.44
§ 135.18 CONTRIBUTING TO UNRULINESS OR DELINQUENCY OF A CHILD.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      DELINQUENT CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2152.02.
      UNRULY CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.022.
   (B)   No person, including a parent, guardian, or other custodian of a
child, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage, or contribute to a child or a
ward of the juvenile court becoming an unruly child or a delinquent child;
      (2)   Act in a way tending to cause a child or a ward of the juvenile
court to become an unruly child or a delinquent child;
      (3)   Act in a way that contributes to an adjudication of the child as a
delinquent child based on the child’s violation of a court order adjudicating
the child an unruly child for being an habitual truant;
      (4)   If the person is the parent, guardian, or custodian of a child who
has the duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950 to register, register a new
residence address, and periodically verify a residence address, and, if
applicable, to send a notice of intent to reside, and if the child is not
emancipated, as defined in R.C. § 2919.121, fail to ensure that the child
complies with those duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of contributing to the
unruliness or delinquency of a child, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each
day of violation of this section is a separate offense.
(R.C. § 2919.24)
Statutory reference:
   Failure to send child to school, see R.C. § 3321.38
§ 135.19 FAILURE TO PROVIDE FOR A PERSON WITH A FUNCTIONAL IMPAIRMENT.
   (A)   No caretaker shall knowingly fail to provide a person with a
functional impairment under the caretaker’s care with any treatment, care,
goods, or service that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of the
person with a functional impairment when this failure results in physical harm
or serious physical harm to the person with a functional impairment.
   (B)   No caretaker shall recklessly fail to provide a person with a
functional impairment under the caretaker’s care with any treatment, care,
goods, or service that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of the
person with a functional impairment when this failure results in serious
physical harm to the person with a functional impairment.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
knowingly failing to provide for a person with a functional impairment, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the person with a functional impairment
under the offender’s care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the
violation of this section, a violation of division (A) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
recklessly failing to provide for a person with a functional impairment, a
misdemeanor of the second degree. If the person with a functional impairment
under the offender’s care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the
violation of this section, a violation of division (B) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.16)
   (D)   As used in this section:
      CARETAKER. A person who assumes the duty to provide for the care and
protection of a person with a functional impairment on a voluntary basis, by
contract, through receipt of payment for care and protection, as a result of a
family relationship, or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. The term
does not include a person who owns, operates, or administers, or who is an
agent or employee of, a care facility, as defined in R.C. § 2903.33.
      PERSON WITH A FUNCTIONAL IMPAIRMENT. Any person who has a physical or
mental impairment that prevents the person from providing for the person’s own
care or protection or whose infirmities caused by aging prevent the person from
providing for the person’s own care or protection.
(R.C. § 2903.10)
§ 135.20 PATIENT ABUSE OR NEGLECT; PATIENT ENDANGERMENT; EXCEPTIONS; FALSE
STATEMENTS; RETALIATION.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      ABUSE. Means knowingly causing physical harm or recklessly causing
serious physical harm to a person by physical contact with the person or by the
inappropriate use of a physical or chemical restraint, medication or isolation
on the person.
      CARE FACILITY. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Any “home” as defined in R.C. § 3721.10.
         (b)   Any “residential facility” as defined in R.C. § 5119.34 or
5123.19.
         (c)   Any institution or facility operated or provided by the
Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services or by the Department of
Developmental Disabilities pursuant to R.C. §§ 5119.14 and 5123.03.
         (d)   Any unit of any hospital, as defined in R.C. § 3701.01, that
provided the same services as a nursing home, as defined in R.C. § 3721.01.
         (e)   Any institution, residence or facility that provides, for a
period of more than 24 hours, whether for consideration or not, accommodations
to one individual or two unrelated individuals who are dependent upon the
services of others.
      GROSS NEGLECT. Means knowingly failing to provide a person with any
treatment, care, goods or service that is necessary to maintain the health or
safety of the person when the failure results in serious physical harm to the
person.
      INAPPROPRIATE USE OF A PHYSICAL OR CHEMICAL RESTRAINT, MEDICATION OR
ISOLATION. Means the use of physical or chemical restraint, medication or
isolation as punishment, for staff convenience, excessively, as a substitute
for treatment, or in quantities that preclude habilitation and treatment.
      NEGLECT. Means recklessly failing to provide a person with any treatment,
care, goods or service that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of
the person when the failure results in serious physical harm to the person.
(R.C. § 2903.33)
   (B)   Patient abuse or neglect; spiritual treatment; defense.
      (1)   No person who owns, operates, or administers, or who is an agent or
employee of a care facility shall do any of the following:
         (a)   Commit abuse against a resident or patient of the facility.
         (b)   Commit gross neglect against a resident or patient of the
facility.
         (c)   Commit neglect against a resident or patient of the facility.
      (2)   (a)   A person who relies upon treatment by spiritual means through
prayer alone, in accordance with the tenets of a recognized religious
denomination, shall not be considered neglectful under division (B)(1)(c) of
this section for that reason alone.
         (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of gross neglect or
neglect under this section that the actor’s conduct was committed in good faith
solely because the actor was ordered to commit the conduct by a person with
supervisory authority over the actor.
      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (B)(1)(a) is guilty of patient
abuse, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (b)   Whoever violates division (B)(1)(b) is guilty of gross patient
neglect, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of, or pleaded guilty to, any violation of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, gross patient
neglect is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (c)   Whoever violates division (B)(1)(c) is guilty of patient
neglect, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of, or pleaded guilty to, any violation of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, gross patient
neglect is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.34)
   (C)   Patient endangerment; spiritual treatment; defense.
      (1)   As used in this section:
         DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES CARETAKER. Means any developmental
disabilities employee or any person who assumes the duty to provide for the
care and protection of a person with a developmental disability on a voluntary
basis, by contract, through receipt of payment for care and protection, as a
result of a family relationship, or by order of a court of competent
jurisdiction. The phrase includes a person who is an employee of a care
facility and a person who is an employee of an entity under contract with a
provider. The phrase does not include a person who owns, operates, or
administers a care facility or who is an agent of a care facility unless that
person also personally provides care to a person with a developmental
disability.
         DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES EMPLOYEE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5123.50.
         DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5123.01.
      (2)   No developmental disabilities caretaker shall create a substantial
risk to the health or safety of a person with a developmental disability. A
developmental disabilities caretaker does not create a substantial risk to the
health or safety of a person with a developmental disability under this
division when the developmental disabilities caretaker treats a physical or
mental illness or disability of the person with a developmental disability by
spiritual means through prayer alone, in accordance with the tenets of a
recognized religious body.
      (3)   No person who owns, operates, or administers a care facility or who
is an agent of a care facility shall condone, or knowingly permit, any conduct
by a developmental disabilities caretaker who is employed by or under the
control of the owner, operator, administrator, or agent that is in violation of
division (C)(2) of this section and that involves a person with a developmental
disability who is under the care of the owner, operator, administrator, or
agent. A person who relies upon treatment by spiritual means through prayer
alone, in accordance with the tenets of a recognized religious denomination,
shall not be considered endangered under this division for that reason alone.
      (4)   (a)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of a violation of
division (C)(2) or (C)(3) of this section that the actor’s conduct was
committed in good faith solely because the actor was ordered to commit the
conduct by a person to whom one of the following applies:
            1.   The person has supervisory authority over the actor.
            2.   The person has authority over the actor’s conduct pursuant to
a contract for the provision of services.
         (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of a violation of
division (C)(3) of this section that the person who owns, operates, or
administers a care facility or who is an agent of a care facility and who is
charged with the violation is following the individual service plan for the
involved person with a developmental disability or that the admission,
discharge, and transfer rule set forth in the Ohio Administrative Code is being
followed.
         (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of a violation of
division (C)(3) of this section that the actor did not have readily available a
means to prevent either the harm to the person with a developmental disability
or the death of such a person and the actor took reasonable steps to summon
aid.
      (5)   (a)   Except as provided in division (C)(5)(b) or (C)(5)(c) of this
section, whoever violates division (C)(2) or (C)(3) of this section is guilty
of patient endangerment, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of, or pleaded
guilty to, a violation of this section, patient endangerment is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (c)   If the violation results in serious physical harm to the person
with a developmental disability, patient endangerment is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.341)
   (D)   False statements.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement, or knowingly
swear or affirm the truth of a false statement previously made, alleging a
violation of division (B) of this section when the statement is made with
purpose to incriminate another.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (D) is guilty of filing a false
patient abuse or neglect complaint, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2903.35)
   (E)   Retaliation against person reporting patient abuse or neglect. No care
facility shall discharge or in any manner discriminate or retaliate against any
person solely because such person, in good faith, filed a complaint, affidavit,
or other document alleging a violation of division (B) of this section or a
violation of R.C. § 2903.34.
(R.C. § 2903.36)
Statutory reference:
   License revocation for felony violations, see R.C. § 2903.37
§ 135.21 INTERFERENCE WITH RIGHT OF PERSON TO ENGAGE IN HOUSING TRANSACTIONS
BECAUSE OF RACE, RELIGION, OR THE LIKE.
   (A)   No person, whether or not acting under color of law, shall by force or
threat of force willfully injure, intimidate, or interfere with, or attempt to
injure, intimidate, or interfere with any of the following:
      (1)   Any person because of race, color, religion, sex, familial status,
as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, national origin, military status as defined in
that section, disability as defined in that section, or ancestry and because
that person is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying,
contracting, or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing, or
occupation of any housing accommodations, or applying for or participating in
any service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or
renting housing accommodations.
      (2)   Any person because that person is or has been doing, or in order to
intimidate that person or any other person or any class of persons from doing
either of the following:
         (a)   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, familial status, as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, national origin,
military status as defined in that section, disability as defined in that
section, or ancestry, in any of the activities, services, organizations, or
facilities described in division (A)(1) of this section;
         (b)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate.
      (3)   Any person because that person is or has been, or in order to
discourage that person or any other person from, lawfully aiding or encouraging
other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, familial status as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, national origin,
military status as defined in that section, disability as defined in that
section, or ancestry, in any of the activities, services, organizations, or
facilities described in division (A)(1) of this section, or participating
lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity
to so participate.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2927.03)
§ 135.22 ETHNIC INTIMIDATION.
   (A)   No person shall violate R.C. § 2903.21, 2903.22, 2909.06, or 2909.07,
or R.C. § 2917.21(A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5), by reason of the race, color,
religion, or national origin of another person or group of persons.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of ethnic intimidation. Ethnic
intimidation is an offense of the next higher degree than the offense the
commission of which is a necessary element of ethnic intimidation. In the case
of an offense that is a misdemeanor of the first degree, ethnic intimidation is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2927.12)
§ 135.23 VIOLATING A PROTECTION ORDER, CONSENT AGREEMENT, ANTI-STALKING
PROTECTION ORDER OR ORDER ISSUED BY A COURT OF ANOTHER STATE.
   (A)   No person shall recklessly violate the terms of any of the following:
      (1)   A protection order issued or consent agreement approved pursuant to
R.C. § 2919.26 or R.C. § 3113.31;
      (2)   A protection order issued pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34, 2903.213 or
2903.214;
      (3)   A protection order issued by a court of another state.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of violating a
protection order.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(3) or (B)(4) of this
section, violating a protection order is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   Violating a protection order is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the offender previously has been convicted of, pleaded
guilty to, or been adjudicated a delinquent child for any of the following:
         (a)   A violation of a protection order issued or consent agreement
approved pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34, 2903.213, 2903.214, 2919.26, or 3113.31,
or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance;
         (b)   Two or more violations of R.C. § 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22, or
2911.211, or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or
any combination of those offenses, that involved the same person who is the
subject of the protection order or consent agreement;
         (c)   One or more violations of this section, or any substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance.
      (4)   If the offender violates a protection order or consent agreement
while committing a felony offense, violating a protection order is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   If the protection order violated by the offender was an order
issued pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34 or 2903.214 that required electronic
monitoring of the offender pursuant to that section, the court may require in
addition to any other sentence imposed upon the offender that the offender be
electronically monitored for a period not exceeding five years by a law
enforcement agency designated by the court. If the court requires under this
division that the offender be electronically monitored, unless the court
determines that the offender is indigent, the court shall order that the
offender pay the costs of the installation of the electronic monitoring device
and the cost of monitoring the electronic monitoring device.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(3) of this
section that the protection order issued by a court of another state does not
comply with the requirements specified in 18 U.S.C. § 2265(b) for a protection
order that must be accorded full faith and credit by a court of this state or
that it is not entitled to full faith and credit under 18 U.S.C. § 2265(c).
   (D)   In a prosecution for a violation of this section, it is not necessary
for the prosecution to prove that the protection order or consent agreement was
served on the defendant if the prosecution proves that the defendant was shown
the protection order or consent agreement or a copy of either or a judge,
magistrate, or law enforcement officer informed the defendant that a protection
order or consent agreement had been issued, and proves that the defendant
recklessly violated the terms of the order or agreement.
   (E)   As used in this section, PROTECTION ORDER ISSUED BY A COURT OF ANOTHER
STATE means an injunction or another order issued by a criminal court of
another state for the purpose of preventing violent or threatening acts or
harassment against, contact or communication with, or physical proximity to
another person including a temporary order, and means an injunction or order of
that nature issued by a civil court of another state, including a temporary
order and a final order issued in an independent action or as a pendente lite
order in a proceeding for other relief, if the court issued it in response to a
complaint, petition or motion filed by or on behalf of a person seeking
protection. The term does not include an order for support or for custody of a
child issued pursuant to the divorce and child custody laws of another state,
except to the extent that the order for support or for custody of a child is
entitled to full faith and credit under the laws of the United States.
(R.C. § 2919.27)
§ 135.24 ADULTERATION OF FOOD.
   (A)   No person shall do either of the following, knowing or having
reasonable cause to believe that any person may suffer physical harm or be
seriously inconvenienced or annoyed thereby:
      (1)   Place a pin, razor blade, glass, laxative, drug of abuse, or other
harmful or hazardous object or substance in any food or confection.
      (2)   Furnish to any person any food or confection which has been
adulterated in violation of division (A)(1) of this section.
(R.C. § 3716.11)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 3716.99(C))
Statutory reference:
   Adulteration of food generally, see R.C. § 3715.59
§ 135.25 ILLEGAL DISTRIBUTION OF CIGARETTES, OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS, OR
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS; TRANSACTION SCANS.
   (A)   Illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products.
      (1)   As used in this section:
         AGE VERIFICATION. A service provided by an independent third party
(other than a manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of
cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers
used to roll cigarettes) that compares information available from a
commercially available database, or aggregate of databases, that regularly are
used by government and businesses for the purpose of age and identity
verification to personal information provided during an internet sale or other
remote method of sale to establish that the purchaser is 21 years of age or
older.
         ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT.
            1.   Subject to division 2. of this definition, an electronic
smoking device, vapor product, or any other product or device that consists of
or contains nicotine that can be ingested into the body by any means,
including, but not limited to, chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, or
inhaling.
            2.   The phrase does not include any of the following:
               a.   Any cigarette or other tobacco product;
               b.   Any product that is a “drug” as that term is defined in 21
U.S.C. § 321(g)(1);
               c.   Any product that is a “device” as that term is defined in
21 U.S.C. § 321(h);
               d.   Any product that is a “combination product” as described in
21 U.S.C. § 353(g).
         CIGARETTE. Includes clove cigarettes and hand-rolled cigarettes.
         DISTRIBUTE. Means to furnish, give, or provide cigarettes, other
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes to the ultimate consumer of the cigarettes, other tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes.
         ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE. Means any device that can be used to
deliver aerosolized or vaporized nicotine or any other substance to the person
inhaling from the device including an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic hookah, vaping pen, or electronic pipe. The phrase includes any
component, part, or accessory of such a device, whether or not sold separately,
and includes any substance intended to be aerosolized or vaporized during the
use of the device. The phrase does not include any product that is a drug,
device, or combination product, as those terms are defined or described in 21
U.S.C. §§ 321 and 353(g).
         PROOF OF AGE. Means a driver’s license, a commercial driver’s license,
a military identification card, a passport, or an identification card issued
under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows that a person is 21 years of age or
older.
         TOBACCO PRODUCT. Means any product that is made or derived from
tobacco or that contains any form of nicotine, if it is intended for human
consumption or is likely to be consumed, whether smoked, heated, chewed,
absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, or ingested by any other means, including, but
not limited to, a cigarette, an electronic smoking device, a cigar, pipe
tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff, or snus. The phrase also means any component
or accessory used in the consumption of a tobacco product, such as filters,
rolling papers, pipes, blunt or hemp wraps, and liquids used in electronic
smoking devices, whether or not they contain nicotine. The phrase does not
include any product that is a drug, device, or combination product, as those
terms are defined or described in 21 U.S.C. §§ 321 and 353(g).
         VAPOR PRODUCT. Means a product, other than a cigarette or other
tobacco product as defined in R.C. Chapter 5743, that contains or is made or
derived from nicotine and that is intended and marketed for human consumption,
including by smoking, inhaling, snorting, or sniffing. The phrase includes any
component, part, or additive that is intended for use in an electronic smoking
device, a mechanical heating element, battery, or electronic circuit and is
used to deliver the product. The phrase does not include any product that is a
drug, device, or combination product, as those terms are defined or described
in 21 U.S.C. §§ 321 and 353(g). The phrase includes any product containing
nicotine, regardless of concentration.
         VENDING MACHINE. Has the same meaning as “coin machine” in R.C. §
2913.01.
      (2)   No manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of
cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers
used to roll cigarettes, no agent, employee, or representative of a
manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of cigarettes,
other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes, and no other person shall do any of the following:
         (a)   Give, sell, or otherwise distribute cigarettes, other tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes:
            1.   To any person under 21 years of age; or
            2.   Without first verifying proof of age.
         (b)   Give away, sell, or distribute cigarettes, other tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes in
any place that does not have posted in a conspicuous place a legibly printed
sign in letters at least one-half inch high stating that giving, selling, or
otherwise distributing cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or papers used to roll cigarettes to a person under 21 years of age
is prohibited by law;
         (c)   Knowingly furnish any false information regarding the name, age,
or other identification of any person under 21 years of age with purpose to
obtain cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or
papers used to roll cigarettes for that person;
         (d)   Manufacture, sell, or distribute in this state any pack or other
container of cigarettes containing fewer than 20 cigarettes or any package of
roll-your-own tobacco containing less than six-tenths of one ounce of tobacco;
         (e)   Sell cigarettes or alternative nicotine products in a smaller
quantity than that placed in the pack or other container by the manufacturer;
         (f)   Give, sell, or otherwise distribute alternative nicotine
products, papers used to roll cigarettes, or tobacco products other than
cigarettes over the internet or through another remote method without age
verification;
         (g)   Allow an employee under 18 years of age to sell any tobacco
product;
         (h)   Give away or otherwise distribute free samples of cigarettes,
other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or coupons redeemable
for cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alterative tobacco products.
      (3)   No person shall sell or offer to sell cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products by or from a vending machine, except
in the following locations:
         (a)   An area within a factory, business, office, or other place not
open to the general public;
         (b)   An area to which persons under 21 years of age are not generally
permitted access;
         (c)   Any other place not identified in division (A)(3)(a) or (A)(3)
(b) of this section, upon all of the following conditions:
            1.   The vending machine is located within the immediate vicinity,
plain view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place, or an
employee of that person, so that all cigarettes, other tobacco product, and
alternative nicotine product purchases from the vending machine will be readily
observed by the person who owns or operates the place or an employee of that
person. For the purpose of this section, a vending machine located in any
unmonitored area, including an unmonitored coatroom, restroom, hallway, or
outer waiting area, shall not be considered located within the immediate
vicinity, plain view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place,
or an employee of that person.
            2.   The vending machine is inaccessible to the public when the
place is closed.
            3.   A clearly visible notice is posted in the area where the
vending machine is located that states the following in letters that are
legibly printed and at least one-half inch high: “It is illegal for any person
under the age of 21 to purchase tobacco or alternative nicotine products.”
      (4)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under division
(A)(2)(a) of this section:
         (a)   The person under 21 years of age was accompanied by a parent,
spouse who is 21 years of age or older, or legal guardian of the person under
21 years of age.
         (b)   The person who gave, sold, or distributed cigarettes, other
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes to a person under 21 years of age under division (A)(2)(a) of this
section is a parent, spouse who is 21 years of age or older, or legal guardian
of the person under 21 years of age.
      (5)   (a)   It is not a violation of division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) of
this section for a person to give or otherwise distribute to a person under 21
years of age cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products,
or papers used to roll cigarettes while the person under 21 years of age is
participating in a research protocol if all of the following apply:
            1.   The parent, guardian, or legal custodian of the person under
21 years of age has consented in writing to the person under 21 years of age
participating in the research protocol.
            2.   An institutional human subjects protection review board, or an
equivalent entity, has approved the research protocol.
            3.   The person under 21 years of age is participating in the
research protocol at the facility or location specified in the research
protocol.
         (b)   It is not a violation of division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) of this
section for an employer to permit an employee 18, 19, or 20 years of age to
sell a tobacco product.
      (6)   (a)   No delivery service shall accept from, transport or deliver
to, or allow pick-up by, a person under 21 years of age with respect to any of
the following:
            1.   Alternative nicotine products;
            2.   Papers used to roll cigarettes;
            3.   Tobacco products other than cigarettes.
         (b)   A delivery service shall require proof of age as a condition of
accepting, transporting, delivering, or allowing pickup of the items described
in divisions (A)(6)(a)1. to 3. of this section.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (A)(2)(a), (A)(2)(b), (A)(2)(d), (A)(2)
(e), (A)(2)(f), (A)(2)(g), (A)(2)(h), (A)(3) or (A)(6) of this section is
guilty of illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative
nicotine products is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to illegal distribution of
cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (8)   Whoever violates division (A)(2)(c) of this section is guilty of
permitting a person under 21 years of age to use cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, permitting a person under 21 years of age to use cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of division (A)(2)(c) of this section or a substantially equivalent state law
or municipal ordinance, permitting a person under 21 years of age to use
cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (9)   Any cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or papers used to roll cigarettes that are given, sold, or otherwise
distributed to a person under 21 years of age in violation of this section and
that are used, possessed, purchased, or received by a person under 21 years of
age in violation of R.C. § 2151.87 are subject to seizure and forfeiture as
contraband under R.C. Chapter 2981.
(R.C. § 2927.02)
   (B)   Transaction scan.
      (1)   As used in this division and division (C) of this section:
         CARD HOLDER. Means any person who presents a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card to a seller, or an agent or employee
of a seller, to purchase or receive cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products from a seller, agent, or employee.
         IDENTIFICATION CARD. Means an identification card issued under R.C. §§
4507.50 through 4507.52.
         SELLER. Means a seller of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products and includes any person whose gift of or other
distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products is subject to the prohibitions of division (A) of this section.
         TRANSACTION SCAN. Means the process by which a seller or an agent or
employee of a seller checks, by means of a transaction scan device, the
validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card
that is presented as a condition for purchasing or receiving cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products.
         TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE. Means any commercial device or combination of
devices used at a point of sale that is capable of deciphering in an
electronically readable format the information encoded on the magnetic strip or
bar code of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification
card.
      (2)   (a)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may perform a
transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check the validity of
a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a
card holder as a condition for selling, giving away, or otherwise distributing
to the card holder cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products.
         (b)   If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed
under division (B)(2)(a) of this section fails to match the information printed
on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by the card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the information
so printed is false or fraudulent, neither the seller nor any agent or employee
of the seller shall sell, give away, or otherwise distribute any cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products to the card holder.
         (c)   Division (B)(2)(a) of this section does not preclude a seller or
an agent or employee of a seller from using a transaction scan device to check
the validity of a document other than a driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or identification card, if the document includes a bar code or magnetic strip
that may be scanned by the device, as a condition for selling, giving away, or
otherwise distributing cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative
nicotine products to the person presenting the document.
      (3)   Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. §
4301.61(C) apply to the use of transaction scan devices for purposes of this
division (B) and division (C) of this section.
      (4)   (a)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information derived from
a transaction scan, except for the following:
            1.   The name and date of birth of the person listed on the
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the
card holder;
            2.   The expiration date and identification number of the driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the card
holder.
         (b)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use the
information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is permitted to be
recorded and maintained under division (B)(4)(a) of this section, except for
purposes of division (C) of this section.
         (c)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use a
transaction scan device for a purpose other than the purpose specified in
division (C)(2)(a) of this section.
         (d)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall sell or
otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan to any
third party, including but not limited to selling or otherwise disseminating
that information for any marketing, advertising, or promotional activities, but
a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant
to a court order or as specifically authorized by division (C) of this section
or another section of this code or the Ohio Revised Code.
      (5)   Nothing in this division (B) or division (C) of this section
relieves a seller or an agent or employee of a seller of any responsibility to
comply with any other applicable local, state or federal laws or rules
governing the sale, giving away, or other distribution of cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (B)(2)(b) or (B)(4) of this section is
guilty of engaging in an illegal tobacco product or alternative nicotine
product transaction scan, and the court may impose upon the offender a civil
penalty of up to $1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of the Court shall pay
each collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for deposit into the
County Treasury.
(R.C. § 2927.021)
   (C)   Affirmative defenses.
      (1)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be found
guilty of a charge of a violation of division (A) of this section in which the
age of the purchaser or other recipient of cigarettes, other tobacco products,
or alternative nicotine products is an element of the alleged violation, if the
seller, agent, or employee raises and proves as an affirmative defense that all
of the following occurred:
         (a)   A card holder attempting to purchase or receive cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products presented a driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or an identification card.
         (b)   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or identification card that the card holder presented indicated that
the license or card was valid.
         (c)   The cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products were sold, given away, or otherwise distributed to the card holder in
reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and the completed
transaction scan.
      (2)   In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee of a seller
has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (C)(1) of this section,
the trier of fact in the action for the alleged violation of division (A) of
this section shall consider any written policy that the seller has adopted and
implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of division (A) of this
section. For purposes of division (C)(1)(c) of this section, the trier of fact
shall consider that reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and
the completed transaction scan may require a seller or an agent or employee of
a seller to exercise reasonable diligence to determine, and that the use of a
transaction scan device does not excuse a seller or an agent or employee of a
seller from exercising reasonable diligence to determine, the following:
         (a)   Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or employee of a
seller sells, gives away, or otherwise distributes cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products is 21 years of age or older;
         (b)   Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a card holder
is that of the card holder.
      (3)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by
division (C)(1) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a
deputy registrar who issued an identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50
through 4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of
that issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with
the Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.
(R.C. § 2927.022)
   (D)   Shipment of tobacco products.
      (1)   As used in this division (D):
         AUTHORIZED RECIPIENT OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS. Means:
            1.   In the case of cigarettes, a person who is:
               a.   Licensed as a cigarette wholesale dealer under R.C. §
5743.15;
               b.   Licensed as a retail dealer as long as the person purchases
cigarettes with the appropriate tax stamp affixed;
               c.   An export warehouse proprietor as defined in Internal
Revenue Code § 5702;
               d.   An operator of a customs bonded warehouse under 19 U.S.C. §
1311 or 19 U.S.C. § 1555;
               e.   An officer, employee, or agent of the federal government or
of this state acting in the person’s official capacity;
               f.   A department, agency, instrumentality, or political
subdivision of the federal government or of this state;
               g.   A person having a consent for consumer shipment issued by
the Ohio Tax Commissioner under R.C. § 5743.71.
            2.   In the case of electronic smoking devices or vapor products, a
person who is:
               a.   Licensed as a distributor of tobacco or vapor products
under R.C. § 5743.61;
               b.   A retail dealer of vapor products, as defined in R.C. §
5741.01(C)(3), that is not licensed as a vapor distributor, as long as the tax
levied by R.C. § 5743.51, 5743.62, or 5743.63, as applicable, has been paid;
               c.   An operator of a customs bonded warehouse under 19 U.S.C. §
1311 or 19 U.S.C. § 1555;
               d.   An officer, employee, or agent of the federal government or
of this state acting in the person’s official capacity;
               e.   A department, agency, instrumentality, or political
subdivision of the federal government or of this state.
         MOTOR CARRIER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4923.01.
      (2)   The purpose of this section is to prevent the sale of cigarettes,
electronic smoking devices, and vapor products to minors and to ensure
compliance with the Master Settlement Agreement, as defined in R.C. § 1346.01.
      (3)   (a)   No person shall cause to be shipped any cigarettes,
electronic smoking devices, and vapor products to any person in this
municipality other than an authorized recipient of tobacco products.
         (b)   No motor carrier, or other person shall knowingly transport
cigarettes, electronic smoking devices, and vapor products to any person in
this municipality that the carrier or other person reasonably believes is not
an authorized recipient of tobacco products. If cigarettes, electronic smoking
devices, and vapor products are transported to a home or residence, it shall be
presumed that the motor carrier, or other person knew that the person to whom
the cigarettes, electronic smoking devices, and vapor products were delivered
was not an authorized recipient of tobacco products.
      (4)   No person engaged in the business of selling cigarettes, electronic
smoking devices, and vapor products who ships or causes to be shipped
cigarettes, electronic smoking devices, and vapor products to any person in
this municipality in any container or wrapping other than the original
container or wrapping shall fail to plainly and visibly mark the exterior of
the container or wrapping in which the cigarettes, electronic smoking devices,
and vapor products are shipped with the words “cigarettes”, “electronic smoking
devices”, or “vapor products”, as applicable.
      (5)   A court shall impose a fine of up to $1,000 for each violation of
division (D)(3)(a), (D)(3)(b) or (D)(4) of this section.
(R.C. § 2927.023)
   (E)   Furnishing false information to obtain tobacco products.
      (1)   No person who is 18 years of age or older but younger than 21 years
of age shall knowingly furnish false information concerning that person’s name,
age, or other identification for the purpose of obtaining tobacco products.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (E)(1) of this section is guilty of
furnishing false information to obtain tobacco products. Except as otherwise
provided in this division, furnishing false information to obtain tobacco
products is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (E)(1) of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
furnishing false information to obtain tobacco products is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
(R.C. § 2927.024)
§ 135.26 NONSMOKING AREAS IN PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY.
   (A)   As used in this section, PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY means:
      (1)   Enclosed theaters, except the lobby; opera houses; auditoriums;
classrooms; elevators; rooms in which persons are confined as a matter of
health care, including but not limited to a hospital room and a room in a
residential care facility serving as the residence of a person living in such
residential care facility.
      (2)   All buildings and other enclosed structures owned by the state, its
agencies, or political subdivisions, including but not limited to hospitals and
state institutions for persons with mental illnesses and persons with
intellectual disabilities; university and college buildings, except rooms
within those buildings used primarily as the residences of students or other
persons affiliated with the university or college; office buildings; libraries;
museums; and vehicles used in public transportation. That portion of a building
or other enclosed structure that is owned by the state, a state agency, or a
political subdivision, and that is used primarily as a food service
establishment, is not a place of public assembly.
      (3)   Each portion of a building or enclosed structure that is not
included in division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section is a place of public
assembly if it has a seating capacity of 50 or more persons and is available to
the public. Restaurants, food service establishments, dining rooms, cafes,
cafeterias, or other rooms used primarily for the service of food, as well as
bowling alleys and places licensed by the Ohio Division of Liquor Control to
sell intoxicating beverages for consumption on the premises, are not places of
public assembly.
   (B)   For the purpose of separating persons who smoke from persons who do
not smoke for the comfort and health of persons not smoking, in every place of
public assembly there shall be an area where smoking is not permitted, which
shall be designated a no smoking area, provided that not more than one-half of
the rooms in any health care facility in which persons are confined as a matter
of health care may be designated as smoking areas in their entirety. The
designation shall be made before the place of public assembly is made available
to the public. In places included in division (A)(1) of this section, the local
fire authority having jurisdiction shall designate the no smoking area. In
places included in division (A)(2) of this section that are owned by the state
or its agencies, the Ohio Director of Administrative Services shall designate
the area, and if the place is owned by a political subdivision, its Legislative
Authority shall designate an officer who shall designate the area. In places
included in division (A)(3) of this section, the person having control of the
operations of the place of public assembly shall designate the no smoking area.
In places included in division (A)(2) of this section which are also included
in division (A)(1) of this section, the officer who has authority to designate
the area in places in division (A)(2) of this section shall designate the no
smoking area. A no smoking area may include the entire place of public
assembly. Designations shall be made by the placement of signs that are clearly
visible and that state “no smoking”. No person shall remove signs from areas
designated as no smoking areas.
   (C)   This section does not affect or modify the prohibition contained in
R.C. § 3313.751(B).
   (D)   No person shall smoke in any area designated as a no smoking area in
accordance with division (B) of this section.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3791.031)
§ 135.27 SPREADING CONTAGION.
   (A)   No person, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the
person has a dangerous, contagious disease, shall knowingly fail to take
reasonable measures to prevent exposing self to other persons, except when
seeking medical aid.
   (B)   No person, having charge or care of a person whom the person having
charge or care knows or has reasonable cause to believe has a dangerous,
contagious disease, shall recklessly fail to take reasonable measures to
protect others from exposure to the contagion, and to inform health authorities
of the existence of the contagion.
   (C)   No person, having charge of a public conveyance or place of public
accommodation, amusement, resort, or trade, and knowing or having reasonable
cause to believe that persons using such conveyance or place have been or are
being exposed to a dangerous, contagious disease, shall negligently fail to
take reasonable measures to protect the public from exposure to the contagion,
and to inform health authorities of the existence of the contagion.
(R.C. § 3701.81)
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
(R.C. § 3701.99(C))
Statutory reference:
   Contagion and quarantine, see R.C. §§ 3707.04 et seq.
   Power to prevent contagious diseases, see R.C. § 715.37
§ 135.28 ABUSE OF A CORPSE.
   (A)   No person, except as authorized by law, shall treat a human corpse in
a way that he or she knows would outrage reasonable family sensibilities.
   (B)   No person, except as authorized by law, shall treat a human corpse in
a way that would outrage reasonable community sensibilities.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of abuse of a
corpse, a misdemeanor of the second degree. Whoever violates division (B) of
this section is guilty of gross abuse of a corpse, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2927.01)
§ 135.29 SMOKING RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall be permitted to smoke cigarettes, cigars, pipes
containing tobacco or similar substances in any public portion of the Village
Hall at any time. Persons are also further expressly prohibited from smoking in
all portions of Village Hall excepting for the Village Mayor’s Office.
   (B)   Any person who violates this section shall be fined no more than $50
for each separate occurrence.
(Prior Code, § 135.50) (Ord. 1999-01, passed 1-12-1999)
CHAPTER 136: OFFENSES AGAINST JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
136.01   Definitions
   
136.02   Falsification
   
136.03   Compounding a crime
   
136.04   Failure to report a crime
   
136.05   Failure to aid a law enforcement officer
   
136.06   Obstructing official business
   
136.07   Obstructing justice
   
136.08   Resisting arrest
   
136.09   Having an unlawful interest in a public contract
   
136.10   Soliciting or receiving improper compensation
   
136.11   Dereliction of duty
   
136.12   Interfering with civil rights
   
136.13   Illegal conveyance of prohibited items onto grounds of a detention
facility or other specified governmental facilities
   
136.14   False report of child abuse or neglect
   
136.15   Assaulting police dog or horse, or assistance dog
   
136.16   Disclosure of confidential peace officer information
   
136.17   Intimidation of crime victim or witness
   
136.18   Using sham legal process
   
136.19   Making false allegation of peace officer misconduct
   
136.20   Misuse of 9-1-1 system
   
136.21   Failure to disclose personal information
Statutory reference:
   Escape from detention, see R.C. § 2921.34
   Harassment by inmates by causing or attempting to cause contact with blood,
semen, urine, feces or other bodily substance; knowledge of AIDS, hepatitis or
tuberculosis infection; felony offenses, see R.C. § 2921.38
§ 136.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3517.01.
   CONTRIBUTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3517.01.
   DETENTION. Arrest; confinement in any vehicle subsequent to an arrest;
confinement in any public or private facility for custody of persons charged
with or convicted of crime in this state or another state or under the laws of
the United States or alleged or found to be a delinquent child or unruly child
in this state or another state or under the laws of the United States;
hospitalization, institutionalization, or confinement in any public or private
facility that is ordered pursuant to or under the authority of R.C. § 2945.37,
2945.371, 2945.38, 2945.39, 2945.40, 2945.401 or 2945.402; confinement in any
vehicle for transportation to or from any facility of any of those natures;
detention for extradition or deportation; except as provided in this division,
supervision by any employee of any facility of any of those natures that is
incidental to hospitalization, institutionalization, or confinement in the
facility but that occurs outside the facility; supervision by an employee of
the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction of a person on any type of
release from a state correctional institution; or confinement in any vehicle,
airplane, or place while being returned from outside of this state into this
state by a private person or entity pursuant to a contract entered into under
R.C. § 311.29(E) or R.C. § 5149.03(B). For a person confined in a county jail
who participates in a county jail industry program pursuant to R.C. § 5147.30,
the term includes time spent at an assigned work site and going to and from the
work site.
   DETENTION FACILITY. Any public or private place used for the confinement of
a person charged with or convicted of any crime in this state or another state
or under the laws of the United States or alleged or found to be a delinquent
child or an unruly child in this state or another state or under the laws of
the United States.
   LEGISLATIVE CAMPAIGN FUND. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3517.01.
   OFFICIAL PROCEEDING. Any proceeding before a legislative, judicial,
administrative, or other governmental agency or official authorized to take
evidence under oath, and includes any proceeding before a referee, hearing
examiner, commissioner, notary, or other person taking testimony or a
deposition in connection with an official proceeding.
   PARTY OFFICIAL. Any person who holds an elective or appointive post in a
political party in the United States or this state, by virtue of which he or
she directs, conducts, or participates in directing or conducting party affairs
at any level of responsibility.
   POLITICAL ACTION COMMITTEE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3517.01.
   POLITICAL CONTRIBUTING ENTITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3517.01.
   POLITICAL PARTY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3517.01.
   PROVIDER AGREEMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
   PUBLIC OFFICIAL. Any elected or appointed officer, employee, or agent of the
state or any political subdivision thereof, whether in a temporary or permanent
capacity, and includes but is not limited to legislators, judges, and law
enforcement officers. The term does not include an employee, officer, or
governor-appointed member of the board of directors of the nonprofit
corporation formed under R.C. § 187.01.
   PUBLIC SERVANT.
      (1)   Any of the following:
         (a)   Any public official.
         (b)   Any person performing ad hoc a governmental function, including
but not limited to a juror, member of a temporary commission, master,
arbitrator, advisor, or consultant.
         (c)   A person who is a candidate for public office, whether or not he
or she is elected or appointed to the office for which he or she is a
candidate. A person is a candidate for purposes of this division if he or she
has been nominated according to law for election or appointment to public
office, or if he or she has filed a petition or petitions as required by law to
have his or her name placed on the ballot in a primary, general, or special
election, or if he or she campaigns as a write-in candidate in any primary,
general, or special election.
      (2)   The term does not include an employee, officer, or governor-
appointed member of the board of directors of the nonprofit corporation formed
under R.C. § 187.01.
   VALUABLE THING or VALUABLE BENEFIT. Includes but is not limited to a
contribution. This inclusion does not indicate or imply that a contribution was
not included in those terms before September 17, 1986.
(R.C. § 2921.01)
§ 136.02 FALSIFICATION.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement, or knowingly swear
or affirm the truth of a false statement previously made, when any of the
following applies:
      (1)   The statement is made in any official proceeding.
      (2)   The statement is made with purpose to incriminate another.
      (3)   The statement is made with purpose to mislead a public official in
performing his or her official function.
      (4)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the payment of
unemployment compensation; Ohio Works First; prevention, retention and
contingency benefits and services; disability financial assistance; retirement
benefits or health care coverage from a state retirement system; economic
development assistance as defined in R.C. § 9.66; or other benefits
administered by a governmental agency or paid out of a public treasury.
      (5)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the issuance by a
governmental agency of a license, permit, authorization, certificate,
registration, release, or provider agreement.
      (6)   The statement is sworn or affirmed before a notary public or
another person empowered to administer oaths.
      (7)   The statement is in writing on or in connection with a report or
return that is required or authorized by law.
      (8)   The statement is in writing, and is made with purpose to induce
another to extend credit to or employ the offender, or to confer any degree,
diploma, certificate of attainment, award of excellence, or honor on the
offender, or to extend to or bestow upon the offender any other valuable
benefit or distinction, when the person to whom the statement is directed
relies upon it to his or her detriment.
      (9)   The statement is made with purpose to commit or facilitate the
commission of a theft offense.
      (10)   The statement is knowingly made to a probate court in connection
with any action, proceeding, or other matter within its jurisdiction, either
orally or in a written document, including but not limited to an application,
petition, complaint, or other pleading, or an inventory, account, or report.
      (11)   The statement is made on an account, form, record, stamp, label or
other writing that is required by law.
      (12)   The statement is made in connection with the purchase of a
firearm, as defined in R.C. § 2923.11, and in conjunction with the furnishing
to the seller of the firearm of a fictitious or altered driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit, a fictitious or altered identification card, or any
other document that contains false information about the purchaser’s identity.
      (13)   The statement is made in a document or instrument of writing that
purports to be a judgment, lien, or claim of indebtedness and is filed or
recorded with the Secretary of State, a county recorder, or the clerk of a
court of record.
      (14)   The statement is made in an application filed with a county
sheriff pursuant to R.C. § 2923.125 in order to obtain or renew a concealed
handgun license or is made in an affidavit submitted to a county sheriff to
obtain a concealed handgun license on a temporary emergency basis under R.C. §
2923.1213.
      (15)   The statement is required under R.C. § 5743.71 in connection with
the person’s purchase of cigarettes or tobacco products in a delivery sale.
   (B)   No person, in connection with the purchase of a firearm as defined in
R.C. § 2923.11, shall knowingly furnish to the seller of the firearm a
fictitious or altered driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit, a
fictitious or altered identification card, or any other document that contains
false information about the purchaser’s identity.
   (C)   No person, in an attempt to obtain a concealed handgun license under
R.C. § 2923.125, shall knowingly present to a sheriff a fictitious or altered
document that purports to be certification of the person’s competence in
handling a handgun as described in division (B)(3) of that section.
   (D)   It is no defense to a charge under division (A)(6) of this section
that the oath or affirmation was administered or taken in an irregular manner.
   (E)   If contradictory statements relating to the same fact are made by the
offender within the period of the statute of limitations for falsification, it
is not necessary for the prosecution to prove which statement was false, but
only that one or the other was false.
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), (A)
(5), (A)(6), (A)(7), (A)(8), (A)(10), (A)(11), (A)(13) or (A)(15) of this
section is guilty of falsification. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, falsification is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(9) of this section is guilty of
falsification in a theft offense. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, falsification in a theft offense is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the value of the property or services stolen is $1,000 or more,
falsification in a theft offense is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(12) or (B) of this section is guilty
of falsification to purchase a firearm, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (A)(14) or (C) of this section is guilty
of falsification to obtain a concealed handgun license, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section in removal
proceedings under R.C. § 319.26, 321.37, 507.13 or 733.78 is guilty of
falsification regarding a removal proceeding, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.13)
   (G)   (1)   No person who has knowingly failed to maintain proof of
financial responsibility in accordance with R.C. § 4509.101 shall produce any
document or present to a peace officer an electronic wireless communications
device that is displaying any text or images with the purpose to mislead a
peace officer upon the request of a peace officer for proof of financial
responsibility made in accordance with R.C. § 4509.101(D)(2).
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (G) is guilty of falsification, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4509.102)
Statutory reference:
   Civil liability for violations of this section, see R.C. § 2921.13(G)
§ 136.03 COMPOUNDING A CRIME.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly demand, accept, or agree to accept anything
of value in consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon a pending
criminal prosecution.
   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section when both
of the following apply:
      (1)   The pending prosecution involved is for a violation of R.C. §
2913.02, 2913.11, 2913.21(B)(2), or 2913.47, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, of which the actor under this section was the victim.
      (2)   The thing of value demanded, accepted, or agreed to be accepted, in
consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon the prosecution, did not
exceed an amount that the actor reasonably believed due him or her as
restitution for the loss caused him or her by the offense.
   (C)   When a prosecuting witness abandons or agrees to abandon a prosecution
under division (B) of this section, the abandonment or agreement in no way
binds the state to abandoning the prosecution.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of compounding a crime, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2921.21)
§ 136.04 FAILURE TO REPORT A CRIME.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2) of this section, no
person, knowing that a felony has been or is being committed, shall knowingly
fail to report the information to law enforcement authorities.
      (2)   No person, knowing that a violation of R.C. § 2913.04(B) has been
or is being committed or that the person has received information derived from
such a violation, shall knowingly fail to report the violation to law
enforcement authorities.
   (B)   Except for conditions that are within the scope of division (E) of
this section, no person giving aid to a sick or injured person shall
negligently fail to report to law enforcement authorities any gunshot or stab
wound treated or observed by the person, or any serious physical harm to
persons that the person knows or has reasonable cause to believe resulted from
an offense of violence.
   (C)   No person who discovers the body or acquires the first knowledge of
the death of a person shall fail to report the death immediately to a physician
or advanced practice registered nurse whom the person knows to be treating the
deceased for a condition from which death at such time would not be unexpected,
or to a law enforcement officer, an ambulance service, an emergency squad, or
the coroner in a political subdivision in which the body is discovered, the
death is believed to have occurred, or knowledge concerning the death is
obtained. For purposes of this division, “advanced practice registered nurse”
does not include a certified registered nurse anesthetist.
   (D)   No person shall fail to provide upon request of the person to whom a
report required by division (C) of this section was made, or to any law
enforcement officer who has reasonable cause to assert the authority to
investigate the circumstances surrounding the death, any facts within his or
her knowledge that may have a bearing on the investigation of the death.
   (E)   (1)   As used in this section, BURN INJURY means any of the following:
         (a)   Second or third degree burns;
         (b)   Any burns to the upper respiratory tract or laryngeal edema due
to the inhalation of super-heated air;
         (c)   Any burn injury or wound that may result in death;
         (d)   Any physical harm to persons caused by or as the result of the
use of fireworks, novelties and
trick noisemakers, and wire sparklers, as each is defined by R.C. § 3743.01.
      (2)   No physician, nurse, physician assistant, or limited practitioner
who, outside a hospital, sanitarium, or other medical facility, attends or
treats a person who has sustained a burn injury inflicted by an explosion or
other incendiary device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a
violent, malicious, or criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury
immediately to the local arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the
jurisdiction in which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to local
law enforcement authorities.
      (3)   No manager, superintendent, or other person in charge of a
hospital, sanitarium, or other medical facility in which a person is attended
or treated for any burn injury inflicted by an explosion or other incendiary
device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a violent,
malicious, or criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury immediately
to the local arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the jurisdiction in
which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to local law enforcement
authorities.
      (4)   No person who is required to report any burn injury under division
(E)(2) or (E)(3) of this section shall fail to file, within three working days
after attending or treating the victim, a written report of the burn injury
with the office of the State Fire Marshal. The report shall be made on a form
provided by the State Fire Marshal.
      (5)   Anyone participating in the making of reports under division (E) of
this section or anyone participating in a judicial proceeding resulting from
the reports is immune from any civil or criminal liability that otherwise might
be incurred or imposed as a result of such actions. Notwithstanding R.C. §
4731.22, the physician-patient relationship or advanced practice registered
nurse-patient relationship is not a ground for excluding evidence regarding a
person’s burn injury or the cause of the burn injury in any judicial proceeding
resulting from a report submitted under division (E) of this section.
   (F)   (1)   Any doctor of medicine or osteopathic medicine, hospital intern
or resident, nurse, psychologist, social worker, independent social worker,
social work assistant, licensed professional clinical counselor, licensed
professional counselor, independent marriage and family therapist, or marriage
and family therapist who knows or has reasonable cause to believe that a
patient or client has been the victim of domestic violence, as defined in R.C.
§ 3113.31, shall note that knowledge or belief and the basis for it in the
patient’s or client’s records.
      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 4731.22, the physician-patient privilege or
advanced practice registered nurse-patient privilege shall not be a ground for
excluding any information regarding the report containing the knowledge or
belief noted under division (F)(1) of this section, and the information may be
admitted as evidence in accordance with the Rules of Evidence.
   (G)   Division (A) or (D) of this section does not require disclosure of
information, when any of the following applies:
      (1)   The information is privileged by reason of the relationship between
attorney and client; physician and patient; advanced practice registered nurse
and patient; licensed psychologist or licensed school psychologist and client;
licensed professional clinical counselor, licensed professional counselor,
independent social worker, social worker, independent marriage and family
therapist, or marriage and family therapist and client; member of the clergy,
rabbi, minister, or priest and any person communicating information
confidentially to the member of the clergy, rabbi, minister, or priest for a
religious counseling purpose of a professional character; husband and wife; or
a communications assistant and those who are a party to a telecommunications
relay service call.
      (2)   The information would tend to incriminate a member of the actor’s
immediate family.
      (3)   Disclosure of the information would amount to revealing a news
source, privileged under R.C. § 2739.04 or 2739.12.
      (4)   Disclosure of the information would amount to disclosure by a
member of the ordained clergy of an organized religious body of a confidential
communication made to that member of the clergy in that member’s capacity as a
member of the clergy by a person seeking the aid or counsel of that member of
the clergy.
      (5)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the
actor in the course of the actor’s duties in connection with a bona fide
program of treatment or services for persons with drug dependencies or persons
in danger of drug dependence, which program is maintained or conducted by a
hospital, clinic, person, agency, or community addiction services provider
whose alcohol and drug addiction services are certified pursuant to R.C. §
5119.36.
      (6)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the
actor in the course of the actor’s duties in connection with a bona fide
program for providing counseling services to victims of crimes that are
violations of R.C. § 2907.02 or R.C. § 2907.05 or to victims of felonious
sexual penetration in violation of former R.C. § 2907.12. As used in this
division, “counseling services” include services provided in an informal
setting by a person who, by education or experience, is competent to provide
those services.
   (H)   No disclosure of information pursuant to this section gives rise to
any liability or recrimination for a breach of privilege or confidence.
   (I)   Whoever violates division (A) or (B) of this section is guilty of
failure to report a crime. Violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Violation of division (A)(2) or (B) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (J)   Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section is guilty of
failure to report knowledge of a death, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (K)   (1)   Whoever negligently violates division (E) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Whoever knowingly violates division (E) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (L)   As used in this section, NURSE includes an advanced practice
registered nurse, registered nurse, and licensed practical nurse.
(R.C. § 2921.22)
§ 136.05 FAILURE TO AID A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   (A)   No person shall negligently fail or refuse to aid a law enforcement
officer, when called upon for assistance in preventing or halting the
commission of an offense, or in apprehending or detaining an offender, when the
aid can be given without a substantial risk of physical harm to the person
giving it.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to aid a law
enforcement officer, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2921.23)
§ 136.06 OBSTRUCTING OFFICIAL BUSINESS.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so and with purpose to prevent,
obstruct, or delay the performance by a public official of any authorized act
within the public official’s official capacity, shall do any act that hampers
or impedes a public official in the performance of the public official’s lawful
duties.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing official
business. Except as otherwise provided in this division, obstructing official
business is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If a violation of this section
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, obstructing official business is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.31)
§ 136.07 OBSTRUCTING JUSTICE.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to hinder the discovery, apprehension,
prosecution, conviction, or punishment of another for crime, or to assist
another to benefit from the commission of a crime, and no person, with purpose
to hinder the discovery, apprehension, prosecution, adjudication as a
delinquent child, or disposition of a child for an act that if committed by an
adult would be a crime or to assist a child to benefit from the commission of
an act that if committed by an adult would be a crime, shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Harbor or conceal the other person or child.
      (2)   Provide the other person or child with money, transportation, a
weapon, a disguise, or other means of avoiding discovery or apprehension.
      (3)   Warn the other person or child of impending discovery or
apprehension.
      (4)   Destroy or conceal physical evidence of the crime or act, or induce
any person to withhold testimony or information or to elude legal process
summoning him or her to testify or supply evidence.
      (5)   Communicate false information to any person.
      (6)   Prevent or obstruct any person, by means of force, intimidation, or
deception, from performing any act to aid in the discovery, apprehension, or
prosecution of the other person or child.
   (B)   A person may be prosecuted for, and may be convicted of or adjudicated
a delinquent child for committing, a violation of division (A) of this section
regardless of whether the person or child aided ultimately is apprehended for,
is charged with, is convicted of, pleads guilty to, or is adjudicated a
delinquent child for committing the crime or act the person or child aided
committed. The crime or act the person or child aided committed shall be used
under division (C) of this section in determining the penalty for violation of
division (A) of this section, regardless of whether the person or child aided
ultimately is apprehended for, is charge with, is convicted of, pleads guilty
to, or is adjudicated a delinquent child for committing the crime or act the
person or child aided committed.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing justice.
      (1)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a misdemeanor or if
the act committed by the child aided would be a misdemeanor if committed by an
adult, obstructing justice is a misdemeanor of the same degree as the crime
committed by the person aided or a misdemeanor of the same degree that the act
committed by the child aided would be if committed by an adult.
      (2)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a felony or if the
act committed by the child aided would be a felony if committed by an adult, or
if the crime or act committed by the person or child aided is an act of
terrorism, obstructing justice is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (D)   As used in this section:
      ACT OF TERRORISM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.21.
      ADULT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.011.
      CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.011.
      DELINQUENT CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2152.02.
(R.C. § 2921.32)
§ 136.08 RESISTING ARREST.
   (A)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of himself, herself or another.
   (B)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of the person or another person and, during the course of or as a
result of the resistance or interference, cause physical harm to a law
enforcement officer.
   (C)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of the person or another person if either of the following
applies:
      (1)   The offender, during the course of or as a result of the resistance
or interference, recklessly causes physical harm to a law enforcement officer
by means of a deadly weapon; or
      (2)   The offender, during the course of the resistance or interference,
brandishes a deadly weapon.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of resisting arrest. A
violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. A violation of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. A violation of division (C) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (E)   As used in this section, DEADLY WEAPON has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2923.11.
(R.C. § 2921.33)
Statutory reference:
   Unlawful taking of deadly weapon from a law enforcement officer, felony
offense, see R.C. § 2911.01
§ 136.09 HAVING AN UNLAWFUL INTEREST IN A PUBLIC CONTRACT.
   (A)   No public official shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Authorize or employ the authority of the public official’s office
to secure authorization of any public contract in which the public official, a
member of the public official’s family, or any of the public official’s
business associates has an interest.
      (2)   Authorize or employ the authority or influence of the public
official’s office to secure the investment of public funds in any share, bond,
mortgage, or other security with respect to which the public official, a member
of the public official’s family, or any of the public official’s business
associates either has an interest, is an underwriter, or receives any
brokerage, origination, or servicing fees.
      (3)   During the public official’s term of office or within one year
thereafter, occupy any position of profit in the prosecution of a public
contract authorized by the public official or by a legislative body,
commission, or board of which the public official was a member at the time of
authorization, unless the contract was let by competitive bidding to the lowest
and best bidder.
      (4)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract
entered into by or for the use of the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality with which the public official is connected.
      (5)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract
that is not let by competitive bidding when required by law, and that involves
more than $150.
   (B)   In the absence of bribery or a purpose to defraud, a public official,
member of a public official’s family, or any of a public official’s business
associates shall not be considered as having an interest in a public contract
or the investment of public funds, if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The interest of that person is limited to owning or controlling
shares of the corporation, or being a creditor of the corporation or other
organization, that is the contractor on the public contract involved, or that
is the issuer of the security in which public funds are invested.
      (2)   The shares owned or controlled by that person do not exceed 5% of
the outstanding shares of the corporation, and the amount due that person as
creditor does not exceed 5% of the total indebtedness of the corporation or
other organization.
      (3)   That person, prior to the time the public contract is entered into,
files with the political subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality
involved, an affidavit giving that person’s exact status in connection with the
corporation or other organization.
   (C)   This section does not apply to a public contract in which a public
official, member of a public official’s family, or one of a public official’s
business associates has an interest, when all of the following apply:
      (1)   The subject of the public contract is necessary supplies or
services for the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved.
      (2)   The supplies or services are unobtainable elsewhere for the same or
lower cost, or are being furnished to the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality as part of a continuing course of dealing established
prior to the public official’
      (3)   The treatment accorded the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality is either preferential to or the same as that
accorded other customers or clients in similar transactions.
      (4)   The entire transaction is conducted at arm’s length, with full
knowledge by the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved, of the interest of the public official, member of the
public official’s family, or business associate, and the public official takes
no part in the deliberations or decision of the political subdivision or
governmental agency or instrumentality with respect to the public contract.
   (D)   Division (A)(4) of this section does not prohibit participation by a
public employee in any housing program funded by public monies if the public
employee otherwise qualifies for the program and does not use the authority or
influence of the public employee’s office or employment to secure benefits from
the program and if the monies are to be used on the primary residence of the
public employee. Such participation does not constitute an unlawful interest in
a public contract in violation of this section.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of having an unlawful interest
in a public contract. Violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. Violation of division
(A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (F)   It is not a violation of this section for a prosecuting attorney to
appoint assistants and employees in accordance with R.C. §§ 309.06 and
2921.421, or for a chief legal officer of a municipality or an official
designated as prosecutor in a municipality to appoint assistants and employees
in accordance with R.C. §§ 733.621 and 2921.421, or for a township law director
appointed under R.C. § 504.15 to appoint assistants and employees in accordance
with R.C. §§ 504.151 and 2921.421.
   (G)   Any public contract in which a public official, a member of the public
official’s family, or any of the public official’s business associates has an
interest in violation of this section is void and unenforceable. Any contract
securing the investment of public funds in which a public official, a member of
the public official’s family, or any of the public official’s business
associates has an interest, is an underwriter, or receives any brokerage,
origination or servicing fees and that was entered into in violation of this
section is void and unenforceable.
   (H)   As used in this section:
      CHIEF LEGAL OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 733.621.
      PUBLIC CONTRACT. Means any of the following:
         (a)   The purchase or acquisition, or a contract for the purchase or
acquisition, of property or services by or for the use of the state or any of
its political subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either,
including the employment of an individual by the state, any of its political
subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either.
         (b)   A contract for the design, construction, alteration, repair, or
maintenance of any public property.
(R.C. § 2921.42)
Statutory reference:
   Assistants and employees of Prosecutors, Law Directors, and Solicitors, see
R.C. § 2921.421
§ 136.10 SOLICITING OR RECEIVING IMPROPER COMPENSATION.
   (A)   No public servant shall knowingly solicit or accept and no person
shall knowingly promise or give to a public servant either of the following:
      (1)   Any compensation, other than as allowed by R.C. § 102.03(G), (H),
(I), or other provisions of law, to perform the public servant’s official
duties, to perform any other act or service in the public servant’s public
capacity, for the general performance of the duties of the public servant’s
public office or public employment, or as a supplement to the public servant’s
public compensation.
      (2)   Additional or greater fees or costs than are allowed by law to
perform the public servant’s official duties.
   (B)   No public servant for the public servant’s own personal or business
use and no person for the person’s own personal or business use or for the
personal or business use of a public servant or party official, shall solicit
or accept anything of value in consideration of either of the following:
      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining, or renewing the appointment of
any person to any public office, employment, or agency.
      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with
respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion, or other
material aspects of employment.
   (C)   No person for the benefit of a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing
entity shall coerce any contribution in consideration of either of the
following:
      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining, or renewing the appointment of
any person to any public office, employment, or agency.
      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with
respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion, or other
material aspects of employment.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of soliciting improper
compensation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (E)   A public servant who is convicted of a violation of this section is
disqualified from holding any public office, employment, or position of trust
in this state for a period of seven years from the date of conviction.
   (F)   Divisions (A), (B), and (C) of this section do not prohibit any person
from making voluntary contributions to a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing
entity or prohibit a political party, campaign committee, legislative campaign
fund, political action committee or political contributing entity from
accepting voluntary contributions.
(R.C. § 2921.43)
§ 136.11 DERELICTION OF DUTY.
   (A)   No law enforcement officer shall negligently do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to serve a lawful warrant without delay.
      (2)   Fail to prevent or halt the commission of an offense or to
apprehend an offender, when it is in the law enforcement officer’s power to do
so alone or with available assistance.
   (B)   No law enforcement, ministerial, or judicial officer shall negligently
fail to perform a lawful duty in a criminal case or proceeding.
   (C)   No officer, having charge of a detention facility, shall negligently
do any of the following:
      (1)   Allow the detention facility to become littered or unsanitary.
      (2)   Fail to provide persons confined in the detention facility with
adequate food, clothing, bedding, shelter, and medical attention.
      (3)   Fail to control an unruly prisoner, or to prevent intimidation of
or physical harm to a prisoner by another.
      (4)   Allow a prisoner to escape.
      (5)   Fail to observe any lawful and reasonable regulation for the
management of the detention facility.
   (D)   No public official shall recklessly create a deficiency, incur a
liability, or expend a greater sum than is appropriated by the Legislative
Authority for the use in any one year of the department, agency, or institution
with which the public official is connected.
   (E)   No public servant shall recklessly fail to perform a duty expressly
imposed by law with respect to the public servant’s office, or recklessly do
any act expressly forbidden by law with respect to the public servant’s office.
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of dereliction of duty, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (G)   Except as otherwise provided by law, a public servant who is a county
treasurer; county auditor; township fiscal officer; city auditor; city
treasurer; village fiscal officer; village clerk-treasurer; village clerk; in
the case of a municipal corporation having a charter that designates an officer
who, by virtue of the charter, has duties and functions similar to those of the
city or village officers referred to in this section, the officer so designated
by the charter; school district treasurer; fiscal officer of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314; treasurer of a science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics school established under R.C. Chapter 3326; or
fiscal officer of a college-preparatory boarding school established under R.C.
Chapter 3328 and is convicted of or pleads guilty to dereliction of duty is
disqualified from holding any public office, employment, or position of trust
in this state for four years following the date of conviction or of entry of
the plea, and is not entitled to hold any public office until any repayment or
restitution required by the court is satisfied.
   (H)   As used in this section, PUBLIC SERVANT includes the following:
      (1)   An officer or employee of a contractor as defined in R.C. § 9.08;
      (2)   A fiscal officer employed by the operator of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314 or by the operator of a college-preparatory
boarding school established under R.C. Chapter 3328.
(R.C. § 2921.44)
§ 136.12 INTERFERING WITH CIVIL RIGHTS.
   (A)   No public servant, under color of the public servant’s office,
employment, or authority, shall knowingly deprive, or conspire or attempt to
deprive any person of a constitutional or statutory right.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interfering with civil
rights, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2921.45)
Statutory reference:
   Restraining or confining pregnant children or pregnant women, see R.C. §
2152.75(B) and R.C. § 2901.10
§ 136.13 ILLEGAL CONVEYANCE OF PROHIBITED ITEMS ONTO GROUNDS OF A DETENTION
FACILITY OR OTHER SPECIFIED GOVERNMENTAL FACILITY.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly convey, or attempt to convey, onto the
grounds of a detention facility or of an institution, office building, or other
place that is under the control of the Department of Mental Health and
Addiction Services, the Department of Developmental Disabilities, the
Department of Youth Services, or the Department of Rehabilitation and
Correction, any of the following items:
      (1)   Any deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance, as defined in R.C. §
2923.11, or any part of or ammunition for use in such deadly weapon or
dangerous ordnance.
      (2)   Any drug of abuse, as defined in R.C. § 3719.011.
      (3)   Any intoxicating liquor, as defined in R.C. § 4301.01, except for
small amounts of wine for sacramental purposes when the person engaging in the
specified conduct is a cleric, as defined in R.C. § 2317.02.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any person who conveys
or attempts to convey an item onto the grounds of a detention facility or of an
institution, office building, or other place under the control of the
Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services, the Department of
Developmental Disabilities, the Department of Youth Services, or the Department
of Rehabilitation and Correction, with written authorization of the person in
charge of the detention facility or the institution, office building, or other
place and in accordance with the written rules of the detention facility or the
institution, office building, or other place.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, to a prisoner who is temporarily released from confinement
for a work assignment, or to any patient in an institution under the control of
the Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services or the Department of
Developmental Disabilities, any item listed in division (A).
   (D)   No person shall knowingly deliver or attempt to deliver cash to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, or to a prisoner who is temporarily released from
confinement for a work assignment.
   (E)   No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, or to a prisoner who is temporarily released from
confinement for a work assignment a cellular telephone, two-way radio, or other
electronic communications device.
   (F)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(1)
of this section that the weapon or dangerous ordnance in question was being
transported in a motor vehicle for any lawful purpose, that it was not on the
actor’s person, and if the weapon or dangerous ordnance was a firearm, that it
was unloaded and was being carried in a closed package, box or case or in a
compartment that can be reached only by leaving the vehicle.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (C) of this
section that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by law from delivering the
item to the confined person, the child, the prisoner, or the patient and that
either of the following applies:
         (a)   The actor was permitted by the written rules of the detention
facility or the institution, office building, or other place to deliver the
item to the confined person or the patient.
         (b)   The actor was given written authorization by the person in
charge of the detention facility or the institution, office building, or other
place to deliver the item to the confined person or the patient.
   (G)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) of this section or commits a
violation of division (C) of this section involving any item listed in division
(A)(1) of this section is guilty of illegal conveyance of weapons onto the
grounds of a specified governmental facility, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section or commits a
violation of division (C) of this section involving any drug of abuse is guilty
of illegal conveyance of drugs of abuse onto the grounds of a specified
governmental facility, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(3) of this section or commits a
violation of division (C) of this section involving any intoxicating liquor is
guilty of illegal conveyance of intoxicating liquor onto the grounds of a
specified governmental facility, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of illegal
conveyance of cash onto the grounds of a detention facility, a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (D) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, illegal conveyance of cash onto
the grounds of a detention facility is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section is guilty of illegal
conveyance of a communications device onto the grounds of a specified
governmental facility, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (E)
of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
illegal conveyance of a communications device onto the grounds of a detention
facility is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.36)
   (H)   The person in charge of a detention facility shall, on the grounds of
the detention facility, have the same power as a peace officer, as defined in
R.C. § 2935.01, to arrest a person who violates this section.
(R.C. § 2921.37)
Statutory reference:
   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance on school
premises, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.122
   Conveyance, possession, or control of deadly weapon or dangerous ordinance
in a courthouse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.123
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offense, see R.C.
§ 2923.131
§ 136.14 FALSE REPORT OF CHILD ABUSE OR NEGLECT.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make or cause another person to make a false
report under R.C. § 2151.421(B) alleging that any person has committed an act
or omission that resulted in a child being an abused child as defined in R.C. §
2151.031 or a neglected child as defined in R.C. § 2151.03.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or causing a false
report of child abuse or child neglect, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2921.14)
§ 136.15 ASSAULTING POLICE DOG OR HORSE, OR ASSISTANCE DOG.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to
a police dog or horse in either of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement officer in
the performance of the officer’s official duties at the time the physical harm
is caused or attempted.
      (2)   The police dog or horse is not assisting a law enforcement officer
in the performance of the officer’s official duties at the time the physical
harm is caused or attempted, but the offender has actual knowledge that the dog
or horse is a police dog or horse.
   (B)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Taunt, torment, or strike a police dog or horse;
      (2)   Throw an object or substance at a police dog or horse;
      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct a police dog or horse, or interfere with
or obstruct a law enforcement officer who is being assisted by a police dog or
horse, in a manner that does any of the following:
         (a)   Inhibits or restricts the law enforcement officer’s control of
the police dog or horse;
         (b)   Deprives the law enforcement officer of control of the police
dog or horse;
         (c)   Releases the police dog or horse from its area of control;
         (d)   Enters the area of control of the police dog or horse without
the consent of the law enforcement officer, including placing food or any other
object or substance into that area;
         (e)   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the police dog or horse to
assist a law enforcement officer;
      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical
injury or death to a police dog or horse;
      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog, fail to
reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in
a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or
otherwise endanger a police dog or horse that at the time of the conduct, the
police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement officer in the performance
of the officer’s duties or that the person knows is a police dog or horse.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to
an assistance dog in either of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The dog, at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted, is
assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment.
      (2)   The dog, at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted, is
not assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment, but the offender has actual knowledge that
the dog is an assistance dog.
   (D)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Taunt, torment, or strike an assistance dog;
      (2)   Throw an object or substance at an assistance dog;
      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct an assistance dog, or interfere with or
obstruct a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a person with a
mobility impairment who is being assisted or served by an assistance dog, in a
manner that does any of the following:
         (a)   Inhibits or restricts the assisted or served person’s control of
the dog;
         (b)   Deprives the assisted or served person of control of the dog;
         (c)   Releases the dog from its area of control;
         (d)   Enters the area of control of the dog without the consent of the
assisted or served person, including placing food or any other object or
substance into that area;
         (e)   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the dog to assist the
assisted or served person;
      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical
injury or death to an assistance dog;
      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog, fail to
reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in
a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or
otherwise endanger an assistance dog that at the time of the conduct is
assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment or that the person knows is an assistance
dog.
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
assaulting a police dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, assaulting a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. If the violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse
other than death or serious physical harm, assaulting a police dog or horse is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in serious physical
harm to the police dog or horse or results in its death, assaulting a police
dog or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
harassing a police dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided this division,
harassing a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse but does not
result in its death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing a police dog
or horse is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in
serous physical harm to the police dog or horse or results in its death,
harassing a police dog or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of
assaulting an assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog other than death or
serious physical harm, assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the violation results in serious physical harm to the
assistance dog or results in its death, assaulting an assistance dog is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of
harassing an assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
harassing an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog but does not result in
the death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing an assistance dog is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in serious physical
harm to the assistance dog or results in its death, harassing an assistance dog
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   In addition to any other sanctions or penalty imposed for the
offense under this section, R.C. Chapter 2929 or any other provision of the
Ohio Revised Code or this code, whoever violates division (A), (B), (C), or (D)
of this section is responsible for the payment of all of the following:
         (a)   Any veterinary bill or bill for medication incurred as a result
of the violation by the police department regarding a violation of division (A)
or (B) of this section or by the person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired
or the person with a mobility impairment assisted or served by the assistance
dog regarding a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section;
         (b)   The cost of any damaged equipment that results from the
violation;
         (c)   If the violation did not result in the death of the police dog
or horse or the assistance dog that was the subject of the violation and if, as
a result of that dog or horse being the subject of the violation, the dog or
horse needs further training or retraining to be able to continue in the
capacity of a police dog or horse or an assistance dog, the cost of any further
training or retraining of that dog or horse by a law enforcement officer or by
the person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or the person with a
mobility impairment assisted or served by the assistance dog;
         (d)   If the violation resulted in the death of the assistance dog
that was the subject of the violation or resulted in serious physical harm to
the police dog or horse or the assistance dog or horse that was the subject of
the violation to the extent that the dog or horse needs to be replaced on
either a temporary or a permanent basis, the cost of replacing that dog or
horse and of any further training of a new police dog or horse or a new
assistance dog by a law enforcement officer or by the person who is blind,
deaf, or hearing impaired or the person with a mobility impairment assisted or
served by the assistance dog, which replacement or training is required because
of the death of or the serious physical harm to the dog or horse that was the
subject of the violation.
   (F)   This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian whose conduct
is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4741.
   (G)   This section only applies to an offender who knows or should know at
the time of the violation that the police dog or horse or assistance dog that
is the subject of a violation under this section is a police dog or horse or an
assistance dog.
   (H)   As used in this section:
      ASSISTANCE DOG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.
      BLIND. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.
      PERSON WITH A MOBILITY IMPAIRMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
955.011.
      PHYSICAL HARM. Means any injury, illness, or other psychological
impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.
      POLICE DOG OR HORSE. Means a dog or horse that has been trained and may
be used to assist law enforcement officers in the performance of their official
duties.
      SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death.
         (b)   Any physical harm that causes permanent maiming or that involves
some temporary, substantial maiming.
         (c)   Any physical harm that causes acute pain of a duration that
results in substantial suffering.
(R.C. § 2921.321)
§ 136.16 DISCLOSURE OF CONFIDENTIAL PEACE OFFICER INFORMATION.
   (A)   No officer or employee of a law enforcement agency or court, or of the
clerk’s office of any court, shall disclose during the pendency of any criminal
case the home address of any peace officer, parole officer, prosecuting
attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional employee, or youth
services employee who is a witness or arresting officer in the case.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not prohibit a peace officer, parole
officer, prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional
employee, or youth services employee from disclosing the peace officer’s,
parole officer’s, prosecuting attorney’s, assistant prosecuting attorney’s,
correctional employee’s, or youth services employee’s own home address, and
does not apply to any person who discloses the home address of a peace officer,
parole officer, prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney,
correctional employee, or youth services employee pursuant to a court-ordered
disclosure under division (C) of this section.
   (C)   The court in which any criminal case is pending may order the
disclosure of the home address of any peace officer, parole officer,
prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional employee, or
youth services employee who is a witness or arresting officer in the case, if
the court determines after a written request for the disclosure that good cause
exists for disclosing the home address of the peace officer, parole officer,
prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional employee, or
youth services employee.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of disclosure
of confidential information, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2921.24)
   (E)   No judge of a court of record, or Mayor presiding over a Mayor’s
Court, shall order a peace officer, parole officer, prosecuting attorney,
assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional employee, or youth services
employee who is a witness in a criminal case, to disclose the peace officer’s,
parole officer’s, prosecuting attorney’s, assistant prosecuting attorney’s,
correctional employee’s, or youth services employee’s home address during the
peace officer’s, parole officer’s, prosecuting attorney’s, assistant
prosecuting attorney’s, correctional employee’s, or youth services employee’s
examination in the case unless the judge or Mayor determines that the defendant
has a right to the disclosure.
   (F)   As used in this section:
      PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
      CORRECTIONAL EMPLOYEE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 149.43.
      YOUTH SERVICES EMPLOYEE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 149.43.
(R.C. § 2921.25)
§ 136.17 INTIMIDATION OF CRIME VICTIM OR WITNESS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly attempt to intimidate or hinder the victim
of a crime or delinquent act in the filing or prosecution of criminal charges
or a delinquent child action or proceeding, and no person shall knowingly
attempt to intimidate a witness to a criminal or delinquent act by reason of
the person being a witness to that act.
   (B)   No person, knowingly and by force or by unlawful threat of harm to any
person or property or by unlawful threat to commit any offense or calumny
against any person, shall attempt to influence, intimidate, or hinder any of
the following persons:
      (1)   The victim of a crime or delinquent act in the filing or
prosecution of criminal charges or a delinquent child action or proceeding;
      (2)   A witness to a criminal or delinquent act by reason of the person
being a witness to that act;
      (3)   An attorney by reason of the attorney’s involvement in any criminal
or delinquent child action or proceeding.
   (C)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any person who is
attempting to resolve a dispute pertaining to the alleged commission of a
criminal offense, either prior to or subsequent to the filing of a complaint,
indictment, or information by participating in the arbitration, mediation,
compromise, settlement or conciliation of that dispute pursuant to an
authorization for arbitration, mediation, compromise, settlement, or
conciliation of a dispute of that nature that is conferred by any of the
following:
      (1)   A section of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (2)   The Rules of Criminal Procedure, the Rules of Superintendence for
Municipal Courts and County Courts, the Rules of Superintendence for Courts of
Common Pleas, or another rule adopted by the Ohio Supreme Court in accordance
with Ohio Constitution, Article IV, Section 5.
      (3)   A local rule of court, including but not limited to a local rule of
court that relates to alternative dispute resolution or other case management
programs and that authorizes the referral of disputes pertaining to the alleged
commission of certain types of criminal offenses to appropriate and available
arbitration, mediation, compromise, settlement or other conciliation programs.
      (4)   The order of a judge of a municipal court, county court, or court
of common pleas.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of intimidation of an
attorney, victim or witness in a criminal case. A violation of division (A) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. A violation of division (B)
of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (E)   As used in this section, WITNESS means any person who has or claims to
have knowledge concerning a fact or facts concerning a criminal or delinquent
act, whether or not criminal or delinquent child charges are actually filed.
(R.C. § 2921.04)
Statutory reference:
   Retaliation, felony offense, see R.C. § 2921.05
§ 136.18 USING SHAM LEGAL PROCESS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      LAWFULLY ISSUED. Means adopted, issued, or rendered in accordance with
the United States Constitution, the Constitution of a state, and the applicable
statutes, rules, regulations and ordinances of the United States, a state, and
the political subdivisions of a state.
      POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS. Means municipal corporations, townships,
counties, school districts, and all other bodies corporate and politic that are
organized under state law and are responsible for governmental activities only
in geographical areas smaller than that of a state.
      SHAM LEGAL PROCESS. Means an instrument that meets all of the following
conditions:
         (a)   It is not lawfully issued.
         (b)   It purports to do any of the following:
            1.   To be a summons, subpoena, judgment, or order of a court, a
law enforcement officer, or a legislative, executive or administrative body.
            2.   To assert jurisdiction over or determine the legal or
equitable status, rights, duties, powers, or privileges of any person or
property.
            3.   To require or authorize the search, seizure, indictment,
arrest, trial, or sentencing of any person or property.
         (c)   It is designed to make another person believe that it is
lawfully issued.
      STATE. Means a state of the United States, including without limitation
the state legislature, the highest court of the state that has statewide
jurisdiction, the offices of all elected state officers, and all departments,
boards, offices, commissions, agencies, institutions, and other
instrumentalities of the state. The term does not include the political
subdivisions of the state.
   (B)   No person shall, knowing the sham legal process to be a sham legal
process, do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly issue, display, deliver, distribute, or otherwise use
sham legal process.
      (2)   Knowingly use sham legal process to arrest, detain, search or seize
any person or the property of another person.
      (3)   Knowingly commit or facilitate the commission of an offense using
sham legal process.
      (4)   Knowingly commit a felony by using sham legal process.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B)(1) or (B)
(2) of this section that the use of sham legal process was for a lawful
purpose.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using sham legal process. A
violation of division (B)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. A violation of division (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree, except that if the purpose of a violation of
division (B)(3) of this section is to commit or facilitate the commission of a
felony, a violation of division (B)(3) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division (B)(4) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.52(A) - (D))
Statutory reference:
   Civil liability, see R.C. § 2921.52(E)
§ 136.19 MAKING FALSE ALLEGATION OF PEACE OFFICER MISCONDUCT.
   (A)   As used in this section, PEACE OFFICER has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2935.01.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly file a complaint against a peace officer
that alleges that the peace officer engaged in misconduct in the performance of
the officer’s duties if the person knows that the allegation is false.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of making a
false allegation of peace officer misconduct, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 2921.15)
§ 136.20 MISUSE OF 9-1-1 SYSTEM.
   (A)   As used in this section, 9-1-1 SYSTEM means a system through which
individuals can request emergency service using the access number 9-1-1.
(R.C. § 128.01(A))
   (B)   No person shall knowingly use the telephone number of a 9-1-1 system
established under R.C. Chapter 128 to report an emergency if the person knows
that no emergency exists.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly use a 9-1-1 system for a purpose other than
obtaining emergency service.
   (D)   No person shall disclose or use any information concerning telephone
numbers, addresses, or names obtained from the database that serves the public
safety answering point of a 9-1-1 system established under R.C. Chapter 128,
except for any of the following purposes or under any of the following
circumstances:
      (1)   For the purpose of the 9-1-1 system;
      (2)   For the purpose of responding to an emergency call to an emergency
service provider;
      (3)   In the circumstance of the inadvertent disclosure of such
information due solely to technology of the wireless telephone network portion
of the 9-1-1 system not allowing access to the database to be restricted to 9-
1-1 specific answering lines at a public safety answering point;
      (4)   In the circumstance of access to a database being given by a
telephone company that is a wireless service provider to a public utility or
municipal utility in handling customer calls in times of public emergency or
service outages. The charge, terms, and conditions for the disclosure or use of
such information for the purpose of such access to a database shall be subject
to the jurisdiction of the Steering Committee;
      (5)   In the circumstance of access to a database given by a telephone
company that is a wireline service provider to a state and local government in
warning of a public emergency, as determined by the Steering Committee. The
charge, terms and conditions for the disclosure or use of that information for
the purpose of access to a database is subject to the jurisdiction of the
Steering Committee.
(R.C. § 128.96(F) - (H))
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 128.99(A), (B))
§ 136.21 FAILURE TO DISCLOSE PERSONAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   No person who is in a public place shall refuse to disclose the
person’s name, address, or date of birth, when requested by a law enforcement
officer who reasonably suspects either of the following:
      (1)   The person is committing, has committed, or is about to commit a
criminal offense.
      (2)   The person witnessed any of the following:
         (a)   An offense of violence that would constitute a felony under the
laws of this state;
         (b)   A felony offense that causes or results in, or creates a
substantial risk of, serious physical harm to another person or property;
         (c)   Any attempt or conspiracy to commit, or complicity in
committing, any offenses identified in division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) of this
section;
         (d)   Any conduct reasonably indicating that any offense identified in
division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) of this section or any attempt, conspiracy, or
complicity described in division (A)(2)(c) of this section has been, is being,
or is about to be committed.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of failure to
disclose one’s personal information, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (C)   Nothing in division (A) of this section requires a person to answer
any questions beyond that person’
   (D)   It is not a violation of division (A) of this section to refuse to
answer a question that would reveal a person’s age or date of birth if age is
an element of the crime that the person is suspected of committing.
(R.C. § 2921.29)
   (E)   No person entering an airport, train station, port, or other similar
critical transportation infrastructure site shall refuse to show identification
when requested by a law enforcement officer when there is a threat to security
and the law enforcement officer is requiring identification of all persons
entering the site.
   (F)   A law enforcement officer may prevent any person who refuses to show
identification when asked under the circumstances described in division (E) of
this section from entering the critical transportation infrastructure site.
(R.C. § 2909.31)
CHAPTER 137: WEAPONS CONTROL
Section
   
137.01   Definitions
   
137.02   Carrying concealed weapons
   
137.03   Using weapons while intoxicated
   
137.04   Improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle
   
137.05   Possessing criminal tools
   
137.06   Failure to secure dangerous ordnance
   
137.07   Unlawful transactions in weapons
   
137.08   Underage purchase of firearm or handgun
   
137.09   Pointing and discharging firearms and other weapons
   
137.10   License or permit to possess dangerous ordnance
   
137.11   Possession of an object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school
safety zone
   
137.12   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention
   
137.13   Concealed handgun licenses: possession of a revoked or suspended
license; additional restrictions; posting of signs prohibiting possession
   
137.14   Defaced firearms
Statutory reference:
   Return of surrendered firearms by law enforcement, see R.C. § 2923.163
§ 137.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTIVE DUTY. Has the same meaning as defined in 10 U.S.C. § 101.
   ALIEN REGISTRATION NUMBER. The number issued by the United States
Citizenship and Immigration Services Agency that is located on the alien’s
permanent resident card and may also be commonly referred to as the “USCIS
number” or the “alien number”.
   AUTOMATIC FIREARM. Any firearm designed or specially adapted to fire a
succession of cartridges with a single function of the trigger.
   BALLISTIC KNIFE. A knife with a detachable blade that is propelled by a
spring-operated mechanism.
   CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE or LICENSE TO CARRY A CONCEALED HANDGUN.
      (1)   Means, subject to division (2) of this definition, a license or
temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun issued under R.C. §
2923.125 or R.C. § 2923.1213 or a license to carry a concealed handgun issued
by another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a reciprocity
agreement under R.C. § 109.69.
      (2)   A reference in any provision of this code to a concealed handgun
license issued under R.C. § 2923.125 or a license to carry a concealed handgun
issued under R.C. § 2923.125 means only a license of the type that is specified
in that section. A reference in any provision of this code to a concealed
handgun license issued under R.C. § 2923.1213, a license to carry a concealed
handgun issued under R.C. § 2923.1213, or a license to carry a concealed
handgun on a temporary emergency basis means only a license of the type that is
specified in R.C. § 2923.1213. A reference in any provision of this code to a
concealed handgun license issued by another state or a license to carry a
concealed handgun issued by another state means only a license issued by
another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a reciprocity
agreement under R.C. § 109.69.
   DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
      (1)   Any of the following, except as provided in division (2) of this
definition:
         (a)   Any automatic or sawed-off firearm, zip-gun, or ballistic knife.
         (b)   Any explosive device or incendiary device.
         (c)   Nitroglycerin, nitrocellulose, nitrostarch, PETN, cyclonite,
TNT, picric acid, and other high explosives; amatol, tritonal, tetrytol,
pentolite, pecretol, cyclotol, and other high explosive compositions; plastic
explosives; dynamite, blasting gelatin, gelatin dynamite, sensitized ammonium
nitrate, liquid-oxygen blasting explosives, blasting powder, and other blasting
agents; and any other explosive substance having sufficient brisance or power
to be particularly suitable for use as a military explosive, or for use in
mining, quarrying, excavating, or demolitions.
         (d)   Any firearm, rocket launcher, mortar, artillery piece, grenade,
mine, bomb, torpedo, or similar weapon, designed and manufactured for military
purposes, and the ammunition for that weapon.
         (e)   Any firearm muffler or suppressor.
         (f)   Any combination of parts that is intended by the owner for use
in converting any firearm or other device into a dangerous ordnance.
      (2)   The term does not include any of the following:
         (a)   Any firearm, including a military weapon and the ammunition for
that weapon, and regardless of its actual age, that employs a percussion cap or
other obsolete ignition system, or that is designed and safe for use only with
black powder.
         (b)   Any pistol, rifle, or shotgun, designed or suitable for sporting
purposes, including a military weapon as issued or as modified, and the
ammunition for that weapon, unless the firearm is an automatic or sawed-off
firearm.
         (c)   Any cannon or other artillery piece that, regardless of its
actual age, is of a type in accepted use prior to 1887, has no mechanical,
hydraulic, pneumatic, or other system for absorbing recoil and returning the
tube into battery without displacing the carriage, and is designed and safe for
use only with black powder.
         (d)   Black powder, priming quills, and percussion caps possessed and
lawfully used to fire a cannon of a type defined in division (2)(c) of this
definition during displays, celebrations, organized matches or shoots, and
target practice, and smokeless and black powder, primers, and percussion caps
possessed and lawfully used as a propellant or ignition device in small-arms or
small-arms ammunition.
         (e)   Dangerous ordnance that is inoperable or inert and cannot
readily be rendered operable or activated, and that is kept as a trophy,
souvenir, curio, or museum piece.
         (f)   Any device that is expressly excepted from the definition of a
destructive device pursuant to the Gun Control Act of 1968, 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)
(4), as amended, and regulations issued under that act.
         (g)   Any firearm with an overall length of at least 26 inches that is
approved for sale by the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and
Explosives under the “Gun Control Act of 1968”, 82 Stat. 1213, 18 U.S.C. § 921
(a)(3), but that is found by the Bureau not to be regulated under the “National
Firearms Act”, 68A Stat. 725 (1934), 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a).
   DEADLY WEAPON. Any instrument, device, or thing capable of inflicting death,
and designed or specially adapted for use as a weapon, or possessed, carried,
or used as a weapon.
   EXPLOSIVE. Any chemical compound, mixture, or device, the primary or common
purpose of which is to function by explosion. The term includes all materials
that have been classified as division 1.1, division 1.2, division 1.3, or
division 1.4 explosives by the United States Department of Transportation in
its regulations and includes but is not limited to dynamite, black powder,
pellet powders, initiating explosives, blasting caps, electric blasting caps,
safety fuses, fuse igniters, squibs, cordeau detonant fuses, instantaneous
fuses, and igniter cords and igniters. The term does not include “fireworks”,
as defined in R.C. § 3743.01, or any substance or material otherwise meeting
the definition of explosive set forth in this section that is manufactured,
sold, possessed, transported, stored, or used in any activity described in R.C.
§ 3743.80, provided the activity is conducted in accordance with all applicable
laws, rules, and regulations, including but not limited to the provisions of
R.C. § 3743.80 and the rules of the Fire Marshal adopted pursuant to R.C. §
3737.82.
   EXPLOSIVE DEVICE. Any device designed or specially adapted to cause physical
harm to persons or property by means of an explosion, and consisting of an
explosive substance or agency and a means to detonate it. The term includes
without limitation any bomb, any explosive demolition device, any blasting cap
or detonator containing an explosive charge, and any pressure vessel that has
been knowingly tampered with or arranged so as to explode.
   FIREARM.
      (1)   Any deadly weapon capable of expelling or propelling one or more
projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible propellant. The term
includes an unloaded firearm, and any firearm that is inoperable but that can
readily be rendered operable.
      (2)   When determining whether a firearm is capable of expelling or
propelling one or more projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible
propellant, the trier of fact may rely upon circumstantial evidence, including
but not limited to the representations and actions of the individual exercising
control over the firearm.
   HANDGUN. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm that has a short stock and is designed to be held and
fired by the use of a single hand;
      (2)   Any combination of parts from which a firearm of a type described
in division (1) of this definition can be assembled.
   INCENDIARY DEVICE. Any firebomb, and any device designed or specially
adapted to cause physical harm to persons or property by means of fire, and
consisting of an incendiary substance or agent and a means to ignite it.
   MISDEMEANOR PUNISHABLE BY IMPRISONMENT FOR A TERM EXCEEDING ONE YEAR. The
phrase does not include any of the following:
      (1)   Any federal or state offense pertaining to antitrust violations,
unfair trade practices, restraints of trade, or other similar offenses relating
to the regulation of business practices;
      (2)   Any misdemeanor offense punishable by a term of imprisonment of two
years or less.
   SAWED-OFF FIREARM. A shotgun with a barrel less than 18 inches long, or a
rifle with a barrel less than 16 inches long, or a shotgun or rifle less than
26 inches long overall. “Sawed-off firearm” does not include any firearm with
an overall length of at least 26 inches that is approved for sale by the
Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives under the “Gun
Control Act of 1968”, 82 Stat. 1213, 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(3), but that is found
by the Bureau not to be regulated under the “National Firearms Act”, 68A Stat.
725 (1934), 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a).
   SEMI-AUTOMATIC FIREARM. Any firearm designed or specially adapted to fire a
single cartridge and automatically chamber a succeeding cartridge ready to
fire, with a single function of the trigger.
   VALID CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE or VALID LICENSE TO CARRY A CONCEALED HAND-
GUN. A concealed handgun license that is currently valid, that is not under a
suspension under R.C. § 2923.128(A)(1), under R.C. § 2923.1213, or under a
suspension provision of the state other than this state in which the license
was issued, and that has not been revoked under R.C. § 2923.128(B)(1), under
R.C. § 2923.1213, or under a revocation provision of the state other than this
state in which the license was issued.
   ZIP-GUN. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm of crude and extemporized manufacture.
      (2)   Any device, including without limitation a starter’s pistol, not
designed as a firearm, but that is specially adapted for use as a firearm.
      (3)   Any industrial tool, signaling device, or safety device, not
designed as a firearm, but that as designed is capable of use as such, when
possessed, carried, or used as a firearm.
(R.C. § 2923.11)
§ 137.02 CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly carry or have, concealed on the person’s
person or concealed ready at hand, any of the following:
      (1)   A deadly weapon other than a handgun;
      (2)   A handgun other than a dangerous ordnance;
      (3)   A dangerous ordnance.
   (B)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license shall do any
of the following:
      (1)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, before or at the time a law enforcement officer
asks if the person is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to disclose
that the person then is carrying a concealed handgun, provided that it is not a
violation of this division if the person fails to disclose that fact to an
officer during the stop and the person already has notified another officer of
that fact during the same stop;
      (2)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to keep the person’s hands in
plain sight at any time after any law enforcement officer begins approaching
the person while stopped and before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless
the failure is pursuant to and in accordance with directions given by a law
enforcement officer;
      (3)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose, if the
person is carrying a concealed handgun, and if the person is approached by any
law enforcement officer while stopped, knowingly remove or attempt to remove
the loaded handgun from the holster, pocket, or other place in which the person
is carrying it, knowingly grasp or hold the loaded handgun, or knowingly have
contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with the person’s hands or
fingers at any time after the law enforcement officer begins approaching and
before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the person removes, attempts
to remove, grasps, holds, or has contact with the loaded handgun pursuant to
and in accordance with directions given by the law enforcement officer;
      (4)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any
lawful order of any law enforcement officer given while the person is stopped,
including but not limited to a specific order to the person to keep the
person’s hands in plain sight.
   (C)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or the
United States, or to a law enforcement officer, who is authorized to carry
concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry handguns and
is acting within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s duties;
         (b)   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry
handguns, and who is subject to and in compliance with the requirements of R.C.
§ 109.801, unless the appointing authority of the person has expressly
specified that the exemption provided in this division (C)(1)(b) does not apply
to the person;
         (c)   A person’s transportation or storage of a firearm, other than a
firearm described in R.C. § 2923.11(G) to (M), in a motor vehicle for any
lawful purpose if the firearm is not on the actor’s person;
         (d)   A person’s storage or possession of a firearm, other than a
firearm described in R.C. § 2923.11(G) to (M), in the actor’s own home for any
lawful purpose.
      (2)   Division (A)(2) of this section does not apply to any person who
has been issued a concealed handgun license that is valid at the time of the
alleged carrying or possession of a handgun or who, at the time of the alleged
carrying or possession of a handgun, is an active duty member of the armed
forces of the United States and is carrying a valid military identification
card and documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets
or exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), unless
the person knowingly is in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(1) of this
section of carrying or having control of a weapon other than a handgun and
other than a dangerous ordnance, that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by
law from having the weapon, and that any of the following applies:
      (1)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for
defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in or was going to or from the
actor’s lawful business or occupation, which business or occupation was of a
character or was necessarily carried on in a manner or at a time or place as to
render the actor particularly susceptible to criminal attack, such as would
justify a prudent person in going armed.
      (2)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for
defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in a lawful activity and had
reasonable cause to fear a criminal attack upon the actor, a member of the
actor’s family, or the actor’s home, such as would justify a prudent person in
going armed.
      (3)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for any
lawful purpose and while in the actor’s own home.
   (E)   (1)   No person who is charged with a violation of this section shall
be required to obtain a concealed handgun license as a condition for the
dismissal of the charge.
      (2)   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty to, or
has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (B)(1) of this section as it
existed prior to June 13, 2022, the person may file an application under R.C. §
2953.35 requesting the expungement of the record of conviction.
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of carrying concealed
weapons. Except as otherwise provided in this division or divisions (F)(2), (F)
(6), and (F)(7) of this section, carrying concealed weapons in violation of
division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Except as
otherwise provided in this division or divisions (F)(2), (F)(6), and (F)(7) of
this section, if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance
or of any offense of violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is
either loaded or for which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the
weapon involved is dangerous ordnance, carrying concealed weapons in violation
of division (A) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. Except as otherwise provided in divisions (F)(2), (F)(6), and (F)(7)
of this section, if the offense is committed aboard an aircraft, or with
purpose to carry a concealed weapon aboard an aircraft, regardless of the
weapon involved, carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (A) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A person shall not be arrested for a violation of division (A)(2)
of this section solely because the person does not promptly produce a valid
concealed handgun license. If a person is arrested for a violation of division
(A)(2) of this section and is convicted of or pleads guilty to the violation,
the offender shall be punished as follows:
         (a)   The offender shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor if both of
the following apply:
            1.   Within 10 days after the arrest, the offender presents a
concealed handgun license, which license was valid at the time of the arrest to
the law enforcement agency that employs the arresting officer.
            2.   At the time of the arrest, the offender was not knowingly in a
place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
         (b)   The offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined
$500 if all of the following apply:
            1.   The offender previously had been issued a concealed handgun
license, and that license expired within the two years immediately preceding
the arrest.
            2.   Within 45 days after the arrest, the offender presents a
concealed handgun license to the law enforcement agency that employed the
arresting officer, and the offender waives in writing the offender’s right to a
speedy trial on the charge of the violation that is provided in R.C. § 2945.71.
            3.   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
not knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
         (c)   If divisions (F)(2)(a) and (F)(2)(b) and (F)(6) of this section
do not apply, the offender shall be punished under division (F)(1) or (F)(7) of
this section.
      (3)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (B)(1) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (4)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (B)(2) or (B)
(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(B)(2) or (B)(4) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. In
addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of division (B)(2) or (B)(4) of this section, the offender’s concealed handgun
license shall be suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2).
      (5)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (B)(3) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (6)   If a person being arrested for a violation of division (A)(2) of
this section is an active duty m ember of the armed forces of the United States
and is carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of
successful completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training
requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), and if at the time of the
violation the person was not knowingly in a place described in R.C. 2923.126
(B), the officer shall not arrest the person for a violation of that division.
If the person is not able to promptly produce a valid military identification
card and documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets
or exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1) and if
the person is not in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B), the officer shall
issue a citation and the offender shall be assessed a civil penalty of not more
than $500. The citation shall be automatically dismissed and the civil penalty
shall not be assessed if both of the following apply:
         (a)   Within ten days after the issuance of the citation, the offender
presents a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), which were both valid at the time of the
issuance of the citation to the law enforcement agency that employs the citing
officer.
         (b)   At the time of the citation, the offender was not knowingly in a
place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
      (7)   If a person being arrested for a violation of division (A)(2) of
this section is knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B)(5) and is
not authorized to carry a handgun or have a handgun concealed on the person’s
person or concealed ready at hand under that division, the penalty shall be as
follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person
produces a valid concealed handgun license within ten days after the arrest and
has not previously been convicted or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(A)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a minor misdemeanor;
         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (A)
(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
         (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of division
(A)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree;
         (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of
division (A)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, or convicted of or pleaded guilty to any offense of
violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for
which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is a
dangerous ordnance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (G)   If a law enforcement officer stops a person to question the person
regarding a possible violation of this section, for a traffic stop, or for any
other law enforcement purpose, if the person surrenders a firearm to the
officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the officer,
and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this section
or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise prohibited by
law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not contraband, the officer
shall return the firearm to the person at the termination of the stop. If a
court orders a law enforcement officer to return a firearm to a person pursuant
to the requirement set forth in this division, R.C. § 2923.163(B) applies.
   (H)   For purposes of this section, “deadly weapon” or “weapon” does not
include any knife, razor, or cutting instrument if the instrument was not used
as a weapon.
(R.C. § 2923.12)
Statutory reference:
   Carrying concealed handguns, licensing through county sheriff, see R.C. §§
2923.124 et seq.
   Concealed carry by a qualifying adult, see R.C. § 2923.111
   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance on school
premises, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.122
   Conveyance, possession, or control of deadly weapon or dangerous ordinance
in a courthouse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.123
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offense, see R.C.
§ 2923.131
   Possession of firearm in liquor permit premises, felony offense, see R.C. §
2923.121
§ 137.03 USING WEAPONS WHILE INTOXICATED.
   (A)   No person, while under the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse,
shall carry or use any firearm or dangerous ordnance.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using weapons while
intoxicated, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2923.15)
§ 137.04 IMPROPERLY HANDLING FIREARMS IN A MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly discharge a firearm while in or on a motor
vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded firearm in a
motor vehicle in such a manner that the firearm is accessible to the operator
or any passenger without leaving the vehicle.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a firearm in a motor
vehicle, unless the person may lawfully possess that firearm under applicable
law of this state or the United States, the firearm is unloaded, and the
firearm is carried in one of the following ways:
      (1)   In a closed package, box, or case.
      (2)   In a compartment that can be reached only by leaving the vehicle.
      (3)   In plain sight and secured in a rack or holder made for the
purpose.
      (4)   If the firearm is at least 24 inches in overall length as measured
from the muzzle to the part of the stock furthest from the muzzle and if the
barrel is at least 18 inches in length, either in plain sight with the action
open or the weapon stripped, or, if the firearm is of a type on which the
action will not stay open or which cannot easily be stripped, in plain sight.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded handgun in a
motor vehicle if, at the time of that transportation or possession, any of the
following applies:
      (1)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them.
      (2)   The person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine
contains a concentration of alcohol, a listed controlled substance, or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance prohibited for persons operating a
vehicle, as specified in R.C. § 4511.19(A), regardless of whether the person at
the time of the transportation or possession as described in this division is
the operator of or a passenger in the motor vehicle.
   (E)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license or who is an
active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is carrying a
valid military identification card and documentation of successful completion
of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements described
in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), who is the driver or an occupant of a motor vehicle
that is stopped as a result of a traffic stop or a stop for another law
enforcement purpose or is the driver or an occupant of a commercial motor
vehicle that is stopped by an employee of the motor carrier enforcement unit
for the purposes defined in R.C. § 5503.34, and who is transporting or has a
loaded handgun in the motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle in any manner,
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Before or at the time a law enforcement officer asks if the person
is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to disclose that the person
then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the motor vehicle, provided that it
is not a violation of this division if the person fails to disclose that fact
to an officer during the stop and the person already has notified another
officer of that fact during the same stop;
      (2)   Before or at the time an employee of the motor carrier enforcement
unit asks if the person is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to
disclose that the person then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the
commercial motor vehicle, provided that it is not a violation of this division
if the person fails to disclose that fact to an employee of the unit during the
stop and the person already has notified another employee of the unit of that
fact during the same stop;
      (3)   Knowingly fail to remain in the motor vehicle while stopped, or
knowingly fail to keep the person’s hands in plain sight at any time after any
law enforcement officer begins approaching the person while stopped and before
the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the failure is pursuant to and in
accordance with directions given by a law enforcement officer;
      (4)   Knowingly have contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with
the person’s hands or fingers in the motor vehicle at any time after the law
enforcement officer begins approaching and before the law enforcement officer
leaves, unless the person has contact with the loaded handgun pursuant to and
in accordance with directions given by the law enforcement officer.
      (5)   Knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any lawful order of any
law enforcement officer given while the motor vehicle is stopped, including but
not limited to a specific order to the person to keep the person’s hands in
plain sight.
   (F)   (1)   Divisions (A), (B), (C), and (E) of this section do not apply to
any of the following:
         (a)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or the
United States, or a law enforcement officer, when authorized to carry or have
loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles and acting within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s duties;
         (b)   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry or have loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles, and who is
subject to and in compliance with the requirements of R.C. § 109.801, unless
the appointing authority of the person has expressly specified that the
exemption provided in this division (F)(1)(b) does not apply to the person.
      (2)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to a person if all of
the following circumstances apply:
         (a)   The person discharges a firearm from a motor vehicle at a coyote
or groundhog, the discharge is not during the deer gun hunting season as set by
the Chief of the Division of Wildlife of the Department of Natural Resources,
and the discharge at the coyote or groundhog, but for the operation of this
section, is lawful.
         (b)   The motor vehicle from which the person discharges the firearm
is on real property that is located in an unincorporated area of a township and
that is either zoned for agriculture or is used for agriculture.
         (c)   The person owns the real property described in division (F)(2)
(b) of this section, is the spouse or a child of another person who owns that
real property, is a tenant of another person who owns that real property, or is
the spouse or a child of a tenant of another person who owns that real
property.
         (d)   The person does not discharge the firearm in any of the
following manners:
            1.   While under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
alcohol and a drug of abuse;
            2.   In the direction of a street, highway or other public or
private property used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking;
            3.   At or into an occupied structure that is a permanent or
temporary habitation;
            4.   In the commission of any violation of law, including but not
limited to a felony that includes, as an essential element, purposely or
knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death of or physical harm to
another and that was committed by discharging a firearm from a motor vehicle.
      (3)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to a person if all of
the following apply:
         (a)   The person possesses a valid all-purpose vehicle permit issued
under R.C. § 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife.
         (b)   The person discharges a firearm at a wild quadruped or game bird
as defined in R.C. § 1531.01 during the open hunting season for the applicable
wild quadruped or game bird.
         (c)   The person discharges a firearm from a stationary all-purpose
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 1531.01 from private or publicly owned lands or
from a motor vehicle that is parked on a road that is owned or administered by
the Division of Wildlife.
         (d)   The person does not discharge the firearm in any of the
following manners:
            1.   While under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
alcohol and a drug of abuse;
            2.   In the direction of a street, a highway, or other public or
private property that is used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking;
            3.   At or into an occupied structure that is a permanent or
temporary habitation;
            4.   In the commission of any violation of law, including but not
limited to a felony that includes, as an essential element, purposely or
knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death of or physical harm to
another and that was committed by discharging a firearm from a motor vehicle.
      (4)   Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to a person if
all of the following circumstances apply:
         (a)   At the time of the alleged violation of either of those
divisions, the person is the operator of or a passenger in a motor vehicle.
         (b)   The motor vehicle is on real property that is located in an
unincorporated area of a township and that is either zoned for agriculture or
is used for agriculture.
         (c)   The person owns the real property described in division (F)(4)
(b) of this section, is the spouse or a child of another person who owns that
real property, is a tenant of another person who owns that real property, or is
the spouse or a child of a tenant of another person who owns that real
property.
         (d)   The person, prior to arriving at the real property described in
division (F)(4)(b) of this section, did not transport or possess a firearm in
the motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by division (B) or (C) of this section
while the motor vehicle was being operated on a street, highway or other public
or private property used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking.
      (5)   Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to a person who
transports or possesses a handgun in a motor vehicle if, at the time of that
transportation or possession, both of the following apply:
         (a)   The person transporting or possessing the handgun has been
issued a concealed handgun license that is valid at the time in question or the
person is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         (b)   The person transporting or possessing the handgun is not
knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
      (6)   Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to a person if
all of the following apply:
         (a)   The person possesses a valid all-purpose vehicle permit issued
under R.C. § 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife.
         (b)   The person is on or in an all-purpose vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 1531.01 or a motor vehicle during the open hunting season for a wild
quadruped or game bird.
         (c)   The person is on or in an all-purpose vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 1531.01 on private or publicly owned lands or on or in a motor vehicle that
is parked on a road that is owned or administered by the Division of Wildlife.
   (G)   (1)   The affirmative defenses authorized in R.C. § 2923.12(D)(1) and
(D)(2) are affirmative defenses to a charge under division (B) or (C) of this
section that involves a firearm other than a handgun.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B) or (C)
of this section of improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle that the
actor transported or had the firearm in the motor vehicle for any lawful
purpose and while the motor vehicle was on the actor’s own property, provided
that this affirmative defense is not available unless the person, immediately
prior to arriving at the actor’s own property, did not transport or possess the
firearm in a motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by division (B) or (C) of
this section while the motor vehicle was being operated on a street, highway,
or other public or private property used by the public for vehicular traffic.
   (H)   (1)   No person who is charged with a violation of division (B), (C),
or (D) of this section shall be required to obtain a concealed handgun license
as a condition for the dismissal of the charge.
      (2)   (a)   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty
to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (E) of this section as it
existed prior to September 30, 2011, and the conduct that was the basis of the
violation no longer would be a violation of division (E) of this section on or
after September 30, 2011, or if a person is convicted of, was convicted of,
pleads guilty to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (E)(1) or
(E)(2) of this section as it existed prior to June 13, 2022, the person may
file an application under R.C. § 2953.35 requesting the expungement of the
record of conviction.
         (b)   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty to,
or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (B) or (C) of this section as
the division existed prior to September 30, 2011, and if the conduct that was
the basis of the violation no longer would be a violation of division (B) or
(C) of this section on or after September 30, 2011, due to the application of
division (F)(5) of this section as it exists on and after September 30, 2011,
the person may file an application under R.C. § 2953.35 requesting the
expungement of the record of conviction.
   (I)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of improperly handling
firearms in a motor vehicle. A violation of division (A) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division
(C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. A violation of
division (D) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law and, if the loaded handgun is concealed on the person’s person, it is
also a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of
division (E)(1) or (E)(2) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. A violation of division (E)(4) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division (E)(3) or (E)
(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(E)(3) or (E)(5) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. In
addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of division (E)(3) or (E)(5) of this section, the offender’s concealed handgun
license shall be suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2). A violation of
division (B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (J)   If a law enforcement officer stops a motor vehicle for a traffic stop
or any other purpose, if any person in the motor vehicle surrenders a firearm
to the officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the
officer, and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this
section or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise
prohibited by law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not
contraband, the officer shall return the firearm to the person at the
termination of the stop. If a court orders a law enforcement officer to return
a firearm to a person pursuant to the requirement set forth in this division,
R.C. § 2923.163(B) applies.
   (K)   As used in this section:
      AGRICULTURE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 519.01.
      COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4506.25(A).
      HIGHWAY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
      MOTOR CARRIER ENFORCEMENT UNIT. Means the Motor Carrier Enforcement Unit
in the Department of Public Safety, Division of State Highway Patrol, that is
created by R.C. § 5503.34.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
      OCCUPIED STRUCTURE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.01.
      STREET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
      TENANT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1531.01.
      UNLOADED.
         (a)   With respect to a firearm other than a firearm described in
division (d) of this definition, means that no ammunition is in the firearm in
question, no magazine or speed loader containing ammunition is inserted into
the firearm, and one of the following applies:
            1.   There is no ammunition in a magazine or speed loader that is
in the vehicle in question and that may be used with the firearm in question.
            2.   Any magazine or speed loader that contains ammunition and that
may be used with the firearm in question is stored in a compartment within the
vehicle in question that cannot be accessed without leaving the vehicle or is
stored in a container that provides complete and separate enclosure.
         (b)   For the purposes of division (a)2. of this definition, a
“container that provides complete and separate enclosure” includes, but is not
limited to, any of the following:
            1.   A package, box, or case with multiple compartments, as long as
the loaded magazine or speed loader and the firearm in question either are in
separate compartments within the package, box, or case, or, if they are in the
same compartment, the magazine or speed loader is contained within a separate
enclosure in that compartment that does not contain the firearm and that closes
using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop closing mechanism, or other
fastener that must be opened to access the contents or the firearm is contained
within a separate enclosure of that nature in that compartment that does not
contain the magazine or speed loader;
            2.   A pocket or other enclosure on the person of the person in
question that closes using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop
closing mechanism, or other fastener that must be opened to access the
contents.
         (c)   For the purposes of divisions (a) and (b) of this definition,
ammunition held in stripper-clips or in en-bloc clips is not considered
ammunition that is loaded into a magazine or speed loader.
         (d)   “Unloaded” means, with respect to a firearm employing a
percussion cap, flintlock, or other obsolete ignition system, when the weapon
is uncapped or when the priming charge is removed from the pan.
   (L)   Divisions (a) and (b) of the definition of “unloaded” in division (K)
of this section do not affect the authority of a person who has been issued a
concealed handgun license that is valid at the time in question to have one or
more magazines or speed loaders containing ammunition anywhere in a vehicle,
without being transported as described in those divisions, as long as no
ammunition is in a firearm, other than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as
permitted under any other provision of this chapter. A person who has been
issued a concealed handgun license that is valid at the time in question may
have one or more magazines or speed loaders containing ammunition anywhere in a
vehicle without further restriction, as long as no ammunition is in a firearm,
other than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as permitted under any
provision of this chapter.
(R.C. § 2923.16)
Statutory reference:
   Return of surrendered firearms by law enforcement, see R.C. § 2923.163
§ 137.05 POSSESSING CRIMINAL TOOLS.
   (A)   No person shall possess or have under his or her control any
substance, device, instrument, or article, with purpose to use it criminally.
   (B)   Each of the following constitutes prima facie evidence of criminal
purpose:
      (1)   Possession or control of any dangerous ordnance, or the materials
or parts for making a dangerous ordnance, in the absence of circumstances
indicating the dangerous ordnance, materials or parts are intended for a
legitimate use.
      (2)   Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument, or
article designed or specially adapted for criminal use.
      (3)   Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument, or
article commonly used for criminal purposes, under circumstances indicating the
item is intended for criminal use.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing criminal tools.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, possessing criminal tools is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the circumstances indicate that the
substance, device, instrument, or article involved in the offense was intended
for use in the commission of a felony, possessing criminal tools is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2923.24)
§ 137.06 FAILURE TO SECURE DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
   (A)   No person, in acquiring, possessing, carrying, or using any dangerous
ordnance, shall negligently fail to take proper precautions:
      (1)   To secure the dangerous ordnance against theft, or against its
acquisition or use by any unauthorized or incompetent person.
      (2)   To insure the safety of persons and property.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to a secure
dangerous ordnance, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 2923.19)
§ 137.07 UNLAWFUL TRANSACTIONS IN WEAPONS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Recklessly sell, lend, give or furnish any firearm to any person
prohibited by R.C. § 2923.13 or 2923.15, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, from acquiring or using any firearm, or recklessly sell,
lend, give or furnish any dangerous ordnance to any person prohibited by R.C. §
2923.13, 2923.15 or 2923.17, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
from acquiring or using any dangerous ordnance;
      (2)   Possess any firearm or dangerous ordnance with purpose to dispose
of it in violation of division (A)(1) of this section;
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this section,
knowingly solicit, persuade, encourage, or entice a federally licensed firearms
dealer or private seller to transfer a firearm or ammunition to any person in a
manner prohibited by state or federal law;
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this section, with
an intent to deceive, knowingly provide materially false information to a
federally licensed firearms dealer or private seller;
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this section,
knowingly procure, solicit, persuade, encourage, or entice a person to act in
violation of division (A)(3) or (A)(4) of this section;
      (6)   When transferring any dangerous ordnance to another, negligently
fail to require the transferee to exhibit such identification, license, or
permit showing the transferee to be authorized to acquire dangerous ordnance
pursuant to R.C. § 2923.17, or negligently fail to take a complete record of
the transaction and forthwith forward a copy of the record to the sheriff of
the county or Safety Director or Police Chief of the municipality where the
transaction takes place;
      (7)   Knowingly fail to report to law enforcement authorities forthwith
the loss or theft of any firearm or dangerous ordnance in the person’s
possession and under his or her control.
   (B)   Divisions (A)(3), (A)(4), and (A)(5) of this section do not apply to
any of the following:
      (1)   A law enforcement officer who is acting within the scope of the
officer’s duties;
      (2)   A person who is acting in accordance with directions given by a law
enforcement officer described in division (B)(1) of this section.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful transactions in
weapons. A violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A
violation of division (A)(6) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. A violation of division (A)(7) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
   (D)   As used in this section:
      AMMUNITION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.401.
      FEDERALLY LICENSED FIREARMS DEALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5502.63.
      MATERIALLY FALSE INFORMATION. Means information regarding the transfer of
a firearm or ammunition that portrays an illegal transaction as legal or a
legal transaction as illegal.
      PRIVATE SELLER. Means a person who sells, offers for sale, or transfers a
firearm or ammunition and who is not a federally licensed firearms dealer.
(R.C. § 2923.20)
§ 137.08 UNDERAGE PURCHASE OF FIREARM OR HANDGUN.
   (A)   No person under 18 years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase
a firearm.
   (B)   No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase
a handgun; provided, that this division does not apply to the purchase or
attempted purchase of a handgun by a person 18 years of age or older and under
21 years of age if either of the following applies:
      (1)   The person is a law enforcement officer and has received firearms
training approved by the Ohio Peace Officer Training Council or equivalent
firearms training.
      (2)   The person is an active or reserve member of the armed services of
the United States or the Ohio National Guard, or was honorably discharged from
military service in the active or reserve armed services of the United States
or the Ohio National Guard, and the person has received firearms training from
the armed services or the national guard or equivalent firearms training.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of underage
purchase of a firearm, a delinquent act that would be a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law if it could be committed by an adult. Whoever
violates division (B) of this section is guilty of underage purchase of a
handgun, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 2923.211)
Statutory reference:
   Improperly furnishing firearms to a minor, felony, see R.C. § 2923.21
§ 137.09 POINTING AND DISCHARGING FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS.
   (A)   Discharge of firearms on or near prohibited premises. No person shall
do any of the following:
      (1)   Without permission from the proper officials and subject to
division (B)(1) of this section, discharge a firearm upon or over a cemetery or
within 100 yards of a cemetery;
      (2)   Subject to division (B)(2) of this section, discharge of a firearm
on a lawn, park, pleasure ground, orchard, or other ground appurtenant to a
schoolhouse, church, or inhabited dwelling, the property of another, or a
charitable institution;
      (3)   Discharge a firearm upon or over a public road or highway.
   (B)   Application of division (A).
      (1)   Division (A)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
while on the person’s own land, discharges a firearm.
      (2)   Division (A)(2) of this section does not apply to a person who owns
any type of property described in that division and who, while on the person’s
own enclosure, discharges a firearm.
   (C)   Penalty for violation of division (A). Whoever violates division (A)
of this section is guilty of discharge of a firearm on or near prohibited
premises. A violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. A violation of division (A)(3) shall be
punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2) of this section, a
violation of division (A)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (2)   If the violation created a substantial risk of physical harm to any
person, caused serious physical harm to property, caused physical harm to any
person, or caused serious physical harm to any person, a violation of division
(A)(3) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2923.162)
   (D)   Hunting near township park.
      (1)   No person shall hunt, shoot, or kill game within one-half mile of a
township park unless the Board of Township Park Commissioners has granted
permission to kill game not desired within the limits prohibited by this
division.
(R.C. § 3773.06)
      (2)   Whoever violates division (D)(1) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 3773.99(A))
   (E)   Unlawful discharge. No person shall discharge any BB gun, air gun, or
firearm, or make use of any sling, bow and arrow, or crossbow, within the
corporate limits of the municipality.
   (F)   Unlawful pointing or aiming. No person shall, intentionally and
without malice, point or aim any BB gun, air gun, or firearm, or any sling, bow
and arrow, or crossbow at or toward another.
   (G)   Penalty for violations of division (E) or (F). Whoever violates
division (E) or (F) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
   (H)   Exceptions. This section shall not prohibit the firing of a military
salute or the firing of weapons by persons of the nation’s armed forces acting
under military authority, and shall not apply to law enforcement officials or
other government officials in the proper enforcement of the law, or to any
person in the proper exercise of the right of self defense, or to any person
otherwise lawfully permitted by proper federal, state or local authorities to
discharge a BB gun, air gun, or firearm, or to use a sling, bow and arrow, or
crossbow in a manner contrary to the provisions of this section. Division (E)
of this section does not extend to cases in which BB guns, air guns, or
firearms, or slings, bows and arrows, or crossbows are used in the confines of
structures or used within the confines of a person’s own property, provided
such use is under adult supervision and is approved by the municipality.
Statutory reference:
   Improperly discharging firearm at or into habitation or school safety zone,
felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.161
§ 137.10 LICENSE OR PERMIT TO POSSESS DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
   (A)   Upon application to the sheriff of the county or Safety Director or
Police Chief of the municipality where the applicant resides or has the
applicant’s principal place of business, and upon payment of the fee specified
in division (B) of this section, a license or temporary permit shall be issued
to qualified applicants to acquire, possess, carry or use a dangerous ordnance
for the following purposes:
      (1)   Contractors, wreckers, quarriers, mine operators and other persons
regularly employing explosives in the course of a legitimate business, with
respect to explosives and explosive devices acquired, possessed, carried or
used in the course of such business.
      (2)   Farmers, with respect to explosives and explosive devices acquired,
possessed, carried or used for agricultural purposes on lands farmed by them.
      (3)   Scientists, engineers, and instructors, with respect to a dangerous
ordnance acquired, possessed, carried or used in the course of bona fide
research or instruction.
      (4)   Financial institutions and armored car company guards, with respect
to automatic firearms lawfully acquired, possessed, carried or used by any such
person while acting within the scope of the person’s duties.
      (5)   In the discretion of the issuing authority, any responsible person,
with respect to a dangerous ordnance lawfully acquired, possessed, carried or
used for a legitimate research, scientific, educational, industrial or other
proper purpose.
   (B)   Application for a license or temporary permit under this section shall
be in writing under oath to the sheriff of the county or Safety Director or
Police Chief of the municipality where the applicant resides or has the
applicant’s principal place of business. The application shall be accompanied
by an application fee of $50 when the application is for a license, and an
application fee of $5 when the application is for a temporary permit. The fees
shall be paid into the General Revenue Fund of the county or municipality. The
application shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name, age, address, occupation and business address of the
applicant, if the applicant is a natural person, or the name, address, and
principal place of business of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation.
      (2)   A description of the dangerous ordnance for which a permit is
requested.
      (3)   A description of the places where and the manner in which the
dangerous ordnance is to be kept, carried, and used.
      (4)   A statement of the purposes for which the dangerous ordnance is to
be acquired, possessed, carried or used.
      (5)   Such other information as the issuing authority may require in
giving effect to this section.
   (C)   Upon investigation, the issuing authority shall issue a license or
temporary permit only if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The applicant is not otherwise prohibited by law from acquiring,
having, carrying or using a dangerous ordnance.
      (2)   The applicant is 21 years of age or over, if the applicant is a
natural person.
      (3)   It appears that the applicant has sufficient competence to safely
acquire, possess, carry or use the dangerous ordnance, and that proper
precautions will be taken to protect the security of the dangerous ordnance and
ensure the safety of persons and property.
      (4)   It appears that the dangerous ordnance will be lawfully acquired,
possessed, carried and used by the applicant for a legitimate purpose.
   (D)   The license or temporary permit shall identify the person to whom it
is issued, identify the dangerous ordnance involved and state the purposes for
which the license or temporary permit is issued, state the expiration date, if
any, and list such restrictions on the acquisition, possession, carriage, or
use of the dangerous ordnance as the issuing authority considers advisable to
protect the security of the dangerous ordnance and ensure the safety of persons
and property.
   (E)   A temporary permit shall be issued for the casual use of explosives
and explosive devices, and other consumable dangerous ordnance, and shall
expire within 30 days of its issuance. A license shall be issued for the
regular use of consumable dangerous ordnance, or for any non-consumable
dangerous ordnance, which license need not specify an expiration date, but the
issuing authority may specify such expiration date, not earlier than one year
from the date of issuance, as it considers advisable in view of the nature of
the dangerous ordnance and the purposes for which the license is issued.
   (F)   The dangerous ordnance specified in a license or temporary permit may
be obtained by the holder anywhere in the state. Pursuant to R.C. § 2923.18(F),
the holder of a license may use such dangerous ordnance anywhere in the state.
The holder of a temporary permit may use such dangerous ordnance only within
the territorial jurisdiction of the issuing authority.
   (G)   The issuing authority shall forward to the State Fire Marshal a copy
of each license or temporary permit issued pursuant to this section, and a copy
of each record of a transaction in a dangerous ordnance and of each report of a
lost or stolen dangerous ordnance, given to the local law enforcement authority
as required by R.C. § 2923.20(A)(6) and (A)(7) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance. The State Fire Marshal will keep a permanent file of all
licenses and temporary permits issued pursuant to this section, and of all
records of transactions in, and losses or thefts of a dangerous ordnance
forwarded by local law enforcement authorities pursuant to this section.
(R.C. § 2923.18)
§ 137.11 POSSESSION OF AN OBJECT INDISTINGUISHABLE FROM A FIREARM IN A SCHOOL
SAFETY ZONE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly possess an object in a school safety zone if
both of the following apply:
      (1)   The object is indistinguishable from a firearm, whether or not the
object is capable of being fired.
      (2)   The person indicates that the person possesses the object and that
it is a firearm, or the person knowingly displays or brandishes the object and
indicates that it is a firearm.
   (B)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or the
United States who is authorized to carry deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance
and is acting within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s duties;
         (b)   A law enforcement officer who is authorized to carry deadly
weapons or dangerous ordnance;
         (c)   A security officer employed by a board of education or governing
body of a school during the time that the security officer is on duty pursuant
to that contract of employment;
         (d)   1.   Any person not described in divisions (B)(1)(a) to (B)(1)
(c) of this section who has written authorization from the board of education
or governing body of a school to convey deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance
into a school safety zone or to possess a deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance
in a school safety zone and who conveys or possesses the deadly weapon or
dangerous ordnance in accordance with that authorization, provided both of the
following apply:
               a.   Either the person has successfully completed the
curriculum, instruction, and training established under R.C. § 5502.703, or the
person has received a certificate of having satisfactorily completed an
approved basic peace officer training program or is a law enforcement officer;
               b.   The board or governing body has notified the public, by
whatever means the affected school regularly communicates with the public, that
the board or governing body has authorized one or more persons to go armed
within a school operated by the board or governing authority.
            2.   A district board or school governing body that authorizes a
person under division (B)(1)(d) of this section shall require that person to
submit to an annual criminal records check conducted in the same manner as R.C.
§ 3319.39 or R.C. § 3319.391.
         (e)   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance, and who is subject to and in
compliance with the requirements of R.C. § 109.801, unless the appointing
authority of the person has expressly specified that the exemption provided in
division (B)(1)(e) of this section does not apply to the person.
      (2)   This section does not apply to premises upon which home schooling
is conducted. This section also does not apply to a school administrator,
teacher or employee who possesses an object that is indistinguishable from a
firearm for legitimate school purposes during the course of employment, a
student who uses an object that is indistinguishable from a firearm under the
direction of a school administrator, teacher or employee, or any other person
who, with the express prior approval of a school administrator, possesses an
object that is indistinguishable from a firearm for a legitimate purpose,
including the use of the object in a ceremonial activity, a play, re-enactment
or other dramatic presentation, school safety training, or a ROTC activity or
another similar use of the object.
      (3)   This section does not apply to a person who conveys or attempts to
convey a handgun into, or possesses a handgun in, a school safety zone if, at
the time of that conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession of the
handgun, all of the following apply:
         (a)   The person does not enter into a school building or onto school
premises and is not at a school activity.
         (b)   The person has been issued a concealed handgun license that is
valid at the time of the conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession or the
person is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         (c)   The person is in the school safety zone in accordance with 18
U.S.C. § 922(q)(2)(B).
         (d)   The person is not knowingly in a place described in R.C. §
2923.126(B)(1) or (B)(3) through (B)(8).
      (4)   This section does not apply to a person who conveys or attempts to
convey a handgun into, or possesses a handgun in, a school safety zone if at
the time of that conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession of the handgun
all of the following apply:
         (a)   The person has been issued a concealed handgun license that is
valid at the time of the conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession or the
person is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         (b)   The person leaves the handgun in a motor vehicle.
         (c)   The handgun does not leave the motor vehicle.
         (d)   If the person exits the motor vehicle, the person locks the
motor vehicle.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal possession of an
object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, illegal possession of an object
indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of this section, illegal possession of an object indistinguishable from a
firearm in a school safety zone is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (D)   (1)   In addition to any other penalty imposed upon a person who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section, and subject to
division (D)(2) of this section, if the offender has not attained 19 years of
age, regardless of whether the offender is attending or is enrolled in a school
operated by a board of education or for which the Director of Education and
Workforce prescribes minimum standards under R.C. § 3301.07, the court shall
impose upon the offender a class four suspension of the offender’s probationary
driver’s license, restricted license, driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, or probationary commercial driver’s
license that then is in effect from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4)
and shall deny the offender the issuance of any permit or license of that type
during the period of the suspension. If the offender is not a resident of this
state, the court shall impose a class four suspension of the nonresident
operating privilege of the offender from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02
(A)(4).
      (2)   If the offender shows good cause why the court should not suspend
one of the types of licenses, permits or privileges specified in division (D)
(1) of this section or deny the issuance of one of the temporary instruction
permits specified in division (D)(1) of this section, the court in its
discretion may choose not to impose the suspension, revocation or denial
required in division (D)(1) of this section, but the court, in its discretion,
instead may require the offender to perform community service for a number of
hours determined by the court.
   (E)   As used in this section, OBJECT THAT IS INDISTINGUISHABLE FROM A
FIREARM means an object made, constructed or altered so that, to a reasonable
person without specialized training in firearms, the object appears to be a
firearm.
(R.C. § 2923.122(C) - (G))
Statutory reference:
   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance in a school
safety zone, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.122(A) and (B)
§ 137.12 POSSESSION OF DEADLY WEAPON WHILE UNDER DETENTION.
   (A)   As used in this section, DETENTION and DETENTION FACILITY have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 2921.01.
   (B)   No person under detention at a detention facility shall possess a
deadly weapon.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possession of a deadly
weapon while under detention.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2) of this section,
possession of a deadly weapon while under detention is a felony to be
prosecuted under state law.
      (2)   If the offender, at the time of the commission of the offense, was
under detention as an alleged or adjudicated delinquent child or unruly child
and if at the time the offender commits the act for which the offender was
under detention it would not be a felony if committed by an adult, possession
of a deadly weapon while under detention is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2923.131)
Statutory reference:
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offenses, see R.C.
§ 2923.131
§ 137.13 CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSES: POSSESSION OF A REVOKED OR SUSPENDED
LICENSE; ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS; POSTING OF SIGNS PROHIBITING POSSESSION.
   (A)   Possession of a revoked or suspended concealed handgun license.
      (1)   No person, except in the performance of official duties, shall
possess a concealed handgun license that was issued and that has been revoked
or suspended.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (A) is guilty of possessing a
revoked or suspended concealed handgun license, a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 2923.1211(B), (C))
   (B)   Additional restrictions. Pursuant to R.C. § 2923.126:
      (1)   A concealed handgun license that is issued under R.C. § 2923.125
shall expire five years after the date of issuance. A licensee who has been
issued a license under that section shall be granted a grace period of 30 days
after the licensee’s license expires during which the licensee’s license
remains valid. Except as provided in divisions (B)(2) and (B)(3) of this
section, a licensee who has been issued a concealed handgun license under R.C.
§ 2923.125 or 2923.1213 may carry a concealed handgun anywhere in this state if
the license is valid when the licensee is in actual possession of a concealed
handgun. The licensee shall give notice of any change in the licensee’s
residence address to the sheriff who issued the license within 45 days after
that change.
      (2)   A valid concealed handgun license does not authorize the licensee
to carry a concealed handgun in any manner prohibited under R.C. § 2923.12(B)
or in any manner prohibited under R.C. § 2923.16. A valid license does not
authorize the licensee to carry a concealed handgun into any of the following
places:
         (a)   A police station, sheriff’s office, or state highway patrol
station, premises controlled by the bureau of criminal identification and
investigation; a state correctional institution, jail, workhouse, or other
detention facility; any area of an airport passenger terminal that is beyond a
passenger or property screening checkpoint or to which access is restricted
through security measures by the airport authority or a public agency; or an
institution that is maintained, operated, managed, and governed pursuant to
R.C. § 5119.14(A) or R.C. § 5123.03(A)(1);
         (b)   A school safety zone if the licensee’s carrying the concealed
handgun is in violation of R.C. § 2923.122;
         (c)   A courthouse or another building or structure in which a
courtroom is located if the licensee’s carrying the concealed handgun is in
violation of R.C. § 2923.123;
         (d)   Any premises or open air arena for which a D permit has been
issued under R.C. Chapter 4303 if the licensee’s carrying the concealed handgun
is in violation of R.C. § 2923.121;
         (e)   Any premises owned or leased by any public or private college,
university, or other institution of higher education, unless the handgun is in
a locked motor vehicle or the licensee is in the immediate process of placing
the handgun in a locked motor vehicle or unless the licensee is carrying the
concealed handgun pursuant to a written policy, rule, or other authorization
that is adopted by the institution’s board of trustees or other governing body
and that authorizes specific individuals or classes of individuals to carry a
concealed handgun on the premises;
         (f)   Any church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of worship, unless
the church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of worship posts or permits
otherwise;
         (g)   Any building that is a government facility of this state or a
political subdivision of this state and that is not a building that is used
primarily as a shelter, restroom, parking facility for motor vehicles, or rest
facility and is not a courthouse or other building or structure in which a
courtroom is located that is subject to division (B)(2)(c) of this section,
unless the governing body with authority over the building has enacted a
statute, ordinance, or policy that permits a licensee to carry a concealed
handgun into the building;
         (h)   A place in which federal law prohibits the carrying of handguns.
      (3)   (a)   Nothing in this division (B) shall negate or restrict a rule,
policy, or practice of a private employer that is not a private college,
university, or other institution of higher education concerning or prohibiting
the presence of firearms on the private employer’s premises or property,
including motor vehicles owned by the private employer. Nothing in this
division (B) shall require a private employer of that nature to adopt a rule,
policy, or practice concerning or prohibiting the presence of firearms on the
private employer’s premises or property, including motor vehicles owned by the
private employer.
         (b)   1.   A private employer shall be immune from liability in a
civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that
allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto the
premises or property of the private employer, including motor vehicles owned by
the private employer, unless the private employer acted with malicious purpose.
A private employer is immune from liability in a civil action for any injury,
death, or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by or related to
the private employer’s decision to permit a licensee to bring, or prohibit a
licensee from bringing, a handgun onto the premises or property of the private
employer.
            2.   A political subdivision shall be immune from liability in a
civil action, to the extent and in the manner provided in R.C. Chapter 2744,
for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused
by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto any premises or property
owned, leased, or otherwise under the control of the political subdivision. As
used in this division, POLITICAL SUBDIVISION has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2744.01.
            3.    An institution of higher education shall be immune from
liability in a civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or
property that allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a
handgun onto the premises of the institution, including motor vehicles owned by
the institution, unless the institution acted with malicious purpose. An
institution of higher education is immune from liability in a civil action for
any injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by
or related to the institution’s decision to permit a licensee or class of
licensees to bring a handgun onto the premises of the institution.
            4.   A nonprofit corporation shall be immune from liability in a
civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that
allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto the
premises of the nonprofit corporation, including any motor vehicle owned by the
nonprofit corporation, or to any event organized by the nonprofit corporation,
unless the nonprofit corporation acted with malicious purpose. A nonprofit
corporation is immune from liability in a civil action for any injury, death,
or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by or related to the
nonprofit corporation’s decision to permit a licensee to bring a handgun onto
the premises of the nonprofit corporation or to any event organized by the
nonprofit corporation.
         (c)   1.   a.   Except as provided in division (B)(3)(c)2. of this
section and R.C. § 2923.1214, the owner or person in control of private land or
premises, and a private person or entity leasing land or premises owned by the
state, the United States, or a political subdivision of the state or the United
States, may post a sign in a conspicuous location on that land or on those
premises prohibiting persons from carrying firearms or concealed firearms on or
onto that land or those premises. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, a person who knowingly violates a posted prohibition of that nature
is guilty of criminal trespass in violation of R.C. § 2911.21(A)(4) and is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If a person knowingly violates a
posted prohibition of that nature and the posted land or premises primarily was
a parking lot or other parking facility, the person is not guilty of criminal
trespass under R.C. § 2911.21 or under any other criminal law of this state or
criminal law, ordinance, or resolution of a political subdivision of this
state, and instead is subject only to a civil cause of action for trespass
based on the violation.
               b.   If a person knowingly violates a posted prohibition of the
nature described in this division and the posted land or premises is a child
care center, type A family child care home, or type B family child care home,
unless the person is a licensee who resides in a type A family child care home
or type B family child care home, the person is guilty of aggravated trespass
in violation of R.C. § 2911.211. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the person
previously has been convicted of a violation of this division or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any offense of
violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for
which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is
dangerous ordnance, the offender is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
            2.   A landlord may not prohibit or restrict a tenant who is a
licensee and who on or after September 9, 2008 enters into a rental agreement
with the landlord for the use of residential premises, and the tenant’s guest
while the tenant is present, from lawfully carrying or possessing a handgun on
those residential premises.
            3.   As used in division (B)(3)(c) of this section:
               LANDLORD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5321.01.
               RENTAL AGREEMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5321.01.
               RESIDENTIAL PREMISES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5321.01,
except the term does not include a dwelling unit that is owned or operated by a
college or university.
               TENANT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5321.01.
      (4)   A person who holds a valid concealed handgun license issued by
another state that is recognized by the Attorney General pursuant to a
reciprocity agreement entered into pursuant to R.C. § 109.69 or a person who
holds a valid concealed handgun license under the circumstances described in
R.C. § 109.69(B) has the same right to carry a concealed handgun in this state
as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license under R.C. § 2923.125
and is subject to the same restrictions that apply to a person who has been
issued a license under that section that is valid at the time in question.
      (5)   (a)   A peace officer has the same right to carry a concealed
handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license
under R.C. § 2923.125, provided that the officer when carrying a concealed
handgun under authority of this division is carrying validating identification.
For purposes of reciprocity with other states, a peace officer shall be
considered to be a licensee in this state.
         (b)   An active duty member of the armed forces of the United States
who is carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of
successful completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training
requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1) has the same right to carry a
concealed handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun
license under R.C. § 2923.125 and is subject to the same restrictions as
specified in this division (B).
         (c)   A tactical medical professional who is qualified to carry
firearms while on duty under R.C. § 109.771 has the same right to carry a
concealed handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun
license under R.C. § 2923.125.
         (d)   A fire investigator who is qualified to carry firearms while on
duty under R.C. § 109.774 has the same right to carry a concealed handgun in
this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license under R.C. §
2923.125.
      (6)   (a)   A qualified retired peace officer who possesses a retired
peace officer identification card issued pursuant to division (B)(6)(b) of this
section and a valid firearms requalification certification issued pursuant to
division (B)(6)(c) of this section has the same right to carry a concealed
handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license
under R.C. § 2923.125 and is subject to the same restrictions that apply to a
person who has been issued a license issued under that section that is valid at
the time in question. For purposes of reciprocity with other states, a
qualified retired peace officer who possesses a retired peace officer
identification card issued pursuant to division (B)(6)(b) of this section and a
valid firearms requalification certification issued pursuant to division (B)(6)
(c) of this section shall be considered to be a licensee in this state.
         (b)   1.   Each public agency of this state or of a political
subdivision of this state that is served by one or more peace officers shall
issue a retired peace officer identification card to any person who retired
from service as a peace officer with that agency, if the issuance is in
accordance with the agency’s policies and procedures and if the person, with
respect to the person’s service with that agency, satisfies all of the
following:
               a.   The person retired in good standing from service as a peace
officer with the public agency, and the retirement was not for reasons of
mental instability.
               b.   Before retiring from service as a peace officer with that
agency, the person was authorized to engage in or supervise the prevention,
detection, investigation, or prosecution of, or the incarceration of any person
for, any violation of law and the person had statutory powers of arrest.
               c.   At the time of the person’s retirement as a peace officer
with that agency, the person was trained and qualified to carry firearms in the
performance of the peace officer’s duties.
               d.   Before retiring from service as a peace officer with that
agency, the person was regularly employed as a peace officer for an aggregate
of 15 years or more, or, in the alternative, the person retired from service as
a peace officer with that agency, after completing any applicable probationary
period of that service, due to a service-connected disability, as determined by
the agency.
            2.   A retired peace officer identification card issued to a person
under division (B)(6)(b)1. of this section shall identify the person by name,
contain a photograph of the person, identify the public agency of this state or
of the political subdivision of this state from which the person retired as a
peace officer and that is issuing the identification card, and specify that the
person retired in good standing from service as a peace officer with the
issuing public agency and satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (B)(6)
(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(B)1.d. of this section. In addition to the required content
specified in this division, a retired peace officer identification card issued
to a person under division (B)(6)(b)1. of this section may include the firearms
requalification certification described in division (B)(6)(c) of this section,
and if the identification card includes that certification, the identification
card shall serve as the firearms requalification certification for the retired
peace officer. If the issuing public agency issues credentials to active law
enforcement officers who serve the agency, the agency may comply with division
(B)(6)(b)1. of this section by issuing the same credentials to persons who
retired from service as a peace officer with the agency and who satisfy the
criteria set forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. of this section,
provided that the credentials so issued to retired peace officers are stamped
with the word “RETIRED”.
            3.   A public agency of this state or of a political subdivision of
this state may charge persons who retired from service as a peace officer with
the agency a reasonable fee for issuing to the person a retired peace officer
identification card pursuant to division (B)(6)(b)1. of this section.
         (c)   1.   If a person retired from service as a peace officer with a
public agency of this state or of a political subdivision of this state and the
person satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)
(b)1.d. of this section, the public agency may provide the retired peace
officer with the opportunity to attend a firearms requalification program that
is approved for purposes of firearms requalification required under R.C. §
109.801. The retired peace officer may be required to pay the cost of the
course.
            2.   If a retired peace officer who satisfies the criteria set
forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. of this section attends a
firearms requalification program that is approved for purposes of firearms
requalification required under R.C. § 109.801, the retired peace officer’s
successful completion of the firearms requalification program requalifies the
retired peace officer for purposes of division (B)(6) of this section for five
years from the date on which the program was successfully completed, and the
requalification is valid during that five-year period. If a retired peace
officer who satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)
(6)(b)1.d. of this section satisfactorily completes such a firearms
requalification program, the retired peace officer shall be issued a firearms
requalification certification that identifies the retired peace officer by
name, identifies the entity that taught the program, specifies that the retired
peace officer successfully completed the program, specifies the date on which
the course was successfully completed, and specifies that the requalification
is valid for five years from that date of successful completion. The firearms
requalification certification for a retired peace officer may be included in
the retired peace officer identification card issued to the retired peace
officer under division (B)(6)(b) of this section.
            3.   A retired peace officer who attends a firearms requalification
program that is approved for purposes of firearms requalification required
under R.C. § 109.801 may be required to pay the cost of the program.
      (7)   As used in division (B) of this section:
         FIRE INVESTIGATOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 109.71.
         GOVERNING BODY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 154.01.
         GOVERNMENT FACILITY OF THIS STATE OR A POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OF THIS
STATE. Means any of the following:
            1.   A building or part of a building that is owned or leased by
the government of this state or a political subdivision of this state and where
employees of the government of this state or the political subdivision
regularly are present for the purpose of performing their official duties as
employees of the state or political subdivision;
            2.   The office of a deputy registrar serving pursuant to R.C.
Chapter 4503 that is used to perform deputy registrar functions.
         NONPROFIT CORPORATION. Means any private organization that is exempt
from federal income taxation pursuant to subsection 501(a) and described in
subsection 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         QUALIFIED RETIRED PEACE OFFICER. Means a person who satisfies all of
the following:
            1.   The person satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (B)
(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. of this section.
            2.   The person is not under the influence of alcohol or another
intoxicating or hallucinatory drug or substance.
            3.   The person is not prohibited by federal law from receiving
firearms.
         RETIRED PEACE OFFICER IDENTIFICATION CARD. Means an identification
card that is issued pursuant to division (B)(6)(b) of this section to a person
who is a retired peace officer.
         TACTICAL MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
109.71.
         VALIDATING IDENTIFICATION. Means photographic identification issued by
the agency for which an individual serves as a peace officer that identifies
the individual as a peace officer of the agency.
(R.C. § 2923.126)
   (C)   Posting of signs prohibiting possession. Each person, board, or entity
that owns or controls any place or premises identified in R.C. § 2923.126(B) as
a place into which a valid license does not authorize the licensee to carry a
concealed handgun, or a designee of such a person, board, or entity, shall post
in the following one or more conspicuous locations in the premises a sign that
contains a statement in substantially the following form: “Unless otherwise
authorized by law, pursuant to the Ohio Revised Code, no person shall knowingly
possess, have under the person’s control, convey, or attempt to convey a deadly
weapon or dangerous ordnance onto these premises.”
(R.C. § 2923.1212)
§ 137.14 DEFACED FIREARMS.
   (A)   No person shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Change, alter, remove, or obliterate the name of the manufacturer,
model, manufacturer’s serial number, or other mark of identification on a
firearm.
      (2)   Possess a firearm knowing or having reasonable cause to believe
that the name of the manufacturer, model, manufacturer’s serial number, or
other mark of identification on the firearm has been changed, altered, removed,
or obliterated.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) of this section is guilty of
defacing identification marks of a firearm. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, defacing identification marks of a firearm is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (A)(1) of this section, defacing
identification marks of a firearm is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of
possessing a defaced firearm. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
possessing a defaced firearm is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
division (A)(2) of this section, possessing a defaced firearm is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (C)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any firearm on which no
manufacturer’s serial number was inscribed at the time of its manufacture.
(R.C. § 2923.201)
CHAPTER 138: DRUG OFFENSES
Section
   
138.01   Definitions
   
138.02   Adult use cannabis control; limitations on conduct by individuals
   
138.03   Drug possession offenses
   
138.04   Possessing drug abuse instruments
   
138.05   Permitting drug abuse
   
138.06   Illegal cultivation of marihuana
   
138.07   Abusing harmful intoxicants
   
138.08   Illegal dispensing of drug samples
   
138.09   Federal prosecution bar to municipal prosecution
   
138.10   Nitrous oxide: improper dispensing or distribution; possession in a
motor vehicle
   
138.11   Laboratory report required
   
138.12   Counterfeit controlled substances
   
138.13   Use, possession, or sale of drug paraphernalia
   
138.14   Controlled substance or prescription labels
   
138.15   Possession, sale and disposal of hypodermics
   
138.16   Controlled substance schedules
   
138.17   Unlawful furnishing of prescription to enable persons to be issued
handicapped parking placards or license plates
   
138.18   Sale of pseudoephedrine
   
138.19   Sale of pure caffeine product
   
138.20   Sale of dextromethorphan
Statutory reference:
   Administration of epinephrine, exemption from prosecution, see R.C. §
2925.64
   Controlled substances, regulation of pharmacists and other professionals,
see R.C. Chapters 3719 and 4729
   Conviction of professionally licensed persons to be reported to licensing
board, see R.C. § 2925.38
   Criminal and civil forfeiture of property for felony drug abuse offenses,
see R.C. Chapter 2981
   Destruction of chemicals used to produce methamphetamine; preservation of
samples, see R.C. § 2925.52
   Tampering with drugs, felony offense, see R.C. § 2925.24
§ 138.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words,
terms and phrases and their derivatives used in this chapter which are not
defined in this section shall have the meanings given to them in the Ohio
Revised Code.
   ADMINISTER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   ADULTERATE. To cause a drug to be adulterated as described in R.C. §
3715.63.
   ALCOHOL AND DRUG ADDICTION SERVICES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5119.01.
   BULK AMOUNT. Of a controlled substance means any of the following:
      (1)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in
Schedule I, Schedule II, or Schedule III, with the exception of any controlled
substance analog, marihuana, cocaine, L.S.D., heroin, any fentanyl-related
compound, and hashish and except as provided in division (2), (5), or (6) of
this definition, whichever of the following is applicable:
         (a)   An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams or 25 unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
a Schedule I opiate or opium derivative;
         (b)   An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams of a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of raw or gum
opium;
         (c)   An amount equal to or exceeding 30 grams or ten unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
a Schedule I hallucinogen other than tetrahydrocannabinol or lysergic acid
amide, or a Schedule I stimulant or depressant;
         (d)   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five times the
maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II opiate or opium
derivative;
         (e)   An amount equal to or exceeding five grams or ten unit doses of
a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount
of phencyclidine;
         (f)   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the
maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II stimulant that is in
a final dosage form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food,
Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the federal
drug abuse control laws, as defined in this section, that is or contains any
amount of a Schedule II depressant substance or a Schedule II hallucinogenic
substance;
         (g)   An amount equal to or exceeding three grams of a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule
II stimulant, or any of its salts or isomers, that is not in a final dosage
form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the federal drug abuse
control laws;
      (2)   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III or IV substance other than an anabolic
steroid or a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;
      (3)   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;
      (4)   An amount equal to or exceeding 250 milliliters or 250 grams of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
a Schedule V substance;
      (5)   An amount equal to or exceeding 200 solid dosage units, 16 grams,
or 16 milliliters of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III anabolic steroid;
      (6)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is a
combination of a fentanyl-related compound and any other compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V,
if the defendant is charged with a violation of R.C. § 2925.11 and the
sentencing provisions set forth in R.C. § 2925.11(C)(10)(b) and (C)(11) will
not apply regarding the defendant and the violation, the bulk amount of the
controlled substance for purposes of the violation is the amount specified in
division (1), (2), (3), (4), or (5) of this definition for the other Schedule
III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V controlled substance that is combined with the
fentanyl-related compound.
   CERTIFIED GRIEVANCE COMMITTEE. A duly constituted and organized committee of
the Ohio State Bar Association or of one or more local bar associations of the
state that complies with the criteria set forth in Rule V, Section 6 of the
Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.
   COCAINE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A cocaine salt, isomer, or derivative, a salt of a cocaine isomer
or derivative, or the base form of cocaine.
      (2)   Coca leaves or a salt, compound, derivative, or preparation of coca
leaves, including ecgonine, a salt, isomer, or derivative of ecgonine, or a
salt of an isomer or derivative of ecgonine.
      (3)   A salt, compound, derivative, or preparation of a substance
identified in division (1) or (2) of this definition that is chemically
equivalent to or identical with any of those substances, except that the
substances shall not include decocainized coca leaves or extraction of coca
leaves if the extractions do not contain cocaine or ecgonine.
   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A JUVENILE. An offense is “committed in the
vicinity of a juvenile” if the offender commits the offense within 100 feet of
a juvenile or within the view of a juvenile, regardless of whether the offender
knows the age of the juvenile, whether the offender knows the offense is being
committed within 100 feet of or within view of the juvenile, or whether the
juvenile actually views the commission of the offense.
   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SCHOOL. An offense is “committed in the
vicinity of a school” if the offender commits the offense on school premises,
in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of any school
premises, regardless of whether the offender knows the offense is being
committed on school premises, in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the
boundaries of any school premises.
   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SUB-STANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER OR A
RECOVERING ADDICT. An offense is “committed in the vicinity of a substance
addiction services provider or a recovering addict” if either of the following
apply:
      (1)   The offender commits the offense on the premises of a substance
addiction services provider’s facility, including a facility licensed prior to
June 29, 2019, under R.C. § 5119.391 to provide methadone treatment or an
opioid treatment program licensed on or after that date under R.C. § 5119.37,
or within 500 feet of the premises of a substance addiction services provider’s
facility and the offender knows or should know that the offense is being
committed within the vicinity of the substance addiction services provider’s
facility.
      (2)   The offender sells, offers to sell, delivers, or distributes the
controlled substance or controlled substance analog to a person who is
receiving treatment at the time of the commission of the offense, or received
treatment within 30 days prior to the commission of the offense, from a
substance addiction services provider and the offender knows that the person is
receiving or received that treatment.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE ANALOG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any drug that bears, or whose container or label bears, a
trademark, trade name, or other identifying mark used without authorization of
the owner of rights to the trademark, trade name, or identifying mark.
      (2)   Any unmarked or unlabeled substance that is represented to be a
controlled substance manufactured, processed, packed, or distributed by a
person other than the person that manufactured, processed, packed, or
distributed it.
      (3)   Any substance that is represented to be a controlled substance but
is not a controlled substance or is a different controlled substance.
      (4)   Any substance other than a controlled substance that a reasonable
person would believe to be a controlled substance because of its similarity in
shape, size, and color, or its markings, labeling, packaging, distribution, or
the price for which it is sold or offered for sale.
   CULTIVATE. Includes planting, watering, fertilizing or tilling.
   DANGEROUS DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   DECEPTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   DISCIPLINARY COUNSEL. The disciplinary counsel appointed by the Board of
Commissioners on Grievances and Discipline of the Ohio Supreme Court under the
Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.
   DISPENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   DISTRIBUTE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2913.02(A) that constitutes theft of drugs,
or any violation of R.C. § 2925.02, 2925.03, 2925.04, 2925.041, 2925.05,
2925.06, 2925.11, 2925.12, 2925.13, 2925.22, 2925.23, 2925.24, 2925.31,
2925.32, 2925.36, or 2925.37.
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former law of a municipality, state
or any other state or of the United States, that is substantially equivalent to
any section listed in division (1) of this definition.
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former law of a municipality, state
or any other state, or of the United States, of which planting, cultivating,
harvesting, processing, making, manufacturing, producing, shipping,
transporting, delivering, acquiring, possessing, storing, distributing,
dispensing, selling, inducing another to use, administering to another, using,
or otherwise dealing with a controlled substance is an element.
      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing or attempting to commit, any offense under division (1), (2), or (3)
of this definition.
   DRUG OF ABUSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.
   FELONY DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Any drug abuse offense that would constitute a
felony under the laws of this state, any other state, or the United States.
   FENTANYL-RELATED COMPOUND. Any of the following:
      (1)   Fentanyl;
      (2)   Alpha-methylfentanyl (N-[1-(alpha-methyl-beta-phenyl)ethyl-4-
piperidyl] propionanilide; 1-(1-methyl-2-phenylethyl)-4-(N-propanilido)
piperidine);
      (3)   Alpha-methylthiofentanyl (N-[1-methyl-2-(2-thienyl)ethyl-4-
piperidinyl]-N- phenylpropanamide);
      (4)   Beta-hydroxyfentanyl (N-[1-(2-hydroxy-2-phenethyl-4-piperidinyl]-N-
phenylpropanamide);
      (5)   Beta-hydroxy-3-methylfentanyl (other name: N-[1-(2-hydroxy-2-
phenethyl)-3- methyl-4-piperidinyl]-N-phenylpropanamide);
      (6)   3-methylfentanyl (N-[3-methyl-1-(2-phenylethyl)-4-piperidyl]-N-
phenylpropanamide);
      (7)   3-methylthiofentanyl (N-[3-methyl-1-[2-(thienyl)ethyl]-4-
piperidinyl]-– phenylpropanamide);
      (8)   Para-fluorofentanyl (N-(4-fluorophenyl)-N-[1-(2-phenethyl)-4-
piperidinyl]propanamide;
      (9)   Thiofentanyl (N-phenyl-N-[1-(2-thienyl)ethyl-4-piperidinyl]-
propanamide;
      (10)   Alfentanil;
      (11)   Carfentanil;
      (12)   Remifentanil;
      (13)   Sufentanil;
      (14)   Acetyl-alpha-methylfentanyl (N-[1-(1-methyl-2-phenethyl)-4-
piperidinyl]-N- phenylacetamide); and
      (15)   Any compound that meets all of the following fentanyl
pharmacophore requirements to bind at the mu receptor, as identified by a
report from an established forensic laboratory, including acetylfentanyl,
furanylfentanyl, valerylfentanyl, butyrylfentanyl, isobutyrylfentanyl, 4-
methoxybutyrylfentanyl, para-fluorobutyrylfentanyl, acrylfentanyl, and ortho-
fluorofentanyl:
         (a)   A chemical scaffold consisting of both of the following:
            1.   A five, six, or seven member ring structure containing a
nitrogen, whether or not further substituted;
            2.   An attached nitrogen to the ring, whether or not that nitrogen
is enclosed in a ring structure, including an attached aromatic ring or other
lipophilic group to that nitrogen.
         (b)   A polar functional group attached to the chemical scaffold,
including but not limited to a hydroxyl, ketone, amide, or ester;
         (c)   An alkyl or aryl substitution off the ring nitrogen of the
chemical scaffold; and
         (d)   The compound has not been approved for medical use by the United
States food and drug administration.
   HARMFUL INTOXICANT. Does not include beer or intoxicating liquor, but means
any of the following:
      (1)   Any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance the gas, fumes, or
vapor of which when inhaled can induce intoxication, excitement, giddiness,
irrational behavior, depression, stupefaction, paralysis, unconsciousness,
asphyxiation, or other harmful physiological effects, and includes but is not
limited to any of the following:
         (a)   Any volatile organic solvent, plastic cement, model cement,
fingernail polish remover, lacquer thinner, cleaning fluid, gasoline, or other
preparation containing a volatile organic solvent.
         (b)   Any aerosol propellant.
         (c)   Any fluorocarbon refrigerant.
         (d)   Any anesthetic gas.
      (2)   Gamma Butyrolactone;
      (3)   1,4 Butanediol.
   HASHISH.
      (1)   A resin or a preparation of a resin to which both of the following
apply:
         (a)   It is contained in or derived from any part of the plant of the
genus cannabis, whether in solid form or in a liquid concentrate, liquid
extract, or liquid distillate form.
         (b)   It has a delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol concentration of more than
0.3%.
      (2)   The term does not include a hemp byproduct in the possession of a
licensed hemp processor under R.C. Chapter 928, provided that the hemp
byproduct is being produced, stored, and disposed of in accordance with rules
adopted under R.C. § 928.03.
   HYPODERMIC. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   JUVENILE. A person under 18 years of age.
   LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS. Has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   L.S.D. Lysergic acid diethylamide.
   MAJOR DRUG OFFENDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   MANDATORY PRISON TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   MANUFACTURE. To plant, cultivate, harvest, process, make, prepare, or
otherwise engage in any part of the production of a drug, by propagation,
extraction, chemical synthesis, or compounding, or any combination of the same,
and includes packaging, repackaging, labeling, and other activities incident to
production.
   MANUFACTURER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   MARIHUANA. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01, except that it does
not include hashish.
   METHAMPHETAMINE. Methamphetamine, any salt, isomer, or salt of an isomer of
methamphetamine, or any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance containing
methamphetamine or any salt, isomer, or salt of an isomer of methamphetamine.
   MINOR DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSE. Either of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2925.11 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996,
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   A violation of R.C. § 2925.11 as it exists on and after July 1,
1996, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that is a misdemeanor
or a felony of the fifth degree.
   OFFICIAL WRITTEN ORDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   PERSON WITH A DRUG DEPENDENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.
   PHARMACIST. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   PHARMACY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   POSSESS or POSSESSION. Having control over a thing or substance but may not
be inferred solely from mere access to the thing or substance through ownership
or occupation of the premises upon which the thing or substance is found.
   PREMISES OF A SUBSTANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER’S FACILITY. Means the
parcel of real property on which any substance addiction service provider’s
facility is situated.
   PRESCRIPTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   PRESUMPTION FOR A PRISON TERM or PRESUMPTION THAT A PRISON TERM SHALL BE
IMPOSED. A presumption as described in R.C. § 2929.13(D) that a prison term is
a necessary sanction for a felony in order to comply with the purposes and
principles of sentencing under R.C. § 2929.11.
   PROFESSIONAL LICENSE. Any license, permit, certificate, registration,
qualification, admission, temporary license, temporary permit, temporary
certificate, or temporary registration that is described in R.C. § 2925.01(W)
(1) through (W)(37) and that qualifies a person as a professionally licensed
person.
   PROFESSIONALLY LICENSED PERSON. Any of the following:
      (1)   A person who has received a certificate or temporary certificate as
a certified public accountant or who has registered as a public accountant
under R.C. Chapter
4701 and who holds an Ohio permit issued under that chapter;
      (2)   A person who holds a certificate of qualification to practice
architecture issued or renewed and registered under R.C. Chapter 4703;
      (3)   A person who is registered as a landscape architect under R.C.
Chapter 4703 or who holds a permit as a landscape architect issued under that
chapter;
      (4)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4707;
      (5)   A person who has been issued a barber’s license, barber
instructor’s license, assistant barber instructor’s license, or independent
contractor’s license under R.C. Chapter 4709;
      (6)   A person licensed and regulated to engage in the business of a debt
pooling company by a legislative authority, under authority of R.C. Chapter
4710;
      (7)   A person who has been issued a cosmetologist’s license, hair
designer’s license, manicurist’s license, esthetician’s license, natural hair
stylist’s license, advanced license to practice cosmetology, advanced license
to practice hair design, advanced license to practice manicuring, advanced
license to practice esthetics, advanced license to practice natural hair
styling, cosmetology instructor’s license, hair design instructor’s license,
manicurist instructor’s license, esthetics instructor’s license, natural hair
style instructor’s license, independent contractor’s license, or tanning
facility permit under R.C. Chapter 4713;
      (8)   A person who has been issued a license to practice dentistry, a
general anesthesia permit, a conscious sedation permit, a limited resident’s
license, a limited teaching license, a dental hygienist’s license, or a dental
hygienist’s teacher’s certificate under R.C. Chapter 4715;
      (9)   A person who has been issued an embalmer’s license, a funeral
director’s license, a funeral home license, or a crematory license, or who has
been registered for an embalmer’s or funeral director’s apprenticeship under
R.C. Chapter 4717;
      (10)   A person who has been licensed as a registered nurse or practical
nurse, or who has been issued a certificate for the practice of nurse-midwifery
under R.C. Chapter 4723;
      (11)   A person who has been licensed to practice optometry or to engage
in optical dispensing under R.C. Chapter 4725;
      (12)   A person licensed to act as a pawnbroker under R.C. Chapter 4727;
      (13)   A person licensed to act as a precious metals dealer under R.C.
Chapter 4728;
      (14)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 as a pharmacist or
pharmacy intern or registered under that chapter as a registered pharmacy
technician, certified pharmacy technician, or pharmacy technician trainee;
      (15)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 as a manufacturer of
dangerous drugs, outsourcing facility, third-party logistics provider,
repackager of dangerous drugs, wholesale distributor of dangerous drugs, or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs;
      (16)   A person who is authorized to practice as a physician assistant
under R.C. Chapter 4730;
      (17)   A person who has been issued a license to practice medicine and
surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery, or podiatric medicine and surgery
under R.C. Chapter 4731 or has been issued a certificate to practice a limited
branch of medicine under that chapter;
      (18)   A person licensed as a psychologist, independent school
psychologist, or school psychologist under R.C. Chapter 4732;
      (19)   A person registered to practice the profession of engineering or
surveying under R.C. Chapter 4733;
      (20)   A person who has been issued a license to practice chiropractic
under R.C. Chapter 4734;
      (21)   A person licensed to act as a real estate broker or real estate
salesperson under R.C. Chapter 4735;
      (22)   A person registered as a registered environmental health
specialist under R.C. Chapter 3776;
      (23)   A person licensed to operate or maintain a junkyard under R.C.
Chapter 4737;
      (24)   A person who has been issued a motor vehicle salvage dealer’s
license under R.C. Chapter 4738;
      (25)   A person who has been licensed to act as a steam engineer under
R.C. Chapter 4739;
      (26)   A person who has been issued a license or temporary permit to
practice veterinary medicine or any of its branches, or who is registered as a
graduate animal technician under R.C. Chapter 4741;
      (27)   A person who has been issued a hearing aid dealer’s or fitter’s
license or trainee permit under R.C. Chapter 4747;
      (28)   A person who has been issued a class A, class B, or class C
license or who has been registered as an investigator or security guard
employee under R.C. Chapter 4749;
      (29)   A person licensed to practice as a nursing home administrator
under R.C. Chapter 4751;
      (30)   A person licensed to practice as a speech-language pathologist or
audiologist under R.C. Chapter 4753;
      (31)   A person issued a license as an occupational therapist or physical
therapist under R.C. Chapter 4755;
      (32)   A person who is licensed as a licensed professional clinical
counselor, licensed professional counselor, social worker, independent social
worker, independent marriage and family therapist, or marriage and family
therapist, or registered as a social work assistant under R.C. Chapter 4757;
      (33)   A person issued a license to practice dietetics under R.C. Chapter
4759;
      (34)   A person who has been issued a license or limited permit to
practice respiratory therapy under R.C. Chapter 4761;
      (35)   A person who has been issued a real estate appraiser certificate
under R.C. Chapter 4763;
      (36)   A person who has been issued a home inspector license under R.C.
Chapter 4764;
      (37)   A person who has been admitted to the bar by order of the Ohio
Supreme Court in compliance with its prescribed and published rules.
   PUBLIC PREMISES. Any hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall, or other
place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort.
   SALE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   SAMPLE DRUG. A drug or pharmaceutical preparation that would be hazardous to
health or safety if used without the supervision of a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs, or a drug of abuse, and that, at
one time, had been placed in a container plainly marked as a sample by a
manufacturer.
SCHEDULE I, SCHEDULE II, SCHEDULE III, SCHEDULE IV or SCHEDULE V. Have the same
meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   SCHOOL. Any school operated by a board of education, any community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314, or any nonpublic school for which the
Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum standards under R.C. §
3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or
training provided by the school is being conducted at the time a criminal
offense is committed.
   SCHOOL BUILDING. Any building in which any of the instruction,
extracurricular activities, or training provided by a school is conducted,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training
provided by the school is being conducted in the school building at the time a
criminal offense is committed.
   SCHOOL PREMISES. Either of the following:
      (1)   The parcel of real property on which any school is situated,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training
provided by the school is being conducted on the premises at the time a
criminal offense is committed.
      (2)   Any other parcel of real property that is owned or leased by a
board of education of a school, the governing authority of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314, or the governing body of a nonpublic
school for which the Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum
standards under R.C. § 3301.07 and on which some of the instruction,
extracurricular activities, or training of the school is conducted, whether or
not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training provided by the
school is being conducted on the parcel of real property at the time a criminal
offense is committed.
   STANDARD PHARMACEUTICAL REFERENCE MANUAL. The current edition, with
cumulative changes if any, of references that are approved by the State Board
of Pharmacy.
   SUBSTANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER. Means an agency, association,
corporation or other legal entity, individual, or program that provides one or
more of the following at a facility:
      (1)   Either alcohol addiction services, or drug addiction services, or
both such services that are certified by the Ohio Director of Mental Health and
Addiction Services under R.C. § 5119.36;
      (2)   Recovery supports that are related to either alcohol addiction
services, or drug addiction services, or both such services and paid for with
federal, state, or local funds administered by the Ohio Department of Mental
Health and Addiction Services or a board of alcohol, drug addiction, and mental
health services.
   UNIT DOSE. An amount or unit or a compound, mixture, or preparation
containing a controlled substance that is separately identifiable and in a form
that indicates that it is the amount or unit by which the controlled substance
is separately administered to or taken by an individual.
   WHOLESALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
(R.C.§ 2925.01)
§ 138.02 ADULT USE CANNABIS CONTROL; LIMITATIONS ON CONDUCT BY INDIVIDUALS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780 and notwithstanding
any conflicting provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code, an adult use
consumer, may do the following:
      (1)   Use adult use cannabis;
      (2)   Possess, transfer without remuneration to another adult consumer,
or transport adult use cannabis, subject to division (B) of this section; and
      (3)   Purchase adult use cannabis from an adult use dispensary per day in
amounts that do not exceed the possession limits set forth in division (B)(1)
of this section.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3796:
      (1)   The amount of cannabis that may be possessed by an adult use
consumer shall not exceed:
         (a)   Two and one-half ounces of adult use cannabis in any form except
adult use extract; and
         (b)   Fifteen grams of adult use cannabis in the form of adult use
extract.
      (2)   The amount of cannabis that may be transferred by an adult use
consumer without remuneration and not advertised or promoted to the public
shall not exceed:
         (a)   Two and one-half ounces of adult use cannabis in any form except
adult use extract; and
         (b)   Fifteen grams of adult use cannabis in the form of adult use
extract.
      (3)   The amount of cannabis that may be transported by an adult use
consumer shall not exceed:
         (a)   Two and one-half ounces of adult use cannabis in any form except
adult use extract; and
         (b)   Fifteen grams of adult use cannabis in the form of adult use
extract.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780, an adult use
consumer shall not be subject to arrest, criminal prosecution, or civil penalty
for engaging in any of the activities authorized under R.C. Chapter 3780,
including:
      (1)   Obtaining, using, possessing, or transporting adult use cannabis;
      (2)   Performing conduct authorized under R.C. § 3780.29;
      (3)   Acquiring, possessing, using, purchasing, manufacturing, selling,
or transporting paraphernalia; and
      (4)   Assisting another adult use consumer, or allowing property to be
used, in any of the acts authorized by R.C. Chapter 3780.
   (D)   (1)   An individual is prohibited from operating a vehicle, motor
vehicle, streetcar, trackless trolley, bike, watercraft, or aircraft while
using adult use cannabis or while under the influence of adult use cannabis and
is subject to R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance
for any violation of this division.
      (2)   An individual is prohibited from smoking, vaporizing, or using any
other combustible adult use cannabis product while in a vehicle, motor vehicle,
streetcar, trackless trolley, bike, watercraft, or aircraft and is subject to
R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for any
violation of this division.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780, no individual under
21 years of age shall knowingly show or give false information concerning the
individual’s name, age, or other identification for the purpose of purchasing
adult use cannabis from an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C. Chapter
3780.
   (F)   Nothing in R.C. Chapter 3780 is intended to permit the transfer or
sale of adult use cannabis, with or without remuneration, to an individual
under 21 years of age, or to allow an individual under 21 years of age to
purchase, possess, use, process, transport, or cultivate cannabis except where
authorized by R.C. Chapter 3796.
   (G)   It is unlawful for any parent or guardian to knowingly permit their
residence, any other private property under their control, or any vehicle,
conveyance, or watercraft under their control to be used by an invitee of the
parent’s child or the guardian’s ward, if the invitee is under 21 years of age,
in a manner that constitutes a violation of R.C. Chapter 3780.
      (1)   A parent or guardian is deemed to have knowingly permitted their
residence, any other private property under their control, or any vehicle,
conveyance, or watercraft under their control to be used in violation of R.C.
Chapter 3780 if they knowingly authorize or permit consumption of cannabis by
underage invitees.
      (2)   Where the residence or other property has an owner and a tenant or
lessee, the trier of fact may infer that the residence or other property is
occupied only by the tenant or lessee.
(R.C. § 3780.36)
   (H)   Penalties.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3796, R.C. § 2925.11
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall apply when an adult use
consumer possesses an amount of cannabis greater than the limits set forth in
division (B)(1) of this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780, an adult use
consumer who uses adult use cannabis in public areas, or who violates division
(D)(2) of this section as a passenger, is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (3)   (a)   An individual under 21 years of age who knowingly shows or
gives false information concerning the individual’s name, age, or other
identification for the purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining adult use
cannabis from an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C. Chapter 3780 is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If, in committing a first
violation, the offender presented to an adult use dispensary licensed under
R.C. Chapter 3780 a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $250 and not
more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more
than six months.
         (b)   On a second violation in which, for the second time, the
offender presented to an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C. Chapter 3780
a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a false or fictitious
driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s license issued
by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree and shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000,
and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months. The
court also may impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from
the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7). The court, in lieu of suspending
the offender’s temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license, or
driver’s license, instead may order the offender to perform a determinate
number of hours of community service, with the court determining the actual
number of hours and the nature of the community service the offender shall
perform.
         (c)   On a third or subsequent violation in which, for the third or
subsequent time, the offender presented to an adult use dispensary licensed
under R.C. Chapter 3780 a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a
false or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a
driver’s license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than
$500 nor more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of
not more than six months. Except as provided in this division, the court also
may impose a class six suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6), and the court may order that the suspension
or denial remain in effect until the offender attains the age of 21 years. The
court, in lieu of suspending the offender’s temporary instruction permit,
probationary driver’s license, or driver’s license, instead may order the
offender to perform a determinate number of hours of community service, with
the court determining the actual number of hours and the nature of the
community service the offender shall perform.
      (4)   An individual who is under 21 years of age and who solicits another
individual to purchase adult use cannabis from an adult use dispensary licensed
under R.C. Chapter 3780 is guilty of:
         (a)   For a first violation, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; and
         (b)   For a second or subsequent violation, a misdemeanor of the
second degree.
      (5)   An employee or agent of an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C.
Chapter 3780 who knowingly sells cannabis to an individual under 21 years of
age is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (6)   Any individual who violates R.C. § 3780.10(A), or R.C. § 3780.29
(F), is guilty of the illegal trafficking in drugs under R.C. § 2925.03 and the
illegal manufacture of drugs under R.C. § 2925.04.
      (7)   Any individual who violates division (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this
section guilty of the illegal trafficking in drugs under R.C. § 2925.03.
      (8)   Any individual who violates R.C. § 3780.20(B) is guilty of illegal
dispensing of drug samples under R.C. § 2925.36 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
      (9)   (a)   An individual who violates division (G) of this section is
guilty of:
            1.   For a first violation, a misdemeanor of the third degree; and
            2.   For a second or subsequent violation, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
         (b)   If a violation of division (G) of this section directly or
indirectly results in great bodily harm or death to any individual, the
individual violating division (G) is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 3780.99)
§ 138.03 DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSES.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly obtain, possess, or use a controlled
substance or a controlled substance analog.
   (B)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   Manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to
prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, and other persons whose
conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731,
and 4741.
         (b)   If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any person who is
conducting or participating in a research project involving the use of an
anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the United States Food and
Drug Administration.
         (c)   Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes, dispenses, or
administers for livestock or other nonhuman species an anabolic steroid that is
expressly intended for administration through implants to livestock or other
nonhuman species and approved for that purpose under the Federal Food, Drug,
and Cosmetic Act, and is sold, offered for sale, prescribed, dispensed, or
administered for that purpose in accordance with that Act.
         (d)   Any person who obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs if the prescription was issued for a legitimate medical purpose and not
altered, forged, or obtained through deception or commission of a theft
offense. As used in this division (B)(1)(d), “deception” and “theft offense”
have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (2)   (a)   As used in division (B)(2) of this section:
            COMMUNITY ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 5119.01.
            COMMUNITY CONTROL SANCTION. Has the same meanings as in R.C. §
2929.01
            HEALTH CARE FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2919.16.
            MINOR DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSE. A violation of this section or R.C.
§ 2925.11 that is a misdemeanor or a felony of the fifth degree.
            PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
            POST-RELEASE CONTROL SANCTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2967.28.
            PUBLIC AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2930.01.
            QUALIFIED INDIVIDUAL. A person who is acting in good faith who
seeks or obtains medical assistance for another person who is experiencing a
drug overdose, a person who experiences a drug overdose and who seeks medical
assistance for that overdose, or a person who is the subject of another person
seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that overdose as described in
division (B)(2)(b) of this section.
            SEEK OR OBTAIN MEDICAL ASSISTANCE. Includes, but is not limited to
making a 9-1-1 call, contacting in person or by telephone call an on-duty peace
officer, or transporting or presenting a person to a health care facility.
         (b)   Subject to division (B)(2)(e) of this section, a qualified
individual shall not be arrested, charged, prosecuted, convicted, or penalized
pursuant to this chapter for a minor drug possession offense or a violation of
R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. § 2925.141 if all of the
following apply:
            1.   The evidence of the obtaining, possession, or use of the
controlled substance or controlled substance analog, drug abuse instruments, or
drug paraphernalia that would be the basis of the offense was obtained as a
result of the qualified individual seeking the medical assistance or
experiencing an overdose and needing medical assistance.
            2.   Subject to division (B)(2)(f) of this section, within 30 days
after seeking or obtaining the medical assistance, the qualified individual
seeks and obtains a screening and receives a referral for treatment from a
community addiction services provider or a properly credentialed addiction
treatment professional.
            3.   Subject to division (B)(2)(f) of this section, the qualified
individual who obtains a screening and receives a referral for treatment under
division (B)(2)(b)2. of this section, upon the request of any prosecuting
attorney, submits documentation to the prosecuting attorney that verifies that
the qualified individual satisfied the requirements of that division. The
documentation shall be limited to the date and time of the screening obtained
and referral received.
         (c)   If a person who is serving a community control sanction or is
under a sanction on post-release control acts pursuant to division (B)(2)(b) of
this section, then R.C. § 2929.141(B), R.C. § 2929.15(B)(2), R.C. § 2929.25(D)
(3), or R.C. § 2967.28(F)(3) applies to the person with respect to any
violation of the sanction or post-release control sanction based on a minor
drug possession offense, as defined in R.C. § 2925.11, or a violation of R.C. §
2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. § 2925.141.
         (d)   Nothing in division (B)(2)(b) of this section shall be construed
to do any of the following:
            1.   Limit the admissibility of any evidence in connection with the
investigation or prosecution of a crime with regards to a defendant who does
not qualify for the protections of division (B)(2)(b) of this section or with
regards to any crime other than a minor drug possession offense or a violation
of R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. § 2925.141 committed by a
person who qualifies for protection pursuant to division (B)(2)(b) of this
section;
            2.   Limit any seizure of evidence or contraband otherwise
permitted by law;
            3.   Limit or abridge the authority of a peace officer to detain or
take into custody a person in the course of an investigation or to effectuate
an arrest for any offense except as provided in that division;
            4.   Limit, modify, or remove any immunity from liability available
pursuant to law in effect prior to September 13, 2016 to any public agency or
to an employee of any public agency.
         (e)   Division (B)(2)(b) of this section does not apply to any person
who twice previously has been granted an immunity under division (B)(2)(b) of
this section. No person shall be granted an immunity under division (B)(2)(b)
of this section more than two times.
         (f)   Nothing in this section shall compel any qualified individual to
disclose protected health information in a way that conflicts with the
requirements of the “Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of
1996”, 104 Pub. L. No. 191, 110 Stat. 2021, 42 U.S.C. §§ 1320d et seq., as
amended, and regulations promulgated by the United States Department of Health
and Human Services to implement the act or the requirements of 42 C.F.R. Part
2.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of one of the
following:
      (1)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule I or Schedule II, with the
exception of marihuana or hashish, whoever violates division (A) of this
section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V,
whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of possession of drugs.
The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2)(b) of this
section, possession of drugs is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the
offender previously has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (b)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds the bulk
amount, possession of drugs is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   If the drug involved in the violation is marihuana or a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance containing marihuana other than hashish,
whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of possession of
marihuana. The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3)(b) or (C)(3)(c)
of this section, possession of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds 100 grams
but is less than 200 grams, possession of marihuana is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
         (c)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds 200 grams,
possession of marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (4)   If the drug involved in the violation is hashish or a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance containing hashish, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of possession of hashish. The penalty
for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(4)(b) or (C)(4)(c)
of this section, possession of hashish is a minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds five grams
but is less than ten grams of hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds one
gram but is less than two grams of hashish in a liquid concentrate, liquid
extract, or liquid distillate form, possession of hashish is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.
         (c)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds ten grams
of hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds two grams of hashish in a
liquid concentrate, liquid extract, or liquid distillate form, possession of
hashish is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is a combination of a fentanyl-related compound
and marihuana, one of the following applies:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(5)(b) of this
section, the offender is guilty of possession of marihuana and shall be
punished as provided in division (C)(3) of this section. Except as otherwise
provided in division (C)(5)(b) of this section, the offender is not guilty of
possession of a fentanyl-related compound under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) and shall
not be charged with, convicted of, or punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) for
possession of a fentanyl-related compound.
         (b)   If the offender knows or has reason to know that the compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is the drug involved contains a
fentanyl-related compound, the offender is guilty of possession of a fentanyl-
related compound and shall be punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11).
      (6)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is a combination of a fentanyl-related compound
and any Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V controlled substance that is
not a fentanyl-related compound, one of the following applies:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(6)(b) of this
section, the offender is guilty of possession of drugs and shall be punished as
provided in division (C)(2) of this section. Except as otherwise provided in
division (C)(6)(b) of this section, the offender is not guilty of possession of
a fentanyl-related compound under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) and shall not be
charged with, convicted of, or punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) for
possession of a fentanyl-related compound.
         (b)   If the offender knows or has reason to know that the compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is the drug involved contains a
fentanyl-related compound, the offender is guilty of possession of a fentanyl-
related compound and shall be punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11).
   (D)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section
does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s criminal
record, including any inquiries contained in any application for employment,
license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s
appearance as a witness.
   (E)   (1)   In addition to any prison term or jail term authorized or
required by division (C) of this section and R.C. §§ 2929.13, 2929.14, 2929.22,
2929.24, and 2929.25, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and
in addition to any other sanction that is imposed for the offense under this
section, R.C. §§ 2929.11 through 2929.18, or R.C. §§ 2929.21 through 2929.28,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court that sentences
an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (A)
of this section may suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit for not more than five years. However, if the offender
pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or the law of another state or the
United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the violation,
the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or permit for not more than five years.
      (2)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to
any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
   (F)   (1)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
      (2)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (F) of this section, the
sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.11)
Statutory reference:
   Felony drug possession offenses, see R.C. § 2925.11(C)
§ 138.04 POSSESSING DRUG ABUSE INSTRUMENTS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make, obtain, possess, or use any
instrument, article, or thing the customary and primary purpose of which is for
the administration or use of a dangerous drug, other than marihuana, when the
instrument involved is a hypodermic or syringe, whether or not of crude or
extemporized manufacture or assembly, and the instrument, article, or thing
involved has been used by the offender to unlawfully administer or use a
dangerous drug, other than marihuana, or to prepare a dangerous drug, other
than marihuana, for unlawful administration or use.
   (B)   (1)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies,
and other persons whose conduct was in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719,
4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, and 4741.
      (2)   Division (B)(2) of R.C. § 2925.11 applies with respect to a
violation of this section when a person seeks or obtains medical assistance for
another person who is experiencing a drug overdose, a person experiences a drug
overdose and seeks medical assistance for that overdose, or a person is the
subject of another person seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that
overdose.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing drug abuse
instruments, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a drug abuse offense, violation of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (D)   (1)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a
violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more than five years
the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit. However, if
the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or the law of another
state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the
violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit for not more than five years. If the offender is a
professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction imposed for a
violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply with R.C. §
2925.38.
      (2)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016, may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (D)(2) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.12)
§ 138.05 PERMITTING DRUG ABUSE.
   (A)   No person who is the owner, operator, or person in charge of a
locomotive, watercraft, aircraft, or other vehicle, as defined in R.C. §
4501.01, shall knowingly permit the vehicle to be used for the commission of a
felony drug abuse offense.
   (B)   No person, who is the owner, lessee, or occupant, or who has custody,
control, or supervision of premises, or real estate, including vacant land,
shall knowingly permit his or her premises, or real estate, including vacant
land, to be used for the commission of a felony drug abuse offense by another
person.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting drug abuse.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section, permitting
drug abuse is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Permitting drug abuse is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the felony drug abuse offense in question is a
violation of R.C. § 2925.02, 2925.03, or 2925.04, or if the felony drug abuse
offense in question is a violation of R.C. § 2925.041 and the offender had
actual knowledge, at the time the offender permitted the vehicle, premises, or
real estate to be used as described in division (A) or (B) of this section,
that the person who assembled or possessed the chemicals in question in
violation of R.C. § 2925.041 had assembled or possessed them with the intent to
manufacture a controlled substance in Schedule I or Schedule II in violation of
R.C. § 2925.04.
   (D)   Any premises or real estate that is permitted to be used in violation
of division (B) of this section constitutes a nuisance subject to abatement
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2925.13(A) - (C), (F))
§ 138.06 ILLEGAL CULTIVATION OF MARIHUANA.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly cultivate marihuana.
   (B)   This section does not apply to any person listed in R.C. § 2925.03(B)
(1), (B)(2) or (B)(3), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, to
the extent and under the circumstances described in that division.
   (C)   Whoever commits a violation of division (A) of this section is guilty
of illegal cultivation of marihuana.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in the following divisions, illegal
cultivation of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor or, if the offense was
committed in the vicinity of a school or in the vicinity of a juvenile, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   If the amount of marihuana involved equals or exceeds 100 grams but
is less than 200 grams, illegal cultivation of marihuana is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree or, if the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school
or in the vicinity of a juvenile, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   If the amount of marihuana involved equals or exceeds 200 grams,
illegal cultivation of marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (D)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section
does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s criminal
record, including any inquiries contained in any application for employment,
license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s
appearance as a witness.
(R.C. § 2925.04(A), (B), (C)(5), (G))
Statutory reference:
   Illegal manufacturing of controlled substances, felony, see R.C. § 2925.04
   Sale or use of drugs not approved by Food and Drug Administration, felony,
see R.C. § 2925.09
§ 138.07 ABUSING HARMFUL INTOXICANTS.
   (A)   Except for lawful research, clinical, medical, dental, or veterinary
purposes, no person, with purpose to induce intoxication or similar
physiological effects, shall obtain, possess, or use a harmful intoxicant.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of abusing harmful
intoxicants, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a drug abuse offense, abusing harmful intoxicants is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (C)   (1)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a
violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more than five years
the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit. However, if
the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or the law of another
state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the
violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit for not more than five years. If the offender is a
professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction imposed for a
violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply with R.C. §
2925.38.
      (2)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to the September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (C)(2) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.31)
§ 138.08 ILLEGAL DISPENSING OF DRUG SAMPLES.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly furnish a sample drug to another person.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to manufacturers,
wholesalers, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, licensed health professionals
authorized to prescribe drugs, and other persons whose conduct is in accordance
with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4725, 4729, 4730, 4731, and 4741.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal dispensing of
drug samples.
      (2)   If the drug involved in the offense is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule I or Schedule II, with the
exception of marihuana, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the drug involved in the offense is a dangerous drug or a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule
IV or Schedule V, or is marihuana, the penalty for the offense shall be
determined as follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in the following division, illegal
dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
         (b)   If the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school or in
the vicinity of a juvenile, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2925.36(A) - (C))
Statutory reference:
   Felony offenses, see R.C. § 2925.36(C)(2)
§ 138.09 FEDERAL PROSECUTION BAR TO MUNICIPAL PROSECUTION.
   No person shall be prosecuted for a violation of this chapter if the person
has been acquitted or convicted under the federal drug abuse control laws of
the same act or omission which, it is alleged, constitutes a violation of this
chapter.
(R.C. §§ 2925.50, 3719.19)
§ 138.10 NITROUS OXIDE: IMPROPER DISPENSING OR DISTRIBUTION; POSSESSION IN A
MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (A)   Improper dispensing or distribution.
      (1)   No person who dispenses or distributes nitrous oxide in cartridges
shall fail to comply with either of the following:
         (a)   The record-keeping requirements established under division (A)
(3) of this section.
         (b)   The labeling and transaction identification requirements
established under division (A)(4) of this section.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(1)(a) or (A)(1)(b) of this section is
guilty of improperly dispensing or distributing nitrous oxide, a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.
      (3)   Beginning July 1, 2001, a person who dispenses or distributes
nitrous oxide shall record each transaction involving the dispensing or
distribution of the nitrous oxide on a separate card. The person shall require
the purchaser to sign the card and provide a complete residence address. The
person dispensing or distributing the nitrous oxide shall sign and date the
card. The person shall retain the card recording a transaction for one year
from the date of the transaction. The person shall maintain the cards at the
person’s business address and make them available during normal business hours
for inspection and copying by officers or employees of the State Board of
Pharmacy or of other law enforcement agencies that are authorized to
investigate violations of this code, R.C. Chapters 2925, 3719, or 4729, or
federal drug abuse control laws. The cards used to record each transaction
shall inform the purchaser of the following:
         (a)   That nitrous oxide cartridges are to be used only for purposes
of preparing food;
         (b)   That inhalation of nitrous oxide can have dangerous health
effects; and
         (c)   That it is a violation of state law to distribute or dispense
cartridges of nitrous oxide to any person under age 21, punishable as a felony
of the fifth degree.
      (4)   (a)   Each cartridge of nitrous oxide dispensed or distributed in
this municipality shall bear the following printed warning: “Nitrous oxide
cartridges are to be used only for purposes of preparing food. Nitrous oxide
cartridges may not be sold to persons under age 21. Do not inhale contents.
Misuse can be dangerous to your health.”
         (b)   Each time a person dispenses or distributes one or more
cartridges of nitrous oxide, the person shall mark the packaging containing the
cartridges with a label or other device that identifies the person who
dispensed or distributed the nitrous oxide and the person’s business address.
(R.C. § 2925.32(B)(4), (D)(2), (F), (G))
   (B)   Possession in a motor vehicle.
      (1)   As used in this section, MOTOR VEHICLE, STREET and HIGHWAY have the
same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
      (2)   Unless authorized by this code or by state law, no person shall
possess an open cartridge of nitrous oxide in either of the following
circumstances:
         (a)   While operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on
a street, highway, or other public or private property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic or parking.
         (b)   While being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on a street,
highway, or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular traffic or parking.
      (3)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of possessing nitrous
oxide in a motor vehicle, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (4)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for
possessing nitrous oxide in a motor vehicle, the court may suspend for not more
than five years the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit.
(R.C. § 2925.33)
Statutory reference:
   Trafficking in harmful intoxicants, see R.C. § 2925.32
§ 138.11 LABORATORY REPORT REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of this chapter or
R.C. Chapters 2925 or 3719, a laboratory report from the Bureau of Criminal
Identification and Investigation or a laboratory operated by another law
enforcement agency, or a laboratory established by or under the authority of an
institution of higher education that has its main campus in this state and that
is accredited by the Association of American Universities or the North Central
Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, primarily for the purpose of
providing scientific service to law enforcement agencies, and signed by the
person performing the analysis, stating that the substance that is the basis of
the alleged offense has been weighed and analyzed and stating the findings as
to the content, weight, and identity of the substance and that it contains any
amount of a controlled substance and the number and description of unit
dosages, is prima facie evidence of the content, identity, and weight or the
existence and number of unit dosages of the substance. In any criminal
prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 2925.041 or a violation of this chapter,
R.C. Chapter 2925 or R.C. Chapter 3719 that is based on the possession of
chemicals sufficient to produce a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance
included in Schedule I, II, III, IV, or V, a laboratory report from the Bureau
or from any laboratory that is operated or established as described in this
division that is signed by the person performing the analysis, stating that the
substances that are the basis of the alleged offense have been weighed and
analyzed and stating the findings as to the content, weight, and identity of
each of the substances, is prima facie evidence of the content, identity, and
weight of the substances.
      (2)   Attached to that report shall be a copy of a notarized statement by
the signer of the report giving the name of the signer and stating that the
signer is an employee of the laboratory issuing the report and that performing
the analysis is a part of the signer’s regular duties, and giving an outline of
the signer’s education, training, and experience for performing an analysis of
materials included under this section. The signer shall attest that
scientifically accepted tests were performed with due caution, and that the
evidence was handled in accordance with established and accepted procedures
while in the custody of the laboratory.
   (B)   The prosecuting attorney shall serve a copy of the report on the
attorney of record for the accused, or on the accused if the accused has no
attorney, prior to any proceeding in which the report is to be used against the
accused other than at a preliminary hearing or grand jury proceeding where the
report may be used without having been previously served upon the accused.
   (C)   The report shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents,
identity, and weight or the existence and number of unit dosages of the
substance if the accused or the accused’s attorney demands the testimony of the
person signing the report, by serving the demand upon the prosecuting attorney,
within seven days from the accused or the accused’s attorney’s receipt of the
report. The time may be extended by a trial judge in the interests of justice.
   (D)   Any report issued for use under this section shall contain notice of
the right of the accused to demand, and the manner in which the accused shall
demand, the testimony of the person signing the report.
   (E)   Any person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or R.C.
Chapters 2925 or 3719 is entitled, upon written request made to the prosecuting
attorney, to have a portion of the substance that is, or of each of the
substances that are, the basis of the alleged violation preserved for the
benefit of independent analysis performed by a laboratory analyst employed by
the accused person, or, if the accused is indigent, by a qualified laboratory
analyst appointed by the court. Such portion shall be a representative sample
of the entire substance that is, or of each of the substances that are, the
basis of the alleged violation and shall be of sufficient size, in the opinion
of the court, to permit the accused’s analyst to make a thorough scientific
analysis concerning the identity of the substance or substances. The
prosecuting attorney shall provide the accused’s analyst with the sample
portion at least 14 days prior to trial, unless the trial is to be held in a
court not of record or unless the accused person is charged with a minor
misdemeanor, in which case the prosecuting attorney shall provide the accused’s
analyst with the sample portion at least three days prior to trial. If the
prosecuting attorney determines that such a sample portion cannot be preserved
and given to the accused’s analyst, the prosecuting attorney shall so inform
the accused person, or the accused’s attorney. In such a circumstance, the
accused person is entitled, upon written request made to the prosecuting
attorney, to have the accused’s privately employed or court appointed analyst
present at an analysis of the substance that is, or the substances that are,
the basis of the alleged violation, and, upon further written request, to
receive copies of all recorded scientific data that result from the analysis
and that can be used by an analyst in arriving at conclusions, findings, or
opinions concerning the identity of the substance or substances subject to the
analysis.
   (F)   In addition to the rights provided under division (E) of this section,
any person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or R.C. Chapters 2925
or 3719 that involves a bulk amount of a controlled substance, or any multiple
thereof, or who is accused of a violation of R.C. § 2925.11 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, other than a minor misdemeanor violation, that
involves marihuana, is entitled, upon written request made to the prosecuting
attorney, to have a laboratory analyst of the accused’s choice, or, if the
accused is indigent, a qualified laboratory analyst appointed by the court,
present at a measurement or weighing of the substance that is the basis of the
alleged violation. Also, the accused person is entitled, upon further written
request, to receive copies of all recorded scientific data that result from the
measurement or weighing and that can be used by an analyst in arriving at
conclusions, findings, or opinions concerning the weight, volume, or number of
unit doses of the substance subject to the measurement or weighing.
(R.C. § 2925.51)
   (G)   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required under
R.C. §§ 2929.18 and 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or required
under any provision of law, the court imposing sentence upon an offender who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a drug abuse offense may order the offender to
pay to the state, municipal, or county law enforcement agencies that handled
the investigation and prosecution all of the costs that the state, municipal
corporation, or county reasonably incurred in having tests performed under this
section or R.C. § 2925.51 or in any other manner on any substance that was the
basis of, or involved in, the offense to determine whether the substance
contained any amount of a controlled substance if the results of the tests
indicate that the substance tested contained any controlled substance. No court
shall order an offender under this section to pay the costs of tests performed
on a substance if the results of the tests do not indicate that the substance
tested contained any controlled substance. The court shall hold a hearing to
determine the amount of costs to be imposed under this section. The court may
hold the hearing as part of the sentencing hearing for the offender.
(R.C. § 2925.511)
§ 138.12 COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly possess any counterfeit controlled
substance.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be guilty of
possession of counterfeit controlled substances, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 2925.37(A), (G))
Statutory reference:
   Trafficking and other felony counterfeit controlled substance offenses, see
R.C. § 2925.37(H) - (M)
§ 138.13 USE, POSSESSION, OR SALE OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   (A)   As used in this section, DRUG PARAPHERNALIA means any equipment,
product, or material of any kind that is used by the offender, intended by the
offender for use, or designed for use, in propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the
human body, a controlled substance in violation of this chapter. The term
includes but is not limited to any of the following equipment, products, or
materials that are used by the offender, intended by the offender for use, or
designed by the offender for use, in any of the following manners:
      (1)   A kit for propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting any
species of a plant that is a controlled substance or from which a controlled
substance can be derived.
      (2)   A kit for manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing, or preparing a controlled substance.
      (3)   Any object, instrument, or device for manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, or preparing methamphetamine.
      (4)   An isomerization device for increasing the potency of any species
of a plant that is a controlled substance.
      (5)   Testing equipment for identifying, or analyzing the strength,
effectiveness, or purity of, a controlled substance, except for those exempted
in division (D)(4) of this section;
      (6)   A scale or balance for weighing or measuring a controlled
substance.
      (7)   A diluent or adulterant, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose, or lactose, for cutting a controlled substance.
      (8)   A separation gin or sifter for removing twigs and seeds from, or
otherwise cleaning or refining, marihuana.
      (9)   A blender, bowl, container, spoon, or mixing device for compounding
a controlled substance.
      (10)   A capsule, balloon, envelope, or container for packaging small
quantities of a controlled substance.
      (11)   A container or device for storing or concealing a controlled
substance.
      (12)   A hypodermic syringe, needle, or instrument for parenterally
injecting a controlled substance into the human body.
      (13)   An object, instrument, or device for ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing into the human body, marihuana, cocaine, hashish, or
hashish oil, such as a metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or
ceramic pipe, with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head, or
punctured metal bowl; water pipe; carburetion tube or device; smoking or
carburetion mask; roach clip or similar object used to hold burning material,
such as a marihuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be
held in the hand; miniature cocaine spoon, or cocaine vial; chamber pipe;
carburetor pipe; electric pipe; air driver pipe; chillum; bong; or ice pipe or
chiller.
   (B)   In determining if any equipment, product, or material is drug
paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in addition
to other relevant factors, the following:
      (1)   Any statement by the owner or by anyone in control of the
equipment, product, or material, concerning its use.
      (2)   The proximity in time or space of the equipment, product, or
material, or of the act relating to the equipment, product, or material, to a
violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2925.
      (3)   The proximity of the equipment, product, or material to any
controlled substance.
      (4)   The existence of any residue of a controlled substance on the
equipment, product, or material.
      (5)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of the owner, or of
anyone in control, of the equipment, product, or material, to deliver it to any
person whom he or she knows intends to use the equipment, product, or material
to facilitate a violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter
2925. A finding that the owner or anyone in control of the equipment, product,
or material is not guilty of a violation of any other provision of this chapter
or R.C. Chapter 2925 does not prevent a finding that the equipment, product, or
material was intended or designed by the offender for use as drug
paraphernalia.
      (6)   Any oral or written instruction provided with the equipment,
product, or material concerning its use.
      (7)   Any descriptive material accompanying the equipment, product, or
material and explaining or depicting its use.
      (8)   National or local advertising concerning the use of the equipment,
product, or material.
      (9)   The manner and circumstances in which the equipment, product, or
material is displayed for sale.
      (10)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of the sales of the
equipment, product, or material to the total sales of the business enterprise.
      (11)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses of the equipment,
product, or material in the community.
      (12)   Expert testimony concerning the use of the equipment, product, or
material.
   (C)   (1)   Subject to divisions (D)(2), (D)(3), and (D)(4) of this section,
no person shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, drug
paraphernalia.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly sell, or possess or manufacture with
purpose to sell, drug paraphernalia, if he or she knows or reasonably should
know that the equipment, product, or material will be used as drug
paraphernalia.
      (3)   No person shall place an advertisement in any newspaper, magazine,
handbill, or other publication that is published and printed and circulates
primarily within this state, if he or she knows that the purpose of the
advertisement is to promote the illegal sale in this municipality or in this
state of the equipment, product, or material that the offender intended or
designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
   (D)   (1)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies,
and other persons whose conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715,
4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, and 4741. This section shall not be construed to
prohibit the possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by R.C. §
3719.172.
      (2)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to a person’s use,
or possession with purpose to use, any drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a
product, or material of any kind that is used by the person, intended by the
person for use, or designed for use in storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body
marihuana.
      (3)   Division (B)(2) of R.C. § 2925.11 applies with respect to a
violation of division (C)(1) of this section when a person seeks or obtains
medical assistance for another person who is experiencing a drug overdose, a
person experiences a drug overdose and seeks medical assistance for that
overdose, or a person is the subject of another person seeking or obtaining
medical assistance for that overdose.
      (4)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to a person’s use,
or possession with purpose to use, any drug testing strips to determine the
presence of fentanyl or a fentanyl-related compound.
   (E)   Notwithstanding R.C. Chapter 2981, any drug paraphernalia that was
used, possessed, sold, or manufactured in violation of this section shall be
seized, after a conviction for that violation, shall be forfeited, and upon
forfeiture shall be disposed of pursuant to R.C. § 2981.12(B).
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (C)(1) of this section is guilty of
illegal use or possession of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (F)(3) of this section, whoever
violates division (C)(2) of this section is guilty of dealing in drug
paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (C)(2) of this section by selling drug
paraphernalia to a juvenile is guilty of selling drug paraphernalia to
juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (C)(3) of this section is guilty of
illegal advertising of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (G)   (1)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a
violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more than five years
the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit. However, if
the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or the law of another
state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the
violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit for not more than five years. If the offender is a
professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction imposed for a
violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply with R.C. §
2925.38.
      (2)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016, may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (G)(2) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.14)
   (H)   Illegal use or possession of marihuana drug paraphernalia.
      (1)   As used in this division (H), DRUG PARAPHERNALIA has the same
meaning as in division (A) of this section.
      (2)   In determining if any equipment, product, or material is drug
paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in addition
to other relevant factors, all factors identified in division (B) of this
section.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, any
drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a product, or material of any kind that
is used by the person, intended by the person for use, or designed for use in
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body marihuana.
      (4)   This division (H) does not apply to any person identified in
division (D)(1) of this section, and it shall not be construed to prohibit the
possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by R.C. § 3719.172.
      (5)   (a)   Division (E) of this section applies with respect to any drug
paraphernalia that was used or possessed in violation of division (H) of this
section.
         (b)   Division (B)(2) of R.C. § 2925.11 applies with respect to a
violation of this division (H) when a person seeks or obtains medical
assistance for another person who is experiencing a drug overdose, a person
experiences a drug overdose and seeks medical assistance for that overdose, or
a person is the subject of another person seeking or obtaining medical
assistance for that overdose.
      (6)   (a)   Whoever violates division (H)(3) of this section is guilty of
illegal use or possession of marihuana drug paraphernalia, a minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   Arrest or conviction for a violation of division (H)(3) of this
section does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the
person so arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s
criminal record, including any inquiries contained in any application for
employment, license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with
the person’s appearance as a witness.
      (7)   (a)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender
for a violation of division (H) of this section, the court shall do the
following, if applicable:
            1.   If the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a
violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or
the law of another state or the United States arising out of the same set of
circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or permit for not more than five years.
            2.   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
         (b)   1.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under division (H)
of this section prior to September 13, 2016, may file a motion with the
sentencing court requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an
offender who pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another
state or the United States that arose out of the same set of circumstances as
the violation for which the offender’s license or permit was suspended under
division (H) of this section shall not file such a motion.
            2.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (H)(7)(b) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.141)
§ 138.14 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE OR PRESCRIPTION LABELS.
   (A)   Whenever a manufacturer sells a controlled substance, and whenever a
wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility sells a controlled substance in
a package the wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility has prepared, the
manufacturer or the wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility, as the
case may be, shall securely affix to each package in which the controlled
substance is contained a label showing in legible English the name and address
of the vendor and the quantity, kind, and form of controlled substance
contained therein. No person, except a pharmacist for the purpose of dispensing
a controlled substance upon a prescription shall alter, deface, or remove any
label so affixed. As used in this division, “repackager” and “outsourcing
facility” have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   (B)   No person shall alter, deface or remove any label affixed pursuant to
R.C. § 3719.08 as long as any of the original contents remain.
(R.C. § 3719.08(A), (E))
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this
section, or R.C. § 3719.07 or 3719.08, or a drug abuse offense, a violation of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the
violation involves the sale, offer to sell, or possession of a Schedule I or II
controlled substance, with the exception of marihuana, and if the offender, as
a result of the violation, is a major drug offender, then R.C. § 3719.99(D)
applies.
(R.C. § 3719.99(C))
§ 138.15 POSSESSION, SALE AND DISPOSAL OF HYPODERMICS.
   (A)   Possession of a hypodermic is authorized for the following:
      (1)   A manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in hypodermics, or
medication packaged in hypodermics, and any authorized agent of employee of
that manufacturer, distributor or dealer, in the regular course of business;
      (2)   A terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, in the regular course of
business;
      (3)   A person authorized to administer injections, in the regular course
of the person’s profession or employment;
      (4)   A person, when the hypodermic in his possession was lawfully
obtained and is kept and used for the purpose of self-administration of insulin
or other drug prescribed for the treatment of disease by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs;
      (5)   A person whose use of a hypodermic is for legal research, clinical,
educational or medicinal purposes;
      (6)   A farmer, for the lawful administration of a drug to an animal;
      (7)   A person whose use of a hypodermic is for lawful professional,
mechanical, trade or craft purposes.
   (B)   No manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in, hypodermics or
medication packaged in hypodermics, or their authorized agents or employees,
and no terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, shall display any hypodermic
for sale. No person authorized to possess a hypodermic pursuant to division (A)
of this section shall negligently fail to take reasonable precautions to
prevent any hypodermic in the person’s possession from theft or acquisition by
any unauthorized person.
(R.C. § 3719.172(A), (B))
   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of a violation of division (B) of this section, R.C. § 3719.05, 3719.06,
3719.13, 3719.172(B), or 3719.31, or a drug abuse offense, a violation of
division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 3719.99(E))
Statutory reference:
   Felony offenses, see R.C. § 3719.172(C) and (D)
§ 138.16 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE SCHEDULES.
   Controlled Substance Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as established in R.C.
§ 3719.41 and amended by R.C. §§ 3719.43 and 3719.44, are hereby adopted by
reference, and shall be treated as if set forth in full herein.
§ 138.17 UNLAWFUL FURNISHING OF PRESCRIPTION TO ENABLE PERSONS TO BE ISSUED
HANDICAPPED PARKING PLACARDS OR LICENSE PLATES.
   (A)   No physician or chiropractor shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Furnish a person with a prescription in order to enable the person
to be issued a standard removable windshield placard, temporary removable
windshield placard, permanent removable windshield placard, or license plates
under R.C. § 4503.44, knowing that the person does not meet any of the criteria
contained in R.C. § 4503.44(A)(1).
      (2)   Furnish a person with a prescription described in division (A)(1)
of this section and knowingly misstate on the prescription the length of time
the physician or chiropractor expects the person to have the disability that
limits or impairs the person’s ability to walk in order to enable the person to
retain a placard issued under R.C. § 4503.44 for a period of time longer than
that which would be estimated by a similar practitioner under the same or
similar circumstances.
(R.C. §§ 4731.481, 4734.161)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. §§ 4731.99(F), 4734.99(B))
§ 138.18 SALE OF PSEUDOEPHEDRINE.
   (A)   Unlawful purchases.
      (1)   As used in divisions (A), (B), (C) and (D) of this section:
         CONSUMER PRODUCT. Any food or drink that is consumed or used by humans
and any drug, including a drug that may be provided legally only pursuant to a
prescription, that is intended to be consumed or used by humans.
         EPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or salts
of optical isomers.
         EPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains ephedrine.
         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or
salts of optical isomers.
         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains
pseudoephedrine.
         RETAILER. A place of business that offers consumer products for sale
to the general public.
         SINGLE-INGREDIENT PREPARATION. A compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that contains a single active ingredient.
         TERMINAL DISTRIBUTOR OF DANGEROUS DRUGS. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 4729.01.
      (2)   (a)   1.   No individual shall knowingly purchase, receive, or
otherwise acquire an amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
that is greater than either of the following unless the pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product is dispensed by a pharmacist pursuant to a valid
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs and the conduct of the pharmacist and the licensed health professional
authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715,
4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, or 4741:
               a.   Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single day;
               b.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
            2.   The limits specified in divisions (A)(2)(a)1.a. and (A)(2)
(a)1.b. of this section apply to the total amount of base pseudoephedrine or
base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product,
respectively. The limits do not apply to the product’s overall weight.
         (b)   It is not a violation of division (B)(1) of this section for an
individual to receive or accept more than an amount of pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product specified in division (A)(2)(a)1.a. or (A)(2)(a)1.b. of
this section if the individual is an employee of a retailer or terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs, and the employee receives or accepts from the
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs the pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product in a sealed container in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (3)   (a)   No individual under 18 years of age shall knowingly purchase,
receive, or otherwise acquire a pseudoephedrine product, or ephedrine product
unless the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product is dispensed by a
pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs and the conduct of the pharmacist
and the licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs is in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, or 4741.
         (b)   Division (A)(3)(a) of this section does not apply to an
individual under 18 years of age who purchases, receives, or otherwise acquires
a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product from any of the following:
            1.   A licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs
or pharmacist who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides the pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to that individual and whose conduct is in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, or 4741;
            2.   A parent or guardian of that individual who provides the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            3.   A person, as authorized by that individual’s parent or
guardian, who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides the pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            4.   A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs who
provides the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to that individual if
the individual is an employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs and the individual receives or accepts from the retailer or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs the pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product in a sealed container in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (4)   No individual under 18 years of age shall knowingly show or give
false information concerning the individual’s name, age, or other
identification for the purpose of purchasing, receiving, or otherwise acquiring
a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.
      (5)   No individual shall knowingly fail to comply with the requirements
of R.C. § 3715.051(B).
      (6)   Whoever violates division (A)(2)(a) of this section is guilty of
unlawful purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (A)(3)(a) of this section is guilty of
underage purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if it could be
committed by an adult.
      (8)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) of this section is guilty of using
false information to purchase a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the first degree if it could be
committed by an adult.
      (9)   Whoever violates division (A)(5) of this section is guilty of
improper purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2925.55)
   (B)   Unlawful retail sales.
      (1)   (a)   1.   Except as provided in division (B)(1)(b) of this
section, no retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or an employee
of a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall knowingly sell,
offer to sell, hold for sale, deliver, or otherwise provide to any individual
an amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product that is greater than
either of the following:
               a.   Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single day;
               b.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
            2.   The maximum amounts specified in divisions (B)(1)(a)1.a. and
(B)(1)(a)1.b. of this section apply to the total amount of base pseudoephedrine
or base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product,
respectively. The maximum amounts do not apply to the product’s overall weight.
         (b)   1.   Division (B)(1)(a) of this section does not apply to any
quantity of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product dispensed by a
pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs if the conduct of the pharmacist and
the licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, or 4741.
            2.   It is not a violation of division (B)(1)(a) of this section
for a retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, or employee of either
to provide to an individual more than an amount of pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product specified in division (B)(1)(a)1.a. or (B)(1)(a)1.b. of this
section under either of the following circumstances:
               a.   The individual is an employee of the retailer or terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs, and the employee receives or accepts from the
retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, or employee the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product in a sealed container in
connection with manufacturing, warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging,
loading, or unloading of the product;
               b.   A stop-sale alert is generated after the submission of
information to the national precursor log exchange under the conditions
described in R.C. § 3715.052(A)(2).
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (B)(2)(b) of this section, no
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or an employee of a
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall sell, offer to sell,
hold for sale, deliver, or otherwise provide a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product to an individual who is under 18 years of age.
         (b)   Division (B)(2)(a) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
            1.   A licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs
or pharmacist who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides a pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to an individual under 18 years of age and whose
conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731,
or 4741;
            2.   A parent or guardian of an individual under 18 years of age
who provides a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            3.   A person who, as authorized by the individual’s parent or
guardian, dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product to an individual under 18 years of age;
            4.   The provision by a retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs, or employee of either of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
in a sealed container to an employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs who is under 18 years of age in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (3)   No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall fail
to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 3715.051(A) or R.C. § 3715.052(A)(2).
      (4)   No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall fail
to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 3715.052(A)(1).
      (5)   Whoever violates division (B)(1)(a) of this section is guilty of
unlawfully selling a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (B)(2)(a) of this section is guilty of
unlawfully selling a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to a minor, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (B)(3) of this section is guilty of
improper sale of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a misdemeanor
of the second degree.
      (8)   Whoever violates division (B)(4) of this section is guilty of
failing to submit information to the national precursor log exchange, a
misdemeanor for which the offender shall be fined not more than $1,000 per
violation.
(R.C. § 2925.56)
   (C)   Transaction scans.
      (1)   As used in this division and division (D) of this section:
         CARD HOLDER. Means any person who presents a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card to a seller, or an agent or employee
of a seller, to purchase or receive any pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product from the seller, agent, or employee.
         IDENTIFICATION CARD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2927.021.
         SELLER. Means a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs.
         TRANSACTION SCAN. Means the process by which a seller or an agent or
employee of a seller checks by means of a transaction scan device the validity
of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card that is
presented as a condition for purchasing or receiving any pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product.
         TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2927.021.
      (2)   (a)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may perform a
transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check the validity of
a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a
card holder as a condition for selling, giving away, or otherwise distributing
to the card holder a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.
         (b)   If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed
under division (C)(2)(a) of this section fails to match the information printed
on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by the card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the information
so printed is false or fraudulent, neither the seller nor any agent or employee
of the seller shall sell, give away, or otherwise distribute any
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the card holder.
         (c)   Division (C)(2)(a) of this section does not preclude a seller or
an agent or employee of a seller as a condition for selling, giving away, or
otherwise distributing a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the
person presenting the document from using a transaction scan device to check
the validity of a document other than a driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or an identification card if the document includes a bar code or magnetic strip
that may be scanned by the device.
      (3)   Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. §
4301.61(C) apply to the use of transaction scan devices for purposes of this
division (C) and division (D) of this section.
      (4)   (a)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information derived from
a transaction scan, except the following:
            1.   The name, address, and date of birth of the person listed on
the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by
a card holder;
            2.   The expiration date, identification number, and issuing agency
of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by a card holder.
         (b)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use the
information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is permitted to be
recorded and maintained under division (C)(4)(a) of this section except for
purposes of division (D) of this section, R.C. § 2925.58, or R.C. § 3715.052(A)
(1).
         (c)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use a
transaction scan device for a purpose other than the purpose specified in
division (C)(2)(a) of this section.
         (d)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall sell or
otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan to any
third party, including but not limited to selling or otherwise disseminating
that information for any marketing, advertising, or promotional activities, but
a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant
to a court order or as specifically authorized by division (D) of this section
or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (5)   Nothing in this division (C) or division (D) of this section
relieves a seller or an agent or employee of a seller of any responsibility to
comply with any other applicable state or federal laws or rules governing the
sale, giving away, or other distribution of pseudoephedrine products or
ephedrine products.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (C)(2)(b) or (C)(4) of this section is
guilty of engaging in an illegal pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
transaction scan, and the court may impose upon the offender a civil penalty of
up to $1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of the Court shall pay each
collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for deposit into the County
Treasury.
(R.C. § 2925.57)
   (D)   Affirmative defenses.
      (1)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be found
guilty of a charge of a violation of division (B) of this section in which the
age of the purchaser or other recipient of a pseudoephedrine product is an
element of the alleged violation if the seller, agent, or employee raises and
proves as an affirmative defense that all of the following occurred:
         (a)   A card holder attempting to purchase or receive a
pseudoephedrine product presented a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
an identification card.
         (b)   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or identification card that the card holder presented indicated that
the license or card was valid.
         (c)   The pseudoephedrine product was sold, given away, or otherwise
distributed to the card holder in reasonable reliance upon the identification
presented and the completed transaction scan.
      (2)   In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee of a seller
has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (D)(1) of this section,
the trier of fact in the action for the alleged violation of division (B) of
this section shall consider any written policy that the seller has adopted and
implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of division (B) of this
section. For purposes of division (D)(1)(c) of this section, the trier of fact
shall consider that reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and
the completed transaction scan may require a seller or an agent or employee of
a seller to exercise reasonable diligence to determine, and that the use of a
transaction scan device does not excuse a seller or an agent or employee of a
seller from exercising reasonable diligence to determine, the following:
         (a)   Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or employee of a
seller sells, gives away, or otherwise distributes a pseudoephedrine product is
18 years of age or older;
         (b)   Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a card holder
is that of the card holder.
      (3)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by
division (D)(1) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a
deputy registrar who issued an identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50
through 4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of
that issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with
the Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.
(R.C. § 2925.58)
   (E)   Retailer’s duties.
      (1)   As used in divisions (E) and (F) of this section:
         CONSUMER PRODUCT. Any food or drink that is consumed or used by humans
and any drug, including a drug that may be provided legally only pursuant to a
prescription, that is intended to be consumed or used by humans.
         DRUG. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         EPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or salts
of optical isomers.
         EPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains ephedrine.
         LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. An officer or employee of any agency or
authority of the United States, a state, a territory, a political subdivision
of a state or territory, or an Indian tribe, who is empowered by the law to
investigate or conduct an official inquiry into a potential violation of law or
prosecute or otherwise conduct a criminal, civil, or administrative proceeding
arising from an alleged violation of law.
         LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS. Has the
same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         NATIONAL PRECURSOR LOG EX-CHANGE or EXCHANGE. The electronic system
for tracking sales of pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products on a
national basis that is administered by the National Association of Drug
Diversion Investigators or a successor organization.
         PHARMACIST. A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 to engage in the
practice of pharmacy.
         PHARMACY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         PRESCRIBER. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         PRESCRIPTION. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         PROOF OF AGE. A driver’s license, a commercial driver’s license, a
military identification card, a passport, or an identification card issued
under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows a person is 18 years of age or
older.
         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or
salts of optical isomers.
         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains
pseudoephedrine.
         RETAILER. A place of business that offers consumer products for sale
to the general public.
         SINGLE-INGREDIENT PREPARATION. A compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that contains a single active ingredient.
         STOP-SALE ALERT. A notification sent from the national precursor log
exchange to a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs indicating
that the completion of a sale of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
would result in a violation of R.C. § 2925.56(A)(1) or federal law.
         TERMINAL DISTRIBUTOR OF DANGEROUS DRUGS. Has the same meanings as in
R.C. § 4729.01.
         WHOLESALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
      (2)   A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs that sells,
offers to sell, holds for sale, delivers, or otherwise provides a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the public shall do all of the
following:
         (a)   Segregate pseudoephedrine products or ephedrine products from
other merchandise so that no member of the public may procure or purchase such
products without the direct assistance of a pharmacist or other authorized
employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs;
         (b)   With regard to each time a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product is sold or otherwise provided without a valid prescription:
            1.   Determine, by examination of a valid proof of age, that the
purchaser or recipient is at least 18 years of age;
            2.   a.   Using any information available, including information
from the national precursor log exchange if the information is accessible, make
a reasonable attempt to ensure that no individual purchases or receives an
amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product that is greater than
either of the following:
                  i.   Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single
day;
                  ii.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
               b.   The maximum amounts specified in divisions (E)(2)(b)2.a.i.
and (E)(2)(b)2.a.ii. of this section apply to the total amount of base
pseudoephedrine or base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product, respectively. The maximum amounts do not apply to the product’s
overall weight.
         (c)   Maintain a log book of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product purchases, in accordance with R.C. § 3715.051;
         (d)   If required to comply with section R.C. § 3715.052, submit the
information specified in divisions (A)(1)(a) to (A)(1)(d) of that section to
the national precursor log exchange.
      (3)   Prescriptions, orders, and records maintained pursuant to this
section and stocks of pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products shall be
open for inspection to federal, state, county, and municipal officers, and
employees of the State Board of Pharmacy whose duty it is to enforce the laws
of this state or of the United States relating to controlled substances. Such
prescriptions, orders, records, and stocks shall be open for inspection by the
State Medical Board and its employees for purposes of enforcing R.C. Chapter
4731.
(R.C. § 3715.05)
   (F)   Theft or loss; reporting requirements.
      (1)   Each retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy,
prescriber, or wholesaler that sells, offers to sell, holds for sale, delivers,
or otherwise provides any pseudoephedrine product and that discovers the theft
or loss of any pseudoephedrine product in an amount of more than nine grams per
incident of theft or loss shall notify all of the following upon discovery of
the theft or loss:
         (a)   The State Board of Pharmacy, by telephone immediately upon
discovery of the theft or loss;
         (b)   Law enforcement authorities. If the incident is a theft and the
theft constitutes a felony, the retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs, pharmacy, prescriber, or wholesaler shall report the theft to the law
enforcement authorities in accordance with R.C. § 2921.22.
      (2)   Within 30 days after making a report by telephone to the State
Board of Pharmacy pursuant to division (F)(1)(a) of this section, a retailer,
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy, prescriber, or wholesaler
shall send a written report to the State Board of Pharmacy.
      (3)   The reports required under this section shall identify the product
that was stolen or lost, the amount of the product stolen or lost, and the date
and time of discovery of the theft or loss.
(R.C. § 3715.06)
§ 138.19 SALE OF PURE CAFFEINE PRODUCT.
   (A)   As used in this section, PURE CAFFEINE PRODUCT means:
      (1)   Subject to division (A)(2) of this section, a product that consists
solely or primarily of caffeine and is manufactured into a crystalline, liquid,
or powdered form.
      (2)   The phrase does not include any of the following that contains
caffeine and is formulated, manufactured, and labeled in accordance with the
laws and regulations enforced by the United States Food and Drug
Administration:
         (a)   Coffee, tea, any soft drink, any energy drink, or any other
caffeine-containing beverage;
         (b)   Any energy product.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (C) of this section, no person shall
knowingly sell or offer for sale a pure caffeine product.
   (C)   Division (B) of this section does not prohibit a person from selling
or offering for sale any product manufactured in a unit-dose form such as a
pill, tablet, or caplet, but only if each unit dose of the product contains not
more than 250 milligrams of caffeine.
   (D)   Nothing in this section prohibits either of the following:
      (1)   Possession of a product described in division (C) of this section;
      (2)   Possession of a pure caffeine product by any of the following:
         (a)   A food processing establishment, as defined in R.C. § 3715.021;
         (b)   A manufacturer of a drug that is available without a
prescription;
         (c)   A laboratory that holds a current, valid category III terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs license issued by the state board of pharmacy
under R.C. § 4729.54;
         (d)   A laboratory of any agency or department of this state that
performs testing, analysis, and other laboratory services on behalf of the
state;
         (e)   A postal or delivery service that transports or delivers a pure
caffeine product to an entity specified in divisions (D)(2)(a) to (D)(2)(d) of
this section.
   (E)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of illegal
sale of pure caffeine, a minor misdemeanor on a first offense and a misdemeanor
of the third degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 2925.34)
§ 138.20 SALE OF DEXTROMETHORPHAN.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      DEXTROMETHORPHAN. Means the dextrorotatory isomer of 3-methoxy-N-
methylmorphinan, including its salts, but not including its racemic or
levorotatory forms.
      EVIDENCE OF MAJORITY AND IDENTITY. Means a document issued by the federal
government or a state, county, or municipal government, or a subdivision or
agency of any of the foregoing, including a driver’s or commercial driver’s
license, an identification card issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52, a
military identification card, or any other form of identification that bears
the name, date of birth, description, and picture of the person identified.
      RETAILER. Means a place of business that offers consumer products for
sale to the general public, including a terminal distributor of dangerous drugs
that is licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 and operated as a pharmacy.
   (B)   No retailer or employee of a retailer shall knowingly supply, deliver,
give, or otherwise provide a drug, material, compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance containing any quantity of dextromethorphan through the sale of any
product to a person under 18 years of age, unless the person has been issued a
prescription for the product being purchased.
   (C)   For purposes of division (B) of this section, the person making the
sale of a product containing dextromethorphan shall require and obtain evidence
of majority and identity from the purchaser, unless from the purchaser’s
outward appearance the person making the sale would reasonably presume the
purchaser to be 25 years of age or older. Proof that the person making the sale
demanded, was shown, and acted in reasonable reliance on the purchaser’s
evidence of majority and identity is a defense to any charge of a violation of
division (B) of this section.
   (D)   A retailer or employee of a retailer is not liable for damages in a
civil action for injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly
arises from an act or omission associated with a failure to prevent the sale of
a product containing dextromethorphan to a person under 18 years of age, unless
the act or omission constitutes willful or wanton misconduct.
   (E)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of illegally
selling dextromethorphan, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2925.62)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
151.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
152.   HOUSING CODES
      
153.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
154.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   Registration of mobile homes
   
150.02   Land reutilization program
   
150.03   Driveway regulations adopted by reference
   
150.04   Design guidelines adopted by reference
   
150.05   Application of Residential Building Code for One-, Two- and Three-
Family Dwellings
Planning and Zoning
   
150.20   Planning Commission
   
150.21   Board of Zoning Appeals
Statutory reference:
   Advice from regional planning commission, see R.C. § 711.10
   Approval of subdivisions and plats, see R.C. § 711.09
   Basis of districting or zoning; classification of buildings and structures,
see R.C. § 713.10
   Enactment and amendment of subdivision regulations, see R.C. § 711.101
   Lost or destroyed records, see R.C. §§ 711.34 et seq.
   Notice and hearing on municipal zoning regulations, see R.C. § 713.12
   Original plats, see R.C. §§ 711.01 et seq.
   Planned Community Law, see R.C. §§ 5312.01 et seq.
   Restriction on location, height, bulk and location of buildings and
structures, see R.C. §§ 713.07 et seq.
   Revision of plats, see R.C. §§ 711.28 et seq.
   Vacating plats, see R.C. §§ 711.17 et seq.
   Violation of zoning ordinances, see R.C. § 713.13
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 REGISTRATION OF MOBILE HOMES.
   (A)   The owner and/or occupant of any mobile home located within the limits
of the village shall, not later than 60 days after the effective date of this
section, cause such mobile home to be registered in the office of the Community
Development Director or the Police Department, upon such forms as may be
prescribed by the Community Development Director to facilitate the uses and
purposes of this section.
   (B)   Upon registration of such mobile home, the owner and/or occupant
thereof shall be issued a registration certificate or decal, which shall be
permanently and prominently affixed to the mobile home within a one-foot radius
of the door handle of the main entrance of the mobile home. On and after the
effective date of this section, it shall be a minor misdemeanor to occupy, own,
locate or place within the limits of the village a mobile home which is not
registered in accordance with this section. On and after the expiration of 60
days from the effective date of this section, any mobile home located within
the village may be registered only upon a payment of a $20 fee for the
registration.
   (C)   One mobile home may be substituted for another previously registered
upon the surrender of the registration certificate previously issued and
without payment of an additional fee.
   (D)   For the purpose of computing a period of time prescribed for the
continuance of a nonconforming use under the terms and conditions of the zoning
ordinance of the village, no mobile home shall be deemed to be used for
residence purposes until that home is appropriately registered.
   (E)   If a mobile home is not registered within that period of time
prescribed for registration and preservation of a nonconforming use of the
zoning ordinances of the village, then the right to a nonconforming use shall
terminate and be of no further force or effect.
(Prior Code, § 150.50) (Ord. 1976-B, passed 1-9-1976) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.02 LAND REUTILIZATION PROGRAM.
   (A)   The village designated unproductive land acquired by it under R.C. §§
5722.03 or 5722.10 and any other land it acquires as a part of its land
reutilization program.
   (B)   The village shall hold and administer such real property in a
governmental capacity for the benefit of the village and of other taxing
districts having an interest in the taxes, assessments, charges, interest and
penalties due and owing thereon at the time of the property’s acquisition by
the village.
   (C)   The village shall:
      (1)   Manage, maintain and protect, or temporarily use for a public
purpose, such land in such manner as it deems appropriate;
      (2)   Compile and maintain a written inventory of all such land. The
inventory shall be available for public inspection and distribution at all
times;
      (3)   Study, analyze and evaluate potential, present and future uses for
such land which would provide for the effective reutilization of the
nonproductive land;
      (4)   Establish and maintain records and accounts reflecting all
transactions, expenditures and revenues relating to its land reutilization
program, including separate itemizations of all transactions, expenditures and
revenues concerning each individual parcel of real property acquired as a part
of such program; and
      (5)   Disposition of land acquired under this section shall be made
pursuant to R.C § 5722.08, and maintain records and accounts reflecting all
transactions, expenditures and revenues relating to its land reutilization
program, including separate itemizations of all transactions, expenditures and
revenues concerning each individual parcel of property acquired as part of such
program.
   (D)   A Committee is established comprised of a representative of each
taxing district within the village. Each member of the Committee shall be
appointed by, and serve at the pleasure of, the taxing district the member
represents. A representative may be an employee of the taxing district. All
members shall serve without compensation. The Committee shall meet at least
quarterly to review the operations of the land reutilization program and to
advise the electing subdivision concerning any matter relating to such.
   (E)   A Neighborhood Advisory Committee is established consisting of persons
living or owning property within the village and affected by the program. The
Committee shall consist of five persons to be appointed by the Mayor of the
village for two-year overlapping terms. The village shall consult with the
Neighborhood Advisory Committee at least quarterly to review the operations of
the land reutilization program and to receive the advice of the members of the
Neighborhood Advisory Committee concerning any matter relating to the program
which comes before the Committee, including a specific interim use plan for the
land.
   (F)   The Village Clerk shall notify the County Auditor of its intention to
return nonproductive land to tax revenue generating status or the devotion
thereof to public use and request a list of all delinquent lands within an
electing subdivision’s boundaries that have been forfeited to the state
pursuant to R.C. § 5723.01.
(Prior Code, § 150.51) (Ord. 2001-38, passed 8-21-2001)
§ 150.03 DRIVEWAY REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The driveway regulations, copies of which are on file in the office of the
Village Clerk, are adopted and incorporated as part of this code of ordinances
as fully as if set out at length herein.
(Prior Code, § 150.52) (Ord. 2003-13, passed 4-22-2003)
§ 150.04 DESIGN GUIDELINES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The design guidelines, copies of which are on file in the office of the
Village Clerk, are adopted and incorporated as part of this code of ordinances
as fully as if set out at length herein.
(Prior Code, § 150.53) (Ord. 2003-40, passed 3-22-2005)
§ 150.05 APPLICATION OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE FOR ONE-, TWO- AND THREE-
FAMILY DWELLINGS.
   The State Residential Building Code for One, Two and Three-Family Dwellings,
O.A.C. § 4101:8, as promulgated by the State Board of Building Standards, shall
apply and be enforced within the village, except plumbing.
(Prior Code, § 150.54) (Ord. 2007-02, passed 1-9-2007)
PLANNING AND ZONING
§ 150.20 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Establishment; membership; compensation; general powers.
      (1)   The Legislative Authority may establish a commission of five
members, consisting of the Mayor, one member of the Legislative Authority to be
elected by the Legislative Authority for the remainder of the individual’s term
as such member of the Legislative Authority, and two citizens of the
municipality, and one public member to be appointed by the Mayor for terms of
six years each, except that the term of one of the members of the first
Planning Commission shall be for four years and one for two years. All members
shall serve without compensation.
      (2)   The public member appointed under this section need not be
residents of the municipality but shall be residents of the county in which the
municipality is located or a township that is adjacent to the county. For
purposes of this section, all members of the Planning Commission are subject to
R.C. § 2921.42.
      (3)   Whenever the Planning Commission is appointed under this section,
it shall have all the powers conferred in R.C. § 735.15.
      (4)   If and when the municipality adopts a Charter, and except as
otherwise may be provided in that Charter, a Planning Commission created in the
manner and by virtue of authority granted by such Charter shall have the powers
of, and the plans made by it shall have the effect of, a planning commission or
city plan created under R.C. §§ 713.01 through 713.15.
      (5)   Any member of a Planning Commission established under this section
or by Charter, except as otherwise provided in such Charter, may hold any other
public office and may serve as a member of a county planning commission and/or
a regional planning commission.
(R.C. § 713.01)
   (B)   Specific powers and duties.
      (1)   The Planning Commission established under this section shall make
plans and maps of the whole or any portion of the municipality, and of any land
outside thereof, which, in the opinion of the Commission, is related to the
planning of the municipality, and make changes in such plans or maps when it
deems it advisable. Such maps or plans shall show the Commission’s
recommendations for the general location, character and extent of streets,
alleys, ways, viaducts, bridges, waterways, waterfronts, subways, boulevards,
parkways, parks, playgrounds, aviation fields and other public grounds, ways
and open spaces; the general location of public buildings and other public
property; the general location and extent of public utilities and terminals,
whether publicly or privately owned or operated, for water, light, sanitation,
transportation, communication, power and other purposes; and the removal,
relocation, widening, narrowing, vacating, abandonment, change of use of or
extension of such public ways, grounds, open spaces, buildings, property,
utilities or terminals. With a view to the systematic planning of the
municipality, the Commission may make recommendations to public officials
concerning the general location, character and extent of any such public ways,
grounds, open spaces, buildings, property, utilities or terminals. As the work
of making the whole plan progresses, the Commission may from time to time adopt
and publish any part thereof, and such part shall cover one or more major
sections or divisions of the municipality or one or more of the functional
matters to be included in the plan. The Commission may from time to time amend,
extend or add to the plan. This section does not confer any powers on the
Commission with respect to the construction, maintenance, use or enlargement of
improvements by any public utility or railroad on its own property if such
utility is owned or operated by an individual, partnership, association or a
corporation for profit.
      (2)   The Planning Commission may accept, receive and expend funds,
grants and services from the federal government or its agencies, from
departments, agencies and instrumentalities of the state or any adjoining state
or from one or more counties of the state or any adjoining state or from any
municipal corporation or political subdivision of this or any adjoining state,
including county, regional and municipal planning commissions of this or any
adjoining state, or from civic sources, and contract with respect thereto,
either separately or jointly or cooperatively, and provide such information and
reports as may be necessary to secure such financial aid.
      (3)   The Commission may control, preserve and care for historical
landmarks; control, in the manner provided by ordinance, the design and
location of statuary and other works of art, which are the property of the
municipality; control the removal, relocation and alteration of any such works;
and control the design of harbors, bridges, viaducts, street fixtures and other
public structures and appurtenances.
      (4)   Whenever the Commission makes a plan of the municipality, or any
portion thereof, no public building or structure, street, boulevard, parkway,
park, playground, public ground, canal, river front, harbor, dock, wharf,
bridge, viaduct, tunnel or other public way, ground, works or utility, whether
publicly or privately owned, or a part thereof, shall be constructed or
authorized to be constructed in the municipality or a planned portion thereof
unless the location, character and extent thereof is approved by the
Commission. In case of disapproval, the Commission shall communicate its
reasons therefor to the Legislative Authority and to the head of the department
which has control of the construction of the proposed improvement or utility.
The Legislative Authority, by a vote of not less than two-thirds of its members
and of such department head, together may overrule such disapproval. If such
public way, ground, works, building, structure or utility is one the
authorization or financing of which does not, under the law or charter
provisions governing it, fall within the province of the Legislative Authority
or any other municipal body or official, the submission to the Commission shall
be by the state, school, county, district or township official, board,
commission or body having such jurisdiction, and the Commission’s disapproval
may be overruled by such official, board, commission or body by a vote of not
less than two-thirds of its membership. The narrowing, ornamentation, vacation
or change in the use of streets and other public ways, grounds and places shall
be subject to similar approval, and disapproval may be similarly overruled. The
Commission may make recommendations to any public authorities or to any
corporations or individuals in the municipality, or the territory contiguous
thereto, concerning the location of any buildings, structures or works to be
erected or constructed by them.
(R.C. § 713.02)
   (C)   Commission shall be Platting Commission. The Planning Commission of
the municipality shall be the Platting Commission thereof, and all the powers
and duties provided by R.C. §§ 735.17 through 735.26 shall, upon the
appointment of a Planning Commission under this section, be transferred to it.
(R.C. § 713.03)
   (D)   Control of buildings. The Legislative Authority may authorize the
Planning Commission to control the height, design and location of buildings.
(R.C. § 713.04)
   (E)   Employment of architects and engineers. The Planning Commission may
control, appoint or employ such architects, engineers and other professional
service, and may appoint such clerks, draftsmen and other subordinates as are
necessary for the performance of its functions. The expenditures for such
service and employments shall be within the amounts appropriated for such
persons by the Legislative Authority, and the Legislative Authority shall
provide for the expenses and accommodations necessary for the work of the
Commission.
(R.C. § 713.05)
   (F)   Division of municipality into zones. The Planning Commission may frame
and adopt a plan for dividing the municipality or any portion thereof into
zones or districts, representing the recommendations of the Commission, in the
interest of the public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity or
general welfare, for the limitation and regulation of the height, bulk and
location of buildings and other structures, including percentage of lot
occupancy, setback building lines, area and dimensions of yards, courts and
other open spaces, and uses, of buildings and other structures and of premises
in such zones or districts.
(R.C. § 713.06)
§ 150.21 BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.
   (A)   The Legislative Authority may create an administrative board to
administer the details of the application of the regulations under R.C. §§
713.06 through 713.12, and may delegate to such board, in accordance with
general rules to be set forth in the districting ordinances and regulations,
the power to hear and determine appeals from refusal of building permits by
building commissioners or other officers, to permit exceptions to and
variations from the district regulations in the classes of cases or situations
specified in the regulations, and to administer the regulations as specified
therein. Such administrative powers and functions may be delegated by the
Legislative Authority to the Planning Commission or to the Board of Zoning
Appeals.
   (B)   If the county administers a county zoning resolution, the Legislative
Authority and the Board of County Commissioners may contract with each other to
have the county administer local zoning regulations, with its powers to include
hearing and deciding zoning appeals and authorizing variances.
(R.C. § 713.11)
CHAPTER 151: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Statutory authorization
   
151.02   Findings of fact
   
151.03   Statement of purpose
   
151.04   Methods of reducing flood losses
   
151.05   Definitions
   
151.06   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
151.07   Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard
   
151.08   Compliance
   
151.09   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
151.10   Interpretation
   
151.11   Warning and disclaimer of liability
Administration
   
151.25   Establishment of development permit
   
151.26   Exemption from filing a development permit
   
151.27   Designation of administrator of this chapter
   
151.28   Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator
   
151.29   Variance procedure
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
151.40   General standards
   
151.41   Specific standards
   
151.42   Floodways
   
151.43   Construction of elevated structures
Motor Homes and Campers
   
151.55   Registration of campers and motor homes
   
151.56   Special regulations required for flood season
   
151.57   Fine for leaving campers and motor homes in flooded areas
 
   
151.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   Article XVIII, § 3, of the State Constitution grants municipalities the
legal authority to adopt land use and control measures for promoting the
health, safety and general welfare of its citizens. Therefore, the Village
Council does ordain this chapter.
(Ord. 2015-6, passed 3-24-2015)
§ 151.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the village are subject to periodic
inundation, which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in areas of special flood hazards, which increase flood heights and velocities,
and, when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are
inadequately flood proofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood also
contribute to the flood loss.
(Ord. 2015-6, passed 3-24-2015)
§ 151.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Protect human life and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the proper use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
   (G)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
(Ord. 2015-6, passed 3-24-2015)
§ 151.04 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
   (A)   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety
and property due to water hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
flood heights or velocities;
   (B)   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;
   (D)   Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
   (E)   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other
areas.
(Ord. 2015-6, passed 3-24-2015)
§ 151.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure on the same lot with, and of a nature
customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal structure.
   APPEAL. A request for review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain subject to a 1% or
greater chance of flooding in any given year. AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD are
designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as Zones A, AE, AH, AO,
A1-30 and A99.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year. The BASE FLOOD may also be referred to as the 100-YEAR FLOOD.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor sub grade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA). The agency with the overall
responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance Program.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency has delineated the areas of special flood hazard.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report in which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has provided flood profiles, floodway boundaries and the
water surface elevations of the base flood.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that have been reserved in order to pass the base flood discharge without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than an allowable rise
as delineated in the flood insurance study. A FLOODWAY is typically determined
through a hydraulic and hydrologic engineering analysis such that the
cumulative increase in the water surface elevation of the base flood discharge
is no more than a designated height.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listings on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided, that such
enclosure is built in accordance with the applicable design requirements
specified in this chapter for enclosures below the LOWEST FLOOR.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided
into three or more manufactured home lots for rent. This definition shall
exclude any manufactured home park, as defined in R.C. Chapter 4781, for which
the Public Health Council has exclusive rule making power.
   MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two or more manufactured home lots for sale. This definition shall
exclude any manufactured home park, as defined in R.C. Chapter 4781, for which
the Public Health Council has exclusive rule making power.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the “start of construction” commenced
on or after the initial effective date of the village flood insurance rate map,
and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. The date the building permit was issued, provided the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The
ACTUAL START means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation
of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. PERMANENT
CONSTRUCTION does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of a building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, manufactured home or gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions;
      (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure; provided, that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure; or
      (3)   Any improvement to a structure, which is considered new
construction.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the standards of this chapter consistent
with the variance conditions herein.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter.
(Ord. 2015-6, passed 3-24-2015)
§ 151.06 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the village as identified by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, including any additional flood hazard areas annexed by the village that
are not identified on the effective flood insurance rate map.
(Ord. 2015-6, passed 3-24-2015)
§ 151.07 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   The areas of special flood hazard have been identified by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled
“Flood Insurance Study for Clermont and Incorporated Areas”, effective March
16, 2006. This study, with accompanying “Flood Insurance Rate Maps for Clermont
County and Incorporated Areas”, effective March 16, 2006, and any revisions
thereto, is adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The
Flood Insurance Study is on file at 102 Willow Street.
(Ord. 2015-6, passed 3-24-2015)
§ 151.08 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, erected, constructed,
reconstructed, repaired, extended, converted, enlarged or altered without full
compliance with the terms of this chapter and all other applicable regulations
which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter, unless
specifically exempted from filing for a development permit as stated in §
151.26.
(Ord. 2015-6, passed 3-24-2015)
§ 151.09 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 2015-6, passed 3-24-2015)
§ 151.10 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions
shall be:
      (1)   Considered as minimum requirements;
      (2)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
      (3)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
   (B)   Where a provision of this chapter may be in conflict with a state law,
such state law shall take precedence over this chapter.
(Ord. 2015-6, passed 3-24-2015)
§ 151.11 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the village, any officer or employee
thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damage that
results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.
(Ord. 2015-6, passed 3-24-2015)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 151.25 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   A development permit shall be obtained from the Floodplain
Administrator before construction or development begins within any area of
special flood hazard established in §
151.07.
   (B)   Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished
by the Floodplain Administrator and may include, but not be limited to: site
specific topographic plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of
the foregoing. The following information is required:
      (1)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor,
including basement, of all proposed structures located in special flood hazard
areas where base flood elevation data are utilized;
      (2)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed
structure will be flood proofed in accordance with §
151.41(B) where base flood elevation data are utilized;
      (3)   Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the flood proofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the flood
proofing criteria in §
151.41(B) where base flood elevation data are utilized;
      (4)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of the proposed development and certification by a
registered professional engineer that the flood carrying capacity of the
watercourse will not be diminished; and
      (5)   Certification by a registered professional engineer, architect or
surveyor of the structure’s as-built lowest floor or flood proofed elevation.
(Ord. 2015-6, passed 3-24-2015)
§ 151.26 EXEMPTION FROM FILING A DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   An application for a development permit shall not be required for
maintenance work such as roofing, painting and basement sealing, or for small
nonstructural development activities (except for filling and grading) valued at
less than $1,000. Any proposed action exempt from filing for a development
permit is also exempt from the standards of this chapter.
(Ord. 2015-6, passed 3-24-2015)
§ 151.27 DESIGNATION OF ADMINISTRATOR OF THIS CHAPTER.
   The Floodplain Administrator is appointed to administer and implement this
chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance
with its provisions.
(Ord. 2015-6, passed 3-24-2015)
§ 151.28 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but are not limited to, the following:
   (A)   Permit review.
      (1)   Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
      (2)   Review all development permits to assure that all necessary permits
have been received from those federal, state or local governmental agencies
from which prior approval is required. The applicant shall be responsible for
obtaining such permits as required, including permits issued by the Department
of the Army under § 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act and § 404 of the Clean
Water Act;
      (3)   Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located within a designated floodway. Floodways are delineated
in the flood boundary and floodway map or the flood insurance rate map of the
flood insurance study. Floodways may also be delineated in other sources of
flood information. If the proposed development is located within a designated
floodway, assure that the encroachment provision of §
151.42(A) is met; and
      (4)   Inspect all development projects before, during and after
construction to ensure proper elevation of the structure and to ensure
compliance with all provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Use of other base flood elevation and floodway data. Areas of special
flood hazard where base flood elevation data have not been provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in accordance with §
151.07, are designated as Zone A on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map.
Within these areas, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a
federal, state or other source, including data obtained under §
151.41(A), (B) and (F), and §
151.42;
   (C)   Information to be obtained and maintained. Where base flood elevation
data are utilized within areas of special flood hazard on a community’s flood
insurance rate map, regardless of the source of such data, the following
provisions apply:
      (1)   Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially
improved structures, and record whether or not such structures contain an
enclosure below the lowest floor; and
      (2)   For all new or substantially improved flood proofed nonresidential
structures:
         (a)   Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) to which the structure was flood proofed;
         (b)   Maintain the flood proofing certifications required in §
151.25(B)(3); and
         (c)   Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter including base flood elevation data, flood insurance
rate maps and flood boundary and floodway maps, variance documentation,
conditional letters of map revision, letters of map revision, letters of map
amendment and as-built elevations.
   (D)   Alteration of watercourses.
      (1)   Notify adjacent communities, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and
the State Department of Natural Resources, Division of Water, prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. A watercourse is
considered to be ALTERED if any change occurs within its banks;
      (2)   Maintain engineering documentation required in §
151.25(B)(4) that the flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse will not be diminished; and
      (3)   Require that necessary maintenance will be provided for the altered
or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity
will not be diminished.
   (E)   Interpretation of flood boundaries. Make interpretations, where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a
mapped boundary and actual field conditions). Where a map boundary and field
elevations disagree, the elevations delineated in the flood elevation profile
shall prevail. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in §
151.29; and
   (F)   Alteration of community boundaries. Upon occurrence, notify FEMA in
writing whenever the boundaries of the village have been modified by annexation
or the community has assumed authority over an area, or no longer has authority
to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for a particular area.
In order that the village’s flood insurance rate map accurately represent the
village’s boundaries, include within such notification a copy of a map of the
village suitable for reproduction, clearly delineating the new corporate limits
or the new area for which the village has assumed or relinquished floodplain
management regulatory authority.
(Ord. 2015-6, passed 3-24-2015)
§ 151.29 VARIANCE PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Appeal Board.
      (1)   The Board of Zoning and Floodplain Appeals as established by the
village shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   The Zoning and Floodplain Appeals Board shall hear and decide
appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or
determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
      (3)   Those aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Appeals or any
taxpayer may appeal such decision to the County Court of Common Pleas, as
provided in R.C. Chapter 2506.
      (4)   In passing upon such applications, the Board of Appeals shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified
in other sections of this chapter, and:
         (a)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
         (b)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
         (c)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         (d)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the community;
         (e)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use,
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
         (f)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location where
applicable;
         (g)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
         (h)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area;
         (i)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         (j)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
         (k)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
      (5)   Upon consideration of the factors of division (A)(4) above and the
purposes of this chapter, the Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this
chapter.
      (6)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency upon request.
   (B)   Conditions for variances.
      (1)   Variances may only be issued where, due to physical characteristics
of the property, compliance with the requirements of this chapter creates an
exceptional hardship. Increased cost or inconvenience of meeting the
requirements of this chapter do not constitute an exceptional hardship.
      (2)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (4)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level; providing, items in division (A)(4)(a) above have
been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the
technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
      (5)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
      (6)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights beyond that which is allowed in this chapter,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in
division (A)(4) above or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
         (d)   A determination that the structure or other development is
protected by methods to minimize flood damages.
      (7)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation and the cost of flood insurance will
be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor
elevation.
(Ord. 2015-6, passed 3-24-2015)
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 151.40 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazard, the following standards are required.
   (A)   Anchoring.
      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
      (2)   All manufactured homes not otherwise regulated by the state
statutes pertaining to manufactured home parks shall be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. Methods of anchoring may
include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground
anchors.
      (3)   All above ground gas or liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to
prevent flotation or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads.
   (B)   Construction materials and methods.
      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage.
      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
      (3)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
   (C)   Utilities. The following standards apply to all water supply, sanitary
sewerage and waste disposal systems not otherwise regulated by the state
statutes:
      (1)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems;
      (2)   New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into flood waters; and
      (3)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (D)   Subdivision proposals.
      (1)   All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home
subdivisions, shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
      (2)   All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home
subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
      (3)   All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home
subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.
      (4)   All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home
subdivisions, shall meet the specific standards of §
151.41(F).
(Ord. 2015-6, passed 3-24-2015) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.41 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in §§
151.07,
151.28(B) or division (F) below, the following provisions are required.
   (A)   Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to the base flood elevation.
   (B)   Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level
of the base flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall:
      (1)   Be flood proofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water to the level of the base
flood elevation. In order to be eligible for lower flood insurance rates, the
structure should be flood proofed at least one foot above the base flood
elevation;
      (2)   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
      (3)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting the standards of this division (B). Such
certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in §
151.25(B)(3).
   (C)   Accessory structures. A relief to the elevation or dry flood proofing
standards may be granted for accessory structures (e.g., sheds, detached
garages) containing 576 square feet or less in gross floor area. Such
structures must meet the encroachment provisions of §
151.42 and the following additional standards.
      (1)   They shall not be used for human habitation.
      (2)   They shall be constructed of flood resistant materials.
      (3)   They shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to
offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
      (4)   They shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation.
      (5)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall
be elevated or flood proofed to or above the level of the base flood elevation.
      (6)   They shall meet the opening requirements of division (E) below.
   (D)   Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
      (1)   The following standards shall apply to all new and substantially
improved manufactured homes and all recreational vehicles not subject to the
manufactured home requirements of R.C. Chapter 4781:
         (a)   Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with §
151.40(A)(2).
         (b)   Manufactured homes shall be elevated on a permanent foundation
such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at a minimum of one foot
above the base flood elevation.
      (2)   Each recreational vehicle must meet one of the following:
         (a)   Ready for highway use and fully licensed with the owner of each
recreational vehicle providing a copy of the current registration for the
recreational vehicle to the village; or
         (b)   Removed from its site at least every 180 consecutive days with
verification of the removal documented and provided to the Village Zoning
Official. Proper documentation shall consist of dated photographic depiction of
the vacated site with the address of the site clearly visible in the photograph
or an affidavit provided to the Village Zoning Official attesting to the
removal of the recreational vehicle from the site.
      (3)   Meet all standards of division (D)(1) above.
   (E)   Enclosures below the lowest floor. The following standards apply to
all new and substantially improved residential and nonresidential structures,
which are elevated to the base flood elevation using pilings, columns or posts.
Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are useable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and
which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must:
      (1)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or
      (2)   Must meet or exceed the following criteria.
         (a)   A minimum of two openings on different walls having a total net
area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided.
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
openings: provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
   (F)   Subdivisions and large developments. In all areas of special flood
hazard where base flood elevation data have not been provided in accordance
with §§
151.07 or
151.28, the following standards apply to all subdivision proposals, including
manufactured home subdivisions, and other proposed developments containing at
least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
      (1)   The applicant shall provide base flood elevation data performed
accordance with standard engineering practices.
      (2)   If division (F)(1) above is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this section and §
151.40.
(Ord. 2015-6, passed 3-24-2015) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.42 FLOODWAYS.
   The flood insurance study referenced in §
151.07 identifies a segment within areas of special flood hazard known as a
floodway. Floodways may also be delineated in other sources of flood
information as specified in §
151.28. The floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of
floodwaters, which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential.
The following provisions apply within all delineated floodway areas:
   (A)   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other development, unless a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
performed in accordance with standard engineering practices demonstrates that
the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge;
   (B)   If division (A) above is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of §
151.41; and
   (C)   Any encroachment within the floodway that would result in an increase
in base flood elevations can only be granted upon the prior approval by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency. Such requests must be submitted by the
Floodplain Administrator to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and must
meet the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program.
(Ord. 2015-6, passed 3-24-2015) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.43 CONSTRUCTION OF ELEVATED STRUCTURES.
   (A)   New permanent residential construction or replacement of factory built
units, modular or mobile, shall have the lowest floor intended for human
occupancy elevated above the base flood elevation.
   (B)   Construction covered shall have provisions for drainage away from the
lowest level of structure to guide rising or receding waters around and away
from structure.
   (C)   Support below the lowest floor may be of poured in place reinforced
concrete, structural steel, reinforced concrete masonry or heavy treated
timbers. Structure shall be designed to resist static and dynamic loading.
Dynamic loading shall be calculated to base flood elevation level and shall
include current with debris. Design minimum shall be six miles per hour current
with a 1,000-pound floating debris strike.
   (D)   If design is for fully or partially enclosed area(s) below the lowest
floor, such area(s) shall be used solely for parking vehicles, incidental
storage and access. When used for vehicle parking, the floor construction shall
be protected by one-hour fire rated ceiling.
   (E)   No heating, ventilating or air conditioning equipment and no electric
panel boards shall be located below the base flood elevation.
   (F)   Fully enclosed area(s) below the lowest floor shall be designed to
provide for automatic equalization of hydrostatic forces from rising or
receding waters per §
151.41(E).
   (G)   Support structures shall be designed by a professional engineer or
architect, registered in the state, and the plans shall carry the name, address
and registration number of the designer.
   (H)   The designer shall furnish to the village, upon request, copies of the
design parameters and calculations. Review of the design calculations by the
village does not absolve the designer of the responsibility for the
appropriateness or structural adequacy of the design.
(Ord. 2011-15, passed 8-23-2011; Ord. 2015-6, passed 3-24-2015) Penalty, see §
151.99
MOTOR HOMES AND CAMPERS
§ 151.55 REGISTRATION OF CAMPERS AND MOTOR HOMES.
   To comply with the guidelines of the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) and minimize the potential damage caused to property by campers and
motor homes left in flood waters, the village has adopted these requirements to
the village’s floodplain regulations.
(Ord. 2019-10, passed 10-8-2019)
§ 151.56 SPECIAL REGULATIONS REQUIRED FOR FLOOD SEASON.
   (A)   For campers and motor homes located on property within the floodplain
(below 505 feet) in the village during FLOOD SEASON, defined as November 15 to
March 15, these vehicles will need to be registered with the village. A list of
all lots with campers and motor homes left during the off season in River Pines
will be provided to the village by River Pines’ Board of Directors. In
addition, campers left within the floodplain will also be expected to adhere to
other village zoning and traffic regulations.
   (B)   Lot owners with campers or motor homes found within the floodplain not
registered and not on the list after November 15 and before March 15 will be
subject to a fine of $100 per day.
(Ord. 2019-10, passed 10-8-2019)
§ 151.57 FINE FOR LEAVING CAMPERS AND MOTOR HOMES IN FLOODED AREAS.
   (A)   It is the responsibility of the lot owner of the camper or motor home
to maintain the license, registration and roadworthiness of their unit as also
required by FEMA. It is also the responsibility of the lot owner to determine
when road conditions allow safe and lawful removal of their units.
   (B)   In the event of a flood, any registered lot owner with a camper or
motor home that is not removed and remains in a flooded area will be fined
$1,000 per day. This additional fine does not apply to flood events that occur
outside the defined flood season of November 15 to March 15. This flood level
threshold and evacuation procedure is defined by the River Pines’ Board of
Directors.
(Ord. 2019-10, passed 10-8-2019)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Any
person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its
requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in
connection with conditions) shall upon conviction thereof be fined or
imprisoned as provided by the laws of the village. Each day such violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained
shall prevent the village from taking such other lawful action as is necessary
to prevent or remedy any violation. The village shall prosecute any violation
of this chapter in accordance with the penalties stated herein.
(Ord. 2015-6, passed 3-24-2015)
CHAPTER 152: HOUSING CODES
Section
Rental Housing
   
152.01   Definitions
   
152.02   Permit requirement for rental units; application
   
152.03   Inspection requirements; check list
   
152.04   Tenant and landlord violations
Minimum Housing and Maintenance Standards
   
152.15   Short title; purpose; scope
   
152.16   Definitions
   
152.17   Nuisance
   
152.18   Exterior property areas
   
152.19   Structure exterior
   
152.20   Structure interior
   
152.21   Basic facilities
   
152.22   Installation and maintenance
   
152.23   Occupancy
   
152.24   Light and ventilation
   
152.25   Responsibilities of owners and occupants
   
152.26   Enforcement
   
152.27   Appeals
   
152.28   Designation of unfit dwelling units
   
152.29   Legal remedies
   
152.30   Conflict with other regulations
   
152.31   General provisions
 
   
152.99   Penalty
RENTAL HOUSING
§ 152.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words and
terms used and not specifically defined in this section, but which are defined
in the State Basic Building Code, shall have the meanings there defined. Words
used in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular. Words used
in the masculine gender include the feminine, and the feminine the masculine.
   EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state
that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to,
fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury, loss of life or property.
   FIRE INSPECTOR. The village’s Fire and EMS Chief, or a department authorized
representative.
   LANDLORD. The owner of a rental unit.
   RENTAL AGREEMENT. Any contract or lease, whether written, oral or implied by
operation of law, for the rental of the rental unit.
   RENTAL UNIT. The whole or part of a building, including common areas used by
a person for living, dining, cooking, sleeping and sanitation purposes, owned
or controlled by another, under an agreement for the periodic payment of rent.
   SECURITY DEPOSIT. Any deposit of money or other property however denominated
whose primary function is to secure the performance of the tenant under a
rental agreement.
   SMOKE DETECTOR. A readily removable device, sensitive to either visible or
invisible particles of combustion or both, which automatically detects any fire
condition and broadcasts locally a signal or alarm.
   TENANT. An occupant of a rental unit other than an owner or operator.
(Ord. 2020-05, passed 4-28-2020)
§ 152.02 PERMIT REQUIREMENT FOR RENTAL UNITS; APPLICATION.
   A rental occupancy permit shall be issued by the Fire Inspector, subject to
the following terms.
   (A)   Application shall be made, in writing, to the Fire Inspector on
approved rental occupancy permit application form, attached to the ordinance
codified herein and marked as Exhibit A, as provided by the Fire Inspector.
   (B)   An inspection must be successfully concluded, including the correction
of any violations found by the Fire Inspector.
   (C)   Any violations found upon inspection will be detailed on a “notice of
violation” form provided to the landlord of an unoccupied rental unit, and to
the tenant and landlord of an occupied unit, specifying the nature of the
violation and assigning responsibility of rectifying the condition either to
the landlord, to the tenant, or to both if circumstances are present that
indicate both parties to be at fault in creating the violation.
   (D)   A re-inspection fee of $40 shall be required if violations are found.
   (E)   Failure to rectify the conditions detailed in the “notice of
violation” will result in voiding any existing occupancy permit and the
issuance of a citation by the Fire Inspector.
(Ord. 2020-05, passed 4-28-2020)
§ 152.03 INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS; CHECK LIST.
   (A)   All rental units in the village are subject to inspections annually,
each time occupancy changes, or upon receipt of a reported violation of
standards prescribed herein for hazardous conditions, whichever occurs first.
The Fire Inspector, or his or her duly authorized representative, shall be the
sole person designated to conduct inspections pursuant to this subchapter. (See
R.C. §§ 715.26(B) and 3737.14(A)).
   (B)   The Fire Inspector or his or her duly authorized representative shall
inspect for any hazardous condition, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Properly functioning smoke detectors on each level including
basements;
      (2)   Obstruction to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways doors or
windows which could interfere with egress of occupants in an emergency
situation including, but not limited to, ice and snow;
      (3)   Operational windows with intact glass;
      (4)   Stable steps with adequate handrails;
      (5)   Solid ceilings and walls free of broken plaster or loose paneling;
      (6)   Solid floors free of broken boards, holes and loose carpeting;
      (7)   Solid roof free of leaks;
      (8)   Properly installed and vented heating system with operational fans
and heat exchanger;
      (9)   Exposed or loose electrical wiring, broken or missing outlets,
switches and covers or other obvious electrical hazards;
      (10)   Water leaks that subject to increase the risk of electrical
hazards, or encourage pests which could increase the risk of fire;
      (11)   Insect or rodent infestation;
      (12)   Operational fire extinguishers;
      (13)   Secure gas lines with proper connections and adequate shut-offs;
      (14)   The accumulation of trash, rubbish or debris in or around the
structure which may present a hazard by encouraging dangerous insect, rodent or
other pest infestation;
      (15)   The accumulation of dangerous amounts or the excessive storage of
any combustible or explosive material in or around the structure which may
create a fire hazard;
      (16)   An accumulation of grease, oil or other flammable residue on,
under or near an appliance used for cooking, heating or producing hot water;
      (17)   An accumulation of dust, waste material, grease, oil or other
flammable residue in air conditioning, ventilation ducts or other exhaust
ducts;
      (18)   Carbon monoxide alarms on each level where required with
combustible appliances and or heating equipment;
      (19)   Address must be installed so it is visible from the road with
plainly legibly letters and numbers that shall be reflective and contrasting
with their background. Letters and numbers shall be four inches in height and
one-half inch stroke width; and
      (20)   Open-flame cooking devices. Charcoal burners and other open-flame
cooking devices shall not be operated on combustible balconies or within ten
feet of combustible construction at multi-family (greater than two) dwelling
unit structures.
(Ord. 2020-05, passed 4-28-2020) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.04 TENANT AND LANDLORD VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Tenant violations. Each tenant shall comply with all duties imposed
upon tenants by the applicable provisions of all municipal codes, regulations
and ordinances, and, in particular:
      (1)   Keep that part of the premises which tenant occupies and uses safe
and sanitary;
      (2)   Dispose of all rubbish, garbage and other waste in a clean, safe
and sanitary manner;
      (3)   Keep all plumbing fixtures in the dwelling unit or used by tenants
as clean as their condition permits; and
      (4)   Install, use and operate all electrical and plumbing fixtures
properly.
   (B)   Landlord violations.
      (1)   The landlord is under a duty to comply explicitly with the terms of
this chapter to prevent revocation of any existing occupancy permit issued
under this section, in addition to any other remedies prescribed herein, or
applicable penalty sections of the state statutes, the State Basic Building
Code or the State Fire Code. Each owner or landlord of residential property
shall comply with all duties imposed upon owners or landlords by the applicable
provisions of all municipal codes, regulations or ordinances governing the
maintenance, construction, use or appearance of the dwelling unit and the
property of which it is a part, and in particular:
         (a)   Keep all common areas of the premises in a safe and sanitary
condition;
         (b)   Make all repairs necessary to put and keep the dwelling unit and
the appurtenances thereto in a fit and habitable condition and in compliance
with the State Basic Building Code, State Fire Code and the regulations of the
Board of Health;
         (c)   Maintain in good, safe working order and condition all
electrical, plumbing, sanitary, heating, ventilating, air conditioning
fixtures, appliances and elevators;
         (d)   Dispose of all garbage and rubbish in accordance with the
regulations of the Board of Health;
         (e)   Exterminate any insects, rodents or other pests on the premises;
and
         (f)   Except in the case of emergency or if it is impracticable to do
so, give the tenant reasonable notice of landlord’s intent to enter for
purposes of maintenance, repair or inspection, and enter only at reasonable
times. Twenty-four hours is presumed to be a reasonable notice in the absence
of evidence to the contrary.
      (2)   The landlord, or his or her authorized agent, must obtain an
occupancy permit prior to offering the unit for rent and is responsible for
maintaining a current occupancy permit on each occupied rental unit he or she
owns.
(Ord. 2020-05, passed 4-28-2020)
MINIMUM HOUSING AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS
§ 152.15 SHORT TITLE; PURPOSE; SCOPE.
   (A)   Short title. This subchapter shall be known as the “Minimum Housing
and Maintenance Standards Code”.
   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of the code is to protect the public health,
safety and welfare in the village by enacting this subchapter to establish
property maintenance and construction standards which apply to all real
property located within the village including without limitation all existing
and newly constructed residential structures and all vacant land.
   (C)   Scope and application. The provisions of this subchapter shall apply
to all real property located within the village including, without limitation,
all existing newly constructed residential and nonresidential structures and
all vacant land.
(Ord. 2008-18, passed 6-10-2008; Ord. 2008-27, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 152.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words and
phrases defined in the Zoning Code, Building Code and Fire Code shall assume
the same definitions for this code, unless included and defined below.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A building or structure, the use of which is incidental
to that of the main building or structure and which is located on the same lot.
   APPROVED. Approved by the Building Official under the provisions of this
subchapter or the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, or approved
by an authority designated by law or by this subchapter.
   BASEMENT. A portion of a building located partly underground but having part
but not more than one-half its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average
grade of the adjoining ground. A BASEMENT is counted as a story for purpose of
height regulations.
   BATHROOM. Enclosed space containing one or more bathtubs, showers or both,
and which may also include toilets, lavatories or fixtures serving similar
purposes and not deemed a habitable room.
   BUILDING. Any structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure,
shelter or protection pf persons, animals, chattels or property.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The person designated by the Village Council to enforce
the provisions of this subchapter.
   CEILING. The surface suspended from or attached to the underside of floors
or roofs, which does not form a structural part of a floor or roof, or shall
mean the underside of exposed floor or roof construction.
   CEILING HEIGHT. The clear distance between the floor and the ceiling
directly above.
   CELLAR. The lowermost portion of the building partly or totally underground
having more than half of its height, measured from clear floor to ceiling,
below the average finished grade of the adjoining ground.
   COMMERCIAL UNIT. Any building or structure, or part thereof, which wholly or
partially contains retail, services or office space. COMMERCIAL UNITS shall
include those buildings, or parts thereof, which provide for or may provide for
commercial uses including but not limited to the following; retail sales and
services; auto sales and services; bowling alleys and other commercial/
recreational buildings; funeral homes; all restaurants and food services;
business and professional offices; service stations; car washes; animal
hospitals and veterinarian clinics; bank and financial institutions; public
service institutions; theaters; medical clinics; laundromats; and other similar
structures or buildings.
   CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS. All written, graphic and pictorial documents
prepared or assembled for describing the design, location and physical
characteristic of the elements of the project needed for obtaining a building
permit.
   DWELLING. Any structure, which is wholly or partly used for or intended to
be used for living or sleeping by human occupants; provided, that temporary
housing, hotels and rooming houses as hereinafter defined shall not be regarded
as DWELLINGS. DWELLINGS do not include tents, cabins, trailers or trailer
coaches.
   DWELLING UNIT. One room, or a suite of two or more rooms, designed for or
used by one family for living and sleeping purposes and having only one kitchen
or kitchenette.
   EXIT. Generally, the way out from any point in a building along continuous
and unobstructed line of travel, which leads to a street or open space or court
communicating with a street or public thoroughfare.
   EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREA. All area on the premises outside of a structure used
for human habitation.
   EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents and vermin by
eliminating their harborage places; by removing, or making inaccessible,
materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating,
trapping; or by any other approved means of pest elimination.
   FAMILY. One or two persons or parents, which their direct lineal descendants
and adopted children (and including the domestic employees thereof) together
with not more than two persons not so related, living together in the whole or
part of a dwelling comprising a single housekeeping unit. Every additional
group of two or less persons living in such housekeeping unit shall be
considered a separate FAMILY for the purposes of this chapter.
   FIRE INSPECTOR. The Fire Chief of the Village Fire Department, or his or her
designated representative.
   GARBAGE. Putrescent animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
   GRADE. Natural surface of the ground, or surface of the ground after
completion of any change in contour.
   GROSS FLOOR AREA. The total net area of all habitable rooms.
   HABITABLE ROOM. Room occupied by one or more persons for living, sleeping,
eating or cooking. Kitchenettes shall not be deemed to be HABITABLE space.
   HEALTH COMMISSIONER. The legally designated Health Commissioner of the
county, or his or her authorized representative.
   HOT WATER. Water heated to a temperature of not less than 120°F at the
outlet.
   HOTEL. Every building or structure kept, used or maintained as an advertised
or held out to the public to be an inn, hotel, motel, family hotel, apartment
hotel, lodging house, dormitory or place where sleep or rooming accommodations
are furnished for hire or are used or maintained for the accommodation of
guests, lodgers or roomers.
   INFESTATION. The presence, within or contiguous to a dwelling, dwelling
unit, rooming house, rooming unit or premises, of insects, rodents, vermin or
other pests.
   INOPERABLE VEHICLE. Includes all definitions included in R.C. § 4511.01 and
shall include any vehicle regardless of its status as a collector or historical
vehicle which is any of the following:
      (1)   Dismantled;
      (2)   Unlicensed;
      (3)   Missing its tires, wheels, doors, windshields, fenders, bumpers,
body panels or its hood, motor, transmission or battery;
      (4)   Damaged or wrecked in such a manner as to be declared a total loss
by the owner’s insurance company; or
      (5)   Cannot be started.
   KITCHEN. Space 60 square feet or more in floor area, with a minimum width of
five feet, used for cooking or preparation of food, and deemed habitable room.
   KITCHENETTE. Space, less than 60 square feet in floor area, used for cooking
or preparation of food, and not deemed a habitable room.
   MULTIPLE-DWELLING. A building containing two or more dwelling units and/or
rooming units.
   NON-HABITABLE ROOM. Space used as kitchenettes, pantries, bath, toilet,
laundry, rest, dressing, locker, storage, utility, heater and boiler rooms,
closets and other spaces for service and maintenance of the building, and those
spaces used for access and vertical travel between stories.
   OCCUPANT. Any person over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking or
eating in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling unit.
   OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a multiple residence
or rooming house, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let or offered
for occupancy.
   OUTSIDE DESIGN TEMPERATURE. Temperature based on the average of the low
annual temperature recorded in the area, either during the last 25 years or as
long as temperature records have been kept, if less than 25 years.
   OWNER. Owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate
therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver,
executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation, in control of a
building.
   PERSON(S). Includes an individual, firm, corporation, association or
partnership.
   PLUMBING SYSTEM. Pipes, fixtures and other apparatus for supplying water for
consumption, or for the conveyance of waste and drainage.
   POTABLE WATER. Water duly approved as satisfactory and safe for drinking.
   PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings or
structures thereon.
   PUBLIC SEWER. Sewer operated by a public authority or public utility, and
available for public use.
   ROOMING HOUSE. Any dwelling or that part of a dwelling containing one or
more rooming units, which may contain common cooking, food storage and/or
eating facilities not located within the rooming unit which space is let for
compensation by the resident owner or resident operator to three or more
persons, none of whom are children, parents, grandchildren, grandparents,
brothers or sisters of said owner or operator; but not including a hotel, rest,
convalescent or nursing home. Dwellings in which space is let to two or less
persons shall not be deemed a ROOMING HOUSE nor shall hotels licensed under
R.C. §§ 3731.01 et seq.
   ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit
used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or
eating purposes.
   RUBBISH. All nonputrescent solid waste, consisting of both combustible
wastes and noncombustible wastes, such as, but not limited to, paper,
wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood,
glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
   SEWAGE. Liquid carried waste from a flush toilet, bath, sink, lavatory,
dishwashing or laundry machine, or from any other fixture, equipment or
machine, containing animal or vegetable matter and which may include industrial
or commercial wastes, and liquids containing chemicals.
   STRUCTURE. Anything which is built or constructed and shall include
prefabricated and modular systems and mobile homes.
   SUPPLIED FACILITIES. Facilities paid for, furnished or provided by, or under
the control of the owner or operator.
   TRASH. All combustible and noncombustible waste material, except garbage.
See RUBBISH.
   VENTILATION. The process of supplying and removing air by natural or
mechanical means to and/or from any space. MECHANICAL shall mean VENTILATION by
power-driven devices. NATURAL shall mean VENTILATION by opening to outer air
through windows, skylights, doors, louvers or stacks without wind driven
devices.
   WASTES. Burnable and non-burnable trash, rubbish and garbage.
   WEEDS. All grasses, annual plants and vegetation other than trees or shrubs
and shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens.
   WORKMANLIKE, STATE OF MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR. Such maintenance and repair
shall be made in a reasonably skillful manner.
(Ord. 2008-18, passed 6-10-2008; Ord. 2008-27, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 152.17 NUISANCE.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE includes any of the following:
   (A)   The physical condition or occupancy of any premises regarded as a
public nuisance at common law;
   (B)   Any physical condition or occupancy of any premises or its
appurtenances considered to be an attractive nuisance to children, including,
but not limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations and unsafe
fences or structures;
   (C)   Any premises with unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities;
   (D)   Any premises designated as unsafe for human habitation;
   (E)   Any premises that is manifestly capable of being a fire hazard or is
manifestly unsafe or insecure as to endanger life, limb or property;
   (F)   Any premises from which the plumbing, heating or other facilities
required by this code have been disconnected, destroyed, removed or rendered
ineffective or the required precautions against trespassers have not been
provided;
   (G)   Any premises that are unsanitary or that are littered with rubbish or
garbage or that have an uncontrolled growth or weeds;
   (H)   Any structure that is in a state of dilapidation, deterioration or
decay; faulty construction; overcrowded; open, vacant or abandoned; damaged by
fire to the extent it cannot provide shelter; in a danger of collapse or
failure and dangerous to anyone on or near the premises; and/or
   (I)   Any structure or land found to be in violation of this Housing Code.
(Ord. 2008-18, passed 6-10-2008; Ord. 2008-27, passed 7-22-2008) Penalty, see
152.99
§ 152.18 EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS.
   (A)   Free from hazards. Exterior property areas shall be free from
conditions which might create a nuisance including graffiti or become a health,
accident or fire hazard.
   (B)   Discharge of sewage. Sewage must be discharged into a public sewer
system or an approved private septic system. Discharge of inadequately treated
sewage shall not be permitted upon the surface of the ground or into natural or
artificial surface drainage ways or into any drains intended for storm drainage
only.
   (C)   Storm water drainage. Storm water shall be properly drained to prevent
recurrent or excessive ponding or the entrance of water into any basement or
cellar. Downspouts, foundation drains and other storm and surface water drains
shall not be connected to sanitary sewers.
   (D)   Insect and rodent harborage. Exterior property areas shall be kept
free from sources of insect, vermin and rodent breeding, harborage and
infestation.
   (E)   Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage of unsightly items, including
inoperable vehicles, for a continued period exceeding 30 days in length, shall
be enclosed or obscured from view. The storage of firewood and bicycles shall
be exempt from this provision.
   (F)   Domestic animals and pets. Domestic animals and pets shall not be kept
on any premises in such a manner as to create unsanitary conditions.
   (G)   Fences, retaining walls. All fences, retaining walls or similar
structures shall be anchored firmly in the ground, shall be constructed in a
workmanlike manner and maintained in that same manner so that retaining walls
or similar structures shall always be in the state of good structural repair.
If any fence, retaining wall or similar structure is found not to be in the
state of good structural repair, it shall be removed, replaced or repaired
within 30 days of discovery.
   (H)   Accessory structures. Accessory structures, located on exterior
property areas, shall be kept in good repair, free from health, fire and
accident hazards, and vermin, insect and rodent harborage.
(Ord. 2008-18, passed 6-10-2008; Ord. 2008-27, passed 7-22-2008) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.19 STRUCTURE EXTERIOR.
   (A)   Foundation walls. The foundation walls of every structure shall be
maintained in good repair and be structurally sound.
   (B)   Condition of exterior surface. Any structure whose exterior surface is
bare, deteriorated, ramshackle, tumbledown, decaying, disintegrating or in poor
repair must be repaired or razed.
      (1)   All buckled, rotted or decayed walls, doors, windows, porches,
floors, steps, railings, trim, roofs and their missing members must be replaced
and put in good condition.
      (2)   All replacements must match and conform to original design or be
replaced completely.
   (C)   Stairs, porches and railings. The stairs, porches and railings,
affixed to the exterior of every structure used for human habitation, shall be
kept in good repair and structurally sound.
   (D)   Weather and watertight. Every structure shall be so maintained that it
will be weather and watertight.
   (E)   Protective coating for all surfaces. All exterior wood surfaces of a
structure shall be treated periodically with a protective coating or other
preservative to prevent structural deterioration. All exterior masonry surfaces
that have been painted, or treated with some other protective covering, must be
periodically treated with a protective covering, or all existing paint must be
removed bringing the masonry back to its natural state.
      (1)   All exterior surfaces shall be replaced or repaired in good
condition preparatory to repainting or coating.
      (2)   All bare exterior surfaces which are flaking or crumbling shall be
replaced or sealed in a good and workmanlike manner.
      (3)   All new or repaired bare surfaces shall be painted or coated.
      (4)   All exterior surfaces weathered with dirt and grime shall be
cleaned and surfaces, which are peeling or flaking shall be scraped and painted
or covered with approved protective coating or surface.
      (F)   Overhanging, loose or missing objects. Every structure shall be
free of insecure overhanging objects such as, but not limited to, gutters and
downspouts, television aerials, roof shingles, and exterior siding. Missing
objects such as, but not limited to, siding, roof shingles, mobile home
skirting or shutters shall be replaced and matched to the original.
(Ord. 2008-18, passed 6-10-2008; Ord. 2008-27, passed 7-22-2008; Ord. 2013-38,
passed 12-17-2013) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.20 STRUCTURE INTERIOR.
   (A)   Free from dampness. Cellars, basements and crawl spaces, in every
structure used for human habitation, shall be free from dampness.
   (B)   Structural members. Supporting structural members of every structure
used for human habitation shall be structurally sound.
   (C)   Chimneys, flues and vents. Chimneys and all flue and vent attachments
thereto, of every structure used for human habitation, and all other flues and
vents shall be structurally sound, free from defects and able to perform the
function for which they were designed and are used.
   (D)   Stairs and railings. Interior stairs of every structure used for human
habitation shall be structurally sound and free from defects and shall be so
designed as to minimize accident hazards. Railings shall be provided for
stairs, balconies, landings and stairwells.
   (E)   Floors, walls and ceilings. Floors, walls and ceilings, of every
structure used for human habitation, shall be structurally sound, free from
irregularities, which may be a cause of accidents, and maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition.
   (F)   Bathroom floors. Bathroom, shower room and toilet room or compartment
floors of every structure used for human habitation, shall be constructed and
maintained so as to be impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be
easily kept in a clean, safe and sanitary condition.
   (G)   Free from rubbish and garbage. The interior of every structure used
for human habitation shall be maintained free from rubbish and garbage that
might become a health, accident or fire hazard, or become a nuisance.
   (H)   Insect and rodent harborage. Buildings used for human habitation shall
be kept free from insect and rodent infestation, and where insects or rodents
are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by acceptable processes, which
will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions
shall be taken to prevent re-infestation.
   (I)   Extermination from buildings. Every owner of a dwelling or multi-
family dwelling shall be responsible for the extermination of insects, rodents,
vermin or other pests whenever infestation exists in two or more of the
dwelling units, or in the shared public parts of the structure.
   (J)   Extermination from single dwelling units. The occupant of a dwelling
unit in a dwelling or multi-family dwelling shall be responsible for such
extermination within the unit occupied by him or her whenever his or her
dwelling unit is the only unit in the building that is infested.
   (K)   Responsibility of owner. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions,
whenever infestation of rodents is caused by failure of the owner to maintain
any dwelling or multi-family dwelling in a rodent-proof condition,
extermination of such rodents shall be the responsibility of the owner.
(Ord. 2008-18, passed 6-10-2008; Ord. 2008-27, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 152.21 BASIC FACILITIES.
   (A)   Potable water supply. Every dwelling, dwelling unit, and rooming house
shall be supplied with a potable water supply. There shall be adequate water
supply and pressure at all installed hot and cold water outlets.
   (B)   Hot water. Every dwelling, dwelling units and rooming house shall have
an adequate supply of hot water, properly connected to plumbing fixtures
requiring hot water.
   (C)   Plumbing fixtures required. Within every dwelling unit there shall be
the following plumbing fixtures: kitchen sink, toilet, bathtub or shower, and
lavatory. Kitchen sinks, bathtubs, showers and lavatories shall be properly
connected to both hot and cold water lines.
   (D)   Plumbing fixtures connected to sewer lines. All plumbing fixtures,
installed within a structure used for human habitation, shall be connected to
sewer lines that discharge into a public sewerage system or other approved
means of disposal.
   (E)   Privies not permitted. No privy shall be constructed or continued in
operation without the written approval of the Building Official.
   (F)   Heating facilities. Every dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house and
rooming unit, occupied during normal heating periods, shall have heating
facilities capable of maintaining a minimum inside temperature of 68°F, based
on outside design temperature in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet and
shower rooms or compartments.
   (G)   Electrical service. Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall be provided
with approved electrical service.
   (H)   Electric outlets required. Every habitable room of such dwelling shall
contain at least two separate wall type electric convenience outlets or one
such convenience outlet and one supplied wall or ceiling type electric light
fixture; and every water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room, furnace
room and public hall shall contain at least one supplied ceiling or wall type
electric light fixture. Every such outlet and fixture shall be properly
installed, shall be maintained in good working condition, and shall be
connected to the source of electric power in a safe manner.
   (I)   Kitchen equipment and facilities. Every dwelling unit shall contain a
room or portion of a room in which food may be stored, prepared and/or cooked
and consumed and which shall be equipped with the following:
      (1)   A kitchen sink in good working condition which shall be connected
to both hot and cold water lines and to an approved water and sewer system. A
lavatory shall not be considered a kitchen sink;
      (2)   Cabinets and/or shelves for the storage of eating, drinking and
cooking equipment and utensil and of food that does not require refrigeration
for safe keeping. Said cabinets and/or shelves shall be adequate for the
permissible occupancy of the dwelling unit and shall be of sound construction
finished with surfaces that are easily cleanable and that will not impart any
toxic or harmful effect to food;
      (3)   A stove, range or similar device for cooking food, properly
installed with all necessary connections for safe and efficient operation;
provided, that such stove, range or similar device need not be installed when
the dwelling is not occupied. The use of gasoline stoves or similar fuel
burning appliances using highly flammable fuels and the use of portable
kerosene stoves or other similar fuel burning portable appliances for cooking
is prohibited; and
      (4)   A refrigerator or similar device, for the safe storage of food at a
temperature less than 45°F, but more than 32°F, properly installed with all
necessary connections for safe, sanitary and efficient operations; provided,
that such refrigeration or similar equipment need not be installed when
dwelling is not occupied.
   (J)   Means of egress. Every dwelling unit and rooming unit shall have safe
and unobstructed means of egress from the structure.
(Ord. 2008-18, passed 6-10-2008; Ord. 2008-27, passed 7-22-2008) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 152.22 INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Maintenance of plumbing fixtures. Every water line, plumbing fixture
and drain located in a structure used for human habitation shall be properly
installed, connected and maintained and capable of performing the function for
which it was designed.
   (B)   Maintenance of plumbing systems. Every stack, waste and sewer line
located in a structure used for human habitation and every connecting sewer
line shall be so installed and maintained as to function properly and not be a
source of structural deterioration or a health hazard.
   (C)   Installation of heating equipment. Every heating, cooking and heating
device, located in a structure used for human habitation, shall be properly
installed, connected and capable of performing the function for which it was
designed.
   (D)   Venting requirements. All heating, cooking and water heating
equipment, burning solid fuels, shall be properly connected to a chimney or
flue, and such heating equipment, burning liquid or gaseous fuels shall be
properly connected to a supply line and, where required, to a chimney, flue or
vent.
   (E)   Maintenance and operation of heating equipment. Every heating, cooking
and water heating device, located in a structure used for human habitation,
shall be so maintained and operated as to be free from fire, health and
accident hazards.
   (F)   Storage of fuels. All fuels stored on the premises for the operation
of heat producing equipment shall be stored in a safe manner.
(Ord. 2008-18, passed 6-10-2008; Ord. 2008-27, passed 7-22-2008) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.23 OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Required space in dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall contain a
minimum gross floor area of at least 150 square feet for the first occupant, at
least 100 square feet for each occupant thereafter.
   (B)   Required space in sleeping rooms. In every dwelling or rooming unit of
two or more habitable rooms, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one
occupant, shall have a minimum gross floor area of at least 70 square feet.
Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall have
a minimum gross floor area of 50 square feet per occupant thereof. Kitchens
shall not be used for sleeping purposes.
   (C)   Occupancy of dwelling units below grade. No dwelling unit partially
below grade shall be used for living purposes unless:
      (1)   Floors and walls are watertight;
      (2)   Total window area and total openable area are in accordance with
this code; and
      (3)   Required minimum window area of every habitable room is entirely
above the grade of the ground adjoining such window area.
(Ord. 2008-18, passed 6-10-2008; Ord. 2008-27, passed 7-22-2008) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.24 LIGHT AND VENTILATION.
   (A)   Light in non-habitable space. Every stair, hall, cellar and basement,
located in a structure used for human habitation, shall have either adequate
natural or artificial light available at all times. Every laundry, furnace room
and all similar non-habitable work space, located in a structure used for human
habitation, shall have either adequate natural or artificial lighting available
at all times.
   (B)   Light in public halls and stairways. Every public hall and common
stairway, located in a structure used for human habitation, and which is used
primarily for ingress and egress in connection with two or more dwelling units
or rooming units shall be supplied with a proper amount of natural light or
lighting facilities controllable by the occupants of the structure and be
available at all times. The natural or artificial lighting provided should not
be less than five foot-candles (five lumens) measured in the darkest portions
of the normally traveled stairs and passageways during the darkest hours of the
day. Structures containing three or more dwelling units shall meet the
requirements of the multiple residence law of the State Building Code §
1219.08.
   (C)   Electric fixtures in bathrooms. Every bathroom, shower room, toilet
room or compartment, located in a structure used for human habitation, shall
have permanently installed artificial lighting fixtures, and the switches shall
be so located as to avoid danger of electrical hazards.
   (D)   Ventilation in habitable rooms. Every habitable room shall be
ventilated by either openable area equal to 45% of the required window area or
by equivalent mechanical ventilation.
   (E)   Ventilation in bathrooms. Every bathroom, shower room, toilet room or
compartment, located in a structure used for human habitation, shall be
adequately ventilated.
(Ord. 2008-18, passed 6-10-2008; Ord. 2008-27, passed 7-22-2008) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.25 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS.
   (A)   Maintenance of private space. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling
unit shall keep in clean and sanitary condition that part of the structure,
dwelling, dwelling unit or premises thereof, which he or she occupies or
controls.
   (B)   Maintenance of plumbing equipment. Every occupant of a dwelling or
dwelling unit shall be responsible for the exercise of proper care and
cleanliness in the use and operation of all plumbing fixtures, sanitary
facilities, appliances and equipment therein.
   (C)   Waste disposal. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall dispose of
rubbish, garbage and other matter. In a dwelling containing three or more
dwelling units, adequate rubbish and garbage containers shall be supplied by
the owner.
   (D)   Extermination. Every occupant of a single dwelling unit shall be
responsible for the extermination of any rodents, vermin or other pests therein
or on the premises. Every occupant of a dwelling unit in a building containing
more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination
whenever his or her dwelling unit is the only one infested, except that
whenever such infestation is caused by the failure of the owner to carry out
the provisions of this subchapter, extermination shall be the responsibility of
the owner. When two or more dwelling units within a building are so infested,
it shall be the responsibility of the owner to carry out the provisions of this
subchapter within such building, as cited above with respect to extermination.
   (E)   Maintenance of public space. Every owner of a building containing two
or more dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean,
sanitary and safe condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling and
premises thereof.
   (F)   Supplied facilities. Every owner of a dwelling and dwelling unit shall
be responsible for keeping supplied facilities in proper operating condition
except for otherwise provided by the Housing Code.
   (G)   Supplied heat. Every owner or operator of a building who permits any
dwelling units to be occupied, under any agreement, express or implied, to
supply or furnish heat to the occupants September 1 to June 1 of the following
year must maintain a minimum inside temperature of 68°F based on outside design
temperature in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, shower rooms and toilet rooms or
compartments. The provisions of the division (G) shall not apply where the
failure to maintain minimum requirements is caused by a general shortage of
fuel, negligent or malicious act of the occupant, necessary repairs or
alterations or any cause beyond the control of the owner or occupant.
   (H)   Discontinuance of utilities. No owner, operator or occupant shall
cause any service, facility, equipment or utility, which is required to be
supplied by the provisions of this code, to be removed from, or shut off from,
or discontinued for any occupied dwelling unit, except for necessary repairs,
alterations or emergencies.
   (I)   Owner access. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit, or
rooming unit, shall give the owner thereof, or his or her agent or employee,
access to any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit or rooming unit, at all
reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are
necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this subchapter, or with
an order issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2008-18, passed 6-10-2008; Ord. 2008-27, passed 7-22-2008) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.26 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Enforcement Officer. It shall be the responsibility of the Building
Official of the village, or his or her authorized representative, to enforce
the provisions of the Housing Code as herein provided.
   (B)   Inspection of dwellings. The Building Official shall be authorized to
make, or cause to be made, inspections to determine the condition of dwellings,
dwelling units and premises thereof in order to safeguard the health, safety,
morals and welfare of the public.
   (C)   Right of entry. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Building
Official during normal business hours, or at any time if an emergency exists,
or at any time mutually agreeable to the inspector and owner, shall request of
the owner or occupant in lawful possession of any building, structure or
premises in the village, permission to enter and inspect the same in order to
perform any duty imposed by this code upon him or her. The Building Official
shall not enter any building, structure or premises where an owner or occupant
in possession shall object to such entry, except where the Building Official
shall have first obtained an order for the purpose of entry after submitting
evidence indicating probable cause exists for the inspection, from a court of
competent jurisdiction. However, the Building Official shall not be required to
obtain the consent of the owner of any premises, building or structure in the
village where the same has been or gives the appearance of having been
abandoned by the owner and the building, structure or premises is in a
condition where entry thereto is generally accessible.
   (D)   Relief from personal responsibility. The Building Official or other
employees or elected officials or other officers of the village charged with
enforcement of this code, while acting for the village within the scope of
their duties and responsibilities, shall not be rendered personally liable for
their actions in enforcing or enacting this code and are relieved of all
personal liability for any damages to persons or property as a result of a
lawful act required or permitted in the discharge of their duties or
responsibilities. Any suit filed against the Building Official or other
employees, officers or elected officials because of acts performed or the
enactment of this subchapter shall be defended by the Village Solicitor or such
other counsel as appointed by the Village Council until final termination
proceedings. The Building Official or other employees or elected officials or
other officers of the village shall not be liable for the cost or damages;
provided, they have acted in good faith and without malice.
   (E)   Notice of violation. Whenever the Building Official determines that
there has been a violation, or that there are reasonable grounds to believe
that there has been a violation of any provision of this subchapter, he or she
shall give notice of such violation or alleged violation to the person or
persons responsible for such violation. The notice shall be in writing and
shall specify the alleged violation and shall provide a reasonable time for
compliance, and shall be served upon the owner, agent, operator or occupant, as
the case may require. The notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon the
owner, agent, operator or occupant, if a copy is served upon him or her
personally; or if a copy thereof is sent by registered or certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the last known residence of the owner, agent,
operator or occupant; or if a copy is left at the place of residence of the
owner, agent, operator or occupant; or by such other method authorized by the
laws of the state. If the owner, agent, operator or occupant of the subject
premises is unknown, then a copy of the notice and order shall be mailed,
addressed to such person, to the address of the subject premises. The failure
of any such person to receive actual notice shall not affect the validity of
any proceedings taken under this section. Service by certified, registered or
ordinary mail in the manner herein provided shall be effective on the date of
mailing. The notice shall inform the person, to whom it is directed, of his or
her right to apply for a hearing before the Housing Appeals Board. The notice
may contain an outline of remedial action and time limit, which, if followed,
will effect compliance with the provisions of this subchapter and with rules
and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
   (F)   Final order.
      (1)   Any notice of violation provided for in division (E) above shall
automatically become a final order if written request for a hearing is not
filed in the office of the Building Code Official or his or her duly designated
representative within ten days after receipt of the notice. A copy of the order
shall be served as provided in division (E) above. If the property owner fails
to comply with the final order, the Building Official has the authority to take
any action necessary, including contracting with outside resources to bring the
property into compliance with the code. The cost associated with abating the
violation to bring the property into compliance with the code shall be paid out
of the General Fund of the village.
      (2)   The costs of abating the dangerous property condition shall be
collected from the property owner in accordance with R.C. § 715.261.
   (G)   Power to act in emergencies. Whenever the Building Code Official, at
any state of the proceedings instituted under the provisions of this
subchapter, finds that a violation of this chapter exists, which in his or her
opinion, requires immediate action to abate a direct hazard, or immediate
danger to the health, safety, morals or welfare of the occupants of a building
or of the public, he or she may, without prior notice or hearing, issue an
order citing the violation and directing that such action be taken as is
necessary to remove or abate the hazard or danger. The order may include an
order to vacate as provided herein. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
subchapter, such an order shall be effective immediately upon service and shall
be complied with immediately or as otherwise provided.
   (H)   Agency to abate hazards in emergencies. Whenever any violation of this
subchapter which, in the opinion of the Building Code Official, causes a direct
hazard or immediate danger to health, safety, morals or welfare of the
occupants of a building or the public has not been corrected in the time
specified by the order issued under division (E) above, the Building Code
Official may take such direct action as is necessary to abate the hazard or
danger. Expenses incurred in the execution of such orders shall be recovered as
provided in §
152.28(J).
   (I)   Demolition as compliance. Any owner of a building, receiving notice of
violation stating that such building does not comply with the provisions of
this subchapter, may demolish such building; and such action shall be deemed
compliance. Demolition of buildings and structures shall be in accordance with
the provisions of the Building Code.
   (J)   Re-inspection. At the end of the period specified in the notice of
violation, or any extension thereof, it shall be the duty of the Building Code
Official, or his or her duly designated representative, to make, or cause to be
made, a re-inspection of the dwelling, dwelling unit, premises and, if
compliance has not been established, appropriate legal action shall be
instituted as specified; provided, that additional notice of violation is not
required.
   (K)   Extension of compliance time. The Building Code Official may extend
the compliance time specified in any notice or order issued under the
provisions of this subchapter where there is evidence of intent to comply
within the period specified; provided, that reasonable conditions exist which
prevent immediate compliance.
   (L)   Records confidential. The Building Code Official or his or her duly
designated representative shall keep confidential all evidence which he or she
may discover or obtain in the course of an inspection made pursuant to this
subchapter and such evidence shall be considered privileged. Evidence so
obtained shall not be disclosed except as may be necessary in the judgment of
the Building Code Official for the proper and effective administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this subchapter and rules and regulations
issued pursuant thereto and shall not otherwise be admissible in any judicial
proceeding without the consent of the owner, agent, operator, occupant or other
person in charge of the dwelling unit inspected.
(Ord. 2008-18, passed 6-10-2008; Ord. 2008-27, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 152.27 APPEALS.
   (A)   Board of Appeals. The Village Board of Zoning Appeals shall serve as
the Appeal Board for this subchapter.
   (B)   Request. Any person affected by any notice and/or order which has been
issued in connection with the enforcement of any provisions of this subchapter
may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Housing
Appeals Board; provided, that such person shall file in the office of the
Building Code Official a written petition requesting such hearing and setting
forth the name and address of the petitioner and a brief statement of the
grounds for such hearing or for the mitigation of any item appearing on any
order issued under the provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   Petition. Petition shall be filed within ten days after the day the
notice and/or order is served. Upon receipt of such a petition, the Housing
Appeals Board shall set a time and place for a hearing before the Housing
Appeals Board and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At the
hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and show
cause why any item appearing on such notice and/or order should be modified or
withdrawn. The failure of the petitioner or his or her representative to appear
and state his or her case at such hearing shall have the same effect as if no
petition had been filed.
   (D)   Notification of findings. After a hearing, the Housing Appeals Board
shall sustain, modify or withdraw any item appearing on the notice and/or order
by majority vote, depending upon its findings as to whether the provisions of
this subchapter have been complied with, and the petitioner and the Building
Code Official shall be notified in writing of such findings.
   (E)   Public record of hearings. The proceedings at such hearings, including
the findings and decision of the Housing Appeals Board and reasons therefore,
shall be summarized and reduced to writing and entered as a matter of public
record in the office of the Building Code Official. The record shall also
include a copy of every notice and/or order issued in connection with the
matter.
(Ord. 2008-18, passed 6-10-2008; Ord. 2008-27, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 152.28 DESIGNATION OF UNFIT DWELLING UNITS.
   (A)   Unfit dwelling units. Any dwelling or dwelling unit may be designated
as unfit for human habitation when any of the following defects or conditions
are found, and when, in the judgment of the Building Official, these defects
create a hazard to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants, or of the
public:
      (1)   Is damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe or vermin
infested;
      (2)   Lacks illumination, ventilation or required sanitary facilities;
and/or
      (3)   General condition of the location is unsanitary, unsafe or
unhealthful.
   (B)   Placard. Whenever any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house or
rooming unit, has been designated as unfit for human habitation as provided in
this code, the Building Official may placard the dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming house or rooming unit, indicating that it is unfit for human
habitation.
   (C)   Order to vacate. Whenever a notice of violation, as provided, has not
been complied with or where an appeal has not been invoked, the Building Code
Official may order the dwelling or dwelling unit to be vacated. A copy of the
notice to vacate shall be served on the owner, agent, operator and the
occupant, as provided in §
152.26(D).
   (D)   Vacation of unfit dwelling. Any dwelling or dwelling unit designated
as unfit for human habitation pursuant to and ordered vacated, as provided in
division (C) above, shall be vacated within such reasonable time as the
Building Code Official may specify in the order. No such dwelling or dwelling
unit shall again be used for human habitation and the placard removed until
written approval is secured from the Building Code Official.
   (E)   Removal of placard. No person shall deface or remove the placard from
any dwelling or dwelling unit which has been designated as unfit for human
habitation, except as provided in division (D) above.
   (F)   Vacated dwelling made secure. The owner, agent or operator of any
dwelling or dwelling unit, which has been designated as unfit for human
habitation and vacated, shall make the dwelling or dwelling unit safe and
secure in whatever manner the Building Code Official shall deem necessary. Any
vacant building, open at the door and windows, if unguarded, shall be deemed
dangerous to human life and a nuisance within the meaning of this provision.
   (G)   Notice of intent to demolish. Whenever the Building Code Official
designates building unfit for human habitation, as provided in this subchapter,
he or she may notify the owner, agent, operator and occupant of his or her
intent to order the demolition of the structure. A copy of the notice shall be
served on the owner, agent, operator and occupant as provided in this section.
   (H)   Order to demolish. Whenever a notice of intent to order the demolition
of the structure as provided in and whenever a notice of violation has not been
complied with, as provided in this section, and whenever the cost necessary to
correct the violation is not reasonably related to the value of the building,
the Building Code Official may order the building demolished in accordance with
the provisions of the Building Code.
   (I)   Agency to make repairs or demolish. Whenever a notice or order to
remove a violation, secure or vacate a building has not been complied with, and
when such failure to comply is deemed by the Building Code Official to
constitute a nuisance, he or she may proceed to cause the structure to be
repaired, altered, secured or vacated, or take such other action, including
demolition, as is necessary to abate the nuisance. Whenever the Building Code
Official determines that the nuisance exists, he or she shall record sufficient
proof to support such determination, and the owner, occupant, lessee or
mortgagee shall be notified of such finding pursuant to this section. Abatement
authorized by this section shall not commence until at least 20 days after
service of such notice.
   (J)   Expenses recoverable. The expenses incurred pursuant to and shall be
paid by the owner or occupant of the premises, or by the person who caused or
maintained such nuisance or other matter. The Building Official shall file
among its records an affidavit stating with fairness and accuracy, the items of
expense and the date of execution of actions authorized. The Building Code
Official may institute a suit to recover such expenses against any person
liable for such expenses or may cause such expenses to be charged against the
property as a lien. Except with respect to a lien imposed for expenses incurred
in demolition, nothing herein shall be construed as placing a lien upon the
property, which supersedes the lien of any mortgage on such property executed
and recorded prior to the existence of a lien herein authorized.
(Ord. 2008-18, passed 6-10-2008; Ord. 2008-27, passed 7-22-2008) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.29 LEGAL REMEDIES.
   (A)   If enforcement under §
152.26 is not successful, the Building Code Official may issue a citation to
Mayor’s Court or the appropriate county court.
   (B)   In addition, the Village Solicitor shall, upon complaint of the
Building Code Official, or his or her designated representative, or upon his or
her own motion, institute appropriate action to restrain, prevent, enjoin,
abate, correct or remove such violation, and to take such other legal action as
is necessary to carry out the terms and provisions of this subchapter. The
remedies provided by law, any and all remedies may be pursued concurrently or
consecutively and the pursuit of any remedy shall not be construed as an
election or the waiver of the right to pursue any and all of the others.
(Ord. 2008-18, passed 6-10-2008; Ord. 2008-27, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 152.30 CONFLICT WITH OTHER REGULATIONS.
   (A)   In any case where a provision of this code is found to be in conflict
with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or
code of this municipality existing on the effective date of this code, the
provisions which established the higher standard shall prevail.
   (B)   In any case where a provision of this code is found to be in conflict
with a provision of any other ordinance or code of this municipality existing
on the effective date of this code, which established a lower standard for the
promotion, and protection of the safety and health of the people, the
provisions of this code shall prevail.
(Ord. 2008-18, passed 6-10-2008; Ord. 2008-27, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 152.31 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   The following requirements shall apply to all properties located in the
village, whether the property is vacant land or used for any purpose.
   (A)   All property in the village shall be maintained by the owner so that
the property is safe and sanitary and free from any trash, garbage, rubbish,
refuse, infestation and waste of any nature and free from the presence of
inoperable vehicles.
   (B)   All sidewalks, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be
kept in a proper state or repair and maintained free of any hazardous
conditions.
   (C)   All real property shall be maintained free of weeds.
   (D)   All real property shall be maintained free of public nuisances.
   (E)   All structures shall be maintained structurally sound and in good
repair.
   (F)   All buildings used for residential, commercial or retail purposes
shall be marked with an address, which is clearly visible from the street.
   (G)   All containers used for the storage or transmission of garbage,
rubbish, refuse or trash shall be properly sealed with a tight lid and shall be
leak proof.
(Ord. 2008-18, passed 6-10-2008; Ord. 2008-27, passed 7-22-2008) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Violations of §§
152.01 to 151.04 resulting in a citation are classified as a misdemeanor
pursuant to R.C. § 715.67 and are punishable by a fine of at not more than $500
and imprisonment not to exceed six months. Each day of such violation(s) shall
be considered a separate violation(s).
   (C)   Any person who shall knowingly and willfully violate or assist in the
violation of §§
152.15 to
152.31 shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $100 for
each offense. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ord. 2008-18, passed 6-10-2008; Ord. 2008-27, passed 7-22-2008; Ord. 2020-05,
passed 4-28-2020)
CHAPTER 153: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
   
153.01   Regulations adopted by reference
   
153.02   Street design and construction standards adopted by reference
§ 153.01 REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The subdivision regulations, copies of which are on file in the office of
the Village Clerk, are adopted and incorporated as part of this code of
ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.
(Prior Code, § 153.01) (Ord. 1993-17, passed - -; Ord. 2005-5, passed 2-22-
2005; Ord. 2005-16, passed 4-26-2005; Ord. 2006-23, passed 10-10-2006; Ord.
2008-21, passed 7-22-2008; Ord. 2008-22, passed 10-28-2008)
§ 153.02 STREET DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The subdivision street design and construction standards, copies of which
are on file in the office of the Village Clerk, are hereby adopted and
incorporated as part of this code of ordinances as if fully set out at length
herein.
(Prior Code, § 153.02) (Ord. 2002-23, passed 7-9-2002; Ord. 2004-5, passed 3-
23-2004; Ord. 2005-10, passed 3-22-2005; Ord. 2006-8, passed 2-14-2006; Ord.
2006-33, passed 10-10-2006; Ord. 2013-5, passed 3-12-2013; Ord. 2013-36, passed
12-17-2013)
CHAPTER 154: ZONING
Section
   
154.01   Zoning code adopted by reference
§ 154.01 ZONING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The village’s zoning code, copies of which are on file in the office of the
Village Clerk, are adopted and incorporated as part of this code of ordinances
as fully as if set out at length herein.
(Res. 2010-34, passed 12-14-2010; Res. 2014-9, passed 5-27-2014; Ord. 2017-13,
passed 7-11-2017; Ord. 2017-15, passed 9-12-2017; Ord. 2018-03, passed 3-27-
2018)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   ANNEXATIONS
      
II.   EASEMENTS
      
III.   LEASES AND LICENSES
      
IV.   VACATIONS AND CLOSINGS
      
V.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
      
VI.   SALES, PURCHASES AND TRANSFERS
      
VII.   CONTRACTS, AGREEMENTS AND FRANCHISES
TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
2005-30       9-27-2005   Annexing Eha property on Bethel New Richmond Road
2006-9        2-28-2006   Annexing real estate
2013-7        - -2013     Stating services to be provided to annexed territory
2013-18       8-13-2013   Stating services to be provided to annexed territory
R. 2014-12    9-9-2014    Annexing land
2014-27       8-12-2014   Stating services to be provided to annexed territory
R. 2015-4     2-10-2015   Annexing land
2021-03       2-23-2021   Consenting to annexation
2021-08       5-11-2021   Annexing a parcel of land
 
TABLE II: EASEMENTS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
1993-01       - -         Authorizing easement
1980-3        2-25-1980   Granting easement for certain lands owned by the
                          village
1982-15       11-9-1982   Granting easement for certain lands owned by the
                          village
1983-4        1-25-1983   Extending area covered by easement
2000-22       5-10-2000   Designating easements for water towers
2003-15       5-13-2003   Executing easement allowing roadway access
R. 2003-44    1-13-2004   Executing sewer pump station easement addendum
R.2004-13     5-26-2004   Granting easement for existing road access within a
                          portion of cemetery
2005-18       6-14-2005   Executing easement for elevated water tower
2007-18       4-10-2007   Executing easement for expansion of well field
R. 2010-27    8-10-2010   Executing easement
                         
 
TABLE III: LEASES AND LICENSES
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
1992-37       - -         Leasing space in municipal building
2006-3        - -         Authorizing three-year lease extension
R. 1980-16    6-9-1980    Authorizing lease with Board of Education for field
                          house
1983-13       4-26-1983   Granting license for operation of boat ramp and
                          landing
1984-31       6-12-1983   Authorizing lease for old Life Squad building
1987-01       1-13-1987   Authorizing license agreement with school district
                          for radio antenna attachment
1989-25       10-10-1989  Authorizing lease for ambulance to Franklin Township
                          Trustees
1990-12       5-8-1990    Granting license for land
1991-02       3-31-1992   Entering lease for water tower
1991-6        2-12-1991   Authorizing lease for use of lot
1991-16       3-12-1991   Authorizing lease for placement of communications
                          antennae
1993-16       4-13-1993   Granting a license for purpose of installing a dock
2005-43       10-25-2005  Authorizing license with Gold Star Chili Inc. for
                          public grounds
2005-48       11-22-2005  Authorizing license with New Richmond Party and Deli
                          Dock LLC. for portion of public grounds
2005-56       11-22-2005  Granting ten-year non- exclusive license
2007-57       1-22-2008   Authorizing lease for ball field property
2010-9        3-23-2010   Approving three-year license with New Richmond
                          Knothole
2015-27       11-24-2015  Granting five-year non-exclusive license
2018-11       5-22-2018   Approving two-year license with New Richmond Youth
                          Sports Association
                         
 
TABLE IV: VACATIONS AND CLOSINGS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
1980-7A       4-14-1980   Closing Plum Street to vehicles
1983-16       6-28-1983   Vacating a portion of Cobra Road
1984-32       9-11-1984   Vacating an unnamed alley between Western Street and
                          Plenty Street
1985-14       7-9-1985    Vacating an unnamed alley between Light Street and
                          Plum Street
1991-23       - -1990     Vacating several streets and alleys within the
                          village
1990-27       9-11-1990   Closing Benjamin Street to vehicle traffic
1991-18       6-11-1991   Closing Orchard Alley to vehicular traffic
2001-8        2-27-2001   Vacating portions of Benjamine Street and Lois Alley
2004-4        3-9-2004    Closing a portion of Willow Street to vehicular
                          traffic
2004-47       1-25-2005   Vacating a portion of the Willard “Jim” David Alley
2006-22       7-25-2006   Vacating Short Street
2009-29       6-23-2009   Vacating a portion of Union Street
2010-2        2-23-2010   Vacating a portion of Main Street
2014-23       7-22-2014   Vacating a portion of High Street
2021-06       4-13-2021   Releasing public access to a portion of property
2021-11       7-27-2021   Vacating portions of Light Street and Columbia Street
2022-11       11-22-2022  Vacating portions of Plum Street and Water Street
                         
 
TABLE V: ZONING MAP CHANGES
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. Date      Description
No.       Passed
R. 1980-  6-9-1980  Establishing the boundaries of a Community Reinvestment
14                  Area
1980-13A  7-14-1980 Rezoning R-5 to R-5M with mobile home restrictions
R. 1980-  12-8-1980 Rezoning tracts of land from agricultural to industrial
34
1981-3A   2-24-1981 Rezoning two parcels of property as agricultural
1982-5    4-27-1982 Changing the name of Ohio Street to Susanna Way
1983-5    3-8-1983  Naming alley between George and Union Street to Veteran’s
                    Way
1983-8    3-22-1983 Abandoning a portion of Augusta Street to establish a
                    public wharf
1983-15   6-28-1983 Rezoning district zone from A-1 to I Industrial
1983-17   7-28-1983 Accepting and dedicating a street to public use as a street
1983-24   12-13-    Rezoning property from R-3 to B-2
          1983
1984-21   5-8-1984  Rezoning a tract of land from R-5 to B-2
1984-43   11-13-    Accepting Country Place as a dedicated village street
          1984
1985-22   10-29-    Rezoning a block from B-2 to B-1
          1985
1988-12   7-26-1988 Rezoning lots from R- 3 to B-2
1988-20   9-13-1988 Rezoning lots from R- 1 to B-2
1990-20   4-8-1990  Rezoning lots from R- 3 to B-2
1990-48   12-11-    Rezoning a parcel from R-2 to R-5
          1990
1991-24   9-10-1991 Rezoning property from R-2 to R-3
1992-21   4-14-1992 Naming alleys in the old Susanna section of the village
1994-15   6-14-1994 Amending Ord. 1991- 24 and extending deadline for
                    construction
1998-06   3-10-1998 Rezoning the Wyler Building from B-1 to B-2
2002-12   3-26-2002 Establishing boundaries of a Community Reinvestment Area
2002-41   9-24-2002 Rezoning parcels from R-3 to R-4
2003-8    3-25-2003 Rezoning parcels from R-5M to R-5C
2003-30   7-22-2003 Rezoning parcels from R-2 to R-3
2004-14   3-23-2004 Rezoning parcel from PUD to B-2
R. 2004-8 4-13-2004 Naming a portion of property “Adamson’s Point”
2004-35   9-28-2004 Rezoning parcels from B-2 to R-5C
2005-9    3-8-2005  Approving record plat for a section of Light’s Hill
                    Subdivision
2005-42   10-25-    Approving record plat for a section of Light’s Hill
          2005      Subdivision
2005-47   11-8-2005 Approving record plat for a block of Riverview Bluffs
                    Subdivision
2006-32   10-10-    Approving record plat for a section of Union Station
          2006      Subdivision
2006-44   12-18-    Rezoning parcel from R-2 to R-3
          2006
2009-50   12-8-2009 Approving record plat for a section of Light’s Pointe
                    Subdivision
2013-15   5-28-2013 Rezoning from R5-M to R5-C
R. 2013-  8-13-2013 Expanding boundaries of Community Reinvestment Area
17
2014-3    3-11-2014 Rezoning parcel from R-2 to R-5
2019-03   2-26-2019 Rezoning parcel from R-3 to PUD
R. 2020-  3-24-2020 Creating a DORA for the core village
03
2021-07   4-27-2021 Rezoning a parcel from R-2 to PUD
2021-14   7-27-2021 Rezoning parcel from R-2 to PUD
                   
 
TABLE VI: SALES, PURCHASES AND TRANSFERS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
1984-36       - -         Deleting the bond requirement in ord. 1984-18
2008-31       - -         Purchasing property from the Department of Housing
                          and Urban Development
1981-3        1-13-1981   Executing a deed conveying certain property
1984-18       4-10-1984   Selling real estate
1984-23       9-11-1984   Amending requirements for purchase of land
1985-7        3-12-1985   Authorizing equipment rental
1988-5        4-12-1988   Authorizing purchase of rescue equipment
1988-15       8-9-1988    Selling lot
1988-25       10-11-1988  Purchasing an ambulance
1989-5        2-20-1989   Purchasing a police cruiser
1990-14       4-10-1990   Purchasing a police cruiser
1990-47       11-13-1990  Purchasing a dump truck
1991-09       2-12-1991   Executing a quit claim deed with Board of Education
1995-22       9-26-1995   Selling cab and fire pumper
1999-16A      6-16-1999   Accepting transfer of land from the school district
1999-16B      6-16-1999   Transferring village property to the Community
                          Improvement Corporation
1999-22       10-19-1999  Granting a time extension to Ord. 1999-16B
2000-32       8-8-2000    Transferring land to the Community Improvement
                          Corporation
2000-42       11-28-2000  Purchasing a salt truck
2001-1        1-9-2001    Accepting transfer of property from the school
                          district
2001-2        1-9-2001    Transferring property to the Community Improvement
                          Corporation
R. 2003-29    7-8-2003    Selling parcels of land
2004-1        3-9-2004    Authorizing division of village owned parcel
2005-11       3-22-2005   Selling Elm Park parcels
R. 2005-14    4-26-2005   Authorizing a quit claim deed
2009-15       2-24-2009   Transferring property to Ohio Township
R. 2012-18    1-8-2012    Purchasing real estate
2012-12       5-8-2012    Selling real property owned by the village
                         
 
TABLE VII: CONTRACTS, AGREEMENTS AND FRANCHISES
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res.  Date Passed Description
No.
1992-64    - -         Contract for payroll services
1995-09    - -         Contract amendment for construction of the waste water
                       treatment plant
1995-25    - -         Contracts for repairs of the water plant clarifier
                       walls
1995-28    - -         Executing contracts for drainage repair project
R. 2000-06 - -         Contract for street improvement project
R. 2000-07 - -         Contract for street improvement project
R. 2004-   - -         Agreement to provide EMS protection
R. 2005-37 - -         Contract for window repair project
2006-25    - -         Contract for services as a third-party collector of
                       reimbursement for emergency medical services
R. 2007-42 - -         Agreement to provide CPR/first aid training services
R. 2009-28 - -         Contract for residential garbage service
R. 2013-5  - -         Contract for residential solid waste and recycling
                       service
1980-4     3-10-1980   Contract for cable television
R. 1980-12 4-28-1980   Depository contract
R. 1980-25 9-30-1980   Contract for grant application consultant
R. 1980-26 10-13-1980  Contract for emergency ambulance service
1981-2     1-13-1981   Contract for trash collection
82-10      6-22-1982   Franchise for a community television system
1984-28    6-12-1984   Contract for telephone equipment
1985-3     2-26-1985   Contract for the Long Hill project
1985-8     3-12-1985   Contract with Branstetter/Carroll
1986-3     2-11-1986   Contract for the Market Street storm drainage project
R. 86-05   3-31-1986   Contract for the Market Street storm drainage project
1986-31    11-6-1986   Assignment of the right to operate a cable television
                       system
1986-34    12-9-1986   Contract for emergency medical services
1986-35    12-9-1986   Contract for fire services
1987-3     12-17-1986  Contract for legal services
1987-05    1-13-1987   Contract for housing of prisoners
1987-10    2-10-1987   Mutual aid contract with county political subdivisions
-          4-21-1987   Amending the county- wide disaster services agreement
1987-22A   5-12-1987   Contract for pavement of streets
87-32      12-14-1987  Contract for computerization of village offices
1988-13    6-28-1988   Contract for continuing medical insurance benefits
1988-16    6-28-1988   Contract for the cleaning of wells at the water
                       treatment plant
1988-35    12-13-1988  Contract for fire and Life Squad services
1989-2     1-10-1989   Contract for general liability insurance
1989-4     2-20-1989   Contract for health insurance
1989-9     3-14-1989   Mutual aid contract for emergency medical services
1989-11    3-14-1989   Contract for dispatching services
1989-12    4-11-1989   Contract for fire protection
1989-36    11-14-1989  Agreement for general liability insurance
1989-38    12-12-1989  Contract for fire and Life Squad services
1990-15    3-20-1990   Contract for fire protection services
1990-21    6-12-1990   Contract for the resurfacing of streets
1990-23    6-12-1990   Contract for additional work to be performed on the
                       tennis courts
1990-40    9-20-1990   Contract for emergency repairs to the pump station
1990-45    11-13-1990  Contract for the housing of prisoners
1990-57    12-11-1990  Contract for fire and emergency medical services
1990-59    12-11-1990  Contract for general liability insurance
1991-01    1-8-1991    Contract for law enforcement television network
1991-4     2-12-1991   Contract for health care insurance
1991-15    3-12-1991   Contract for fire protection
1991-28    10-8-1991   Contract for the installation of an aeration tower
1991-35    12-10-1991  Contract for a comprehensive insurance package
1991-36    12-10-1991  Contract for garbage collection
1991-44    12-10-1991  Contract for emergency medical services
1991-45    12-10-1991  Contract for fire protection
1992-15    2-11-1992   Contract for housing of prisoners
1992-19    2-11-1992   Mutual aid agreement for police protection
1992-20    2-15-1992   Contracts for culvert repair
1992-25    3-10-1992   Contract for mowing of the village cemeteries
1992-26    3-10-1992   Contract for fire protection services
1993-02    1-12-1993   Contract for waste collection
1994-18    8-9-1994    Cooperative agreement for construction of waste water
                       treatment facilities improvements
1994-30    11-1-1994   Contract for pump station repairs
1995-01    1-10-1995   Contract for bridge repairs
1995-02    1-10-1995   Contract for garbage service
1995-16    8-8-1995    Agreement for emergency tie-in to the county’s water
                       system
1996-11    4-23-1996   Contract to administer ambulance billing services
1996-2     12-13-1996  Cooperative agreement for construction of waste water
                       effluent line replacement
2000-53    12-12-2000  Contract for the engineering and design of a water
                       line replacement project
2001-7     1-23-2001   Agreement for the completion of a bike trail study
2001-19    5-8-2001    Mutual assistance agreement for life safety services
R. 2001-19 7-24-2001   Contract for turn lane project
R. 2001-20 7-24-2001   Contract for water line replacement project
2001-43    10-9-2001   Contract for the delivery of a new heart monitor/
                       defibrillator unit
2001-44    12-4-2001   Franchise for placement of gas and electric facilities
2002-1     1-8-2002    Cooperative agreement for construction of a sewer line
R. 2002-2  1-8-2002    Contract for sewer line construction
2002-8     2-12-2002   Contract for engineering for a drainage improvement
                       project
2002-13    3-12-2002   Contract to prepare an all hazards mitigation plan
2002-9     3-13-2002   Water purchase contract for emergency water
2002-18    4-9-2002    Contract for mowing of the village cemeteries
2002-17    4-23-2002   Agreement to conduct technical review of cellular
                       communication towers applications
2003-24    6-3-2003    Contract for legal counsel
R. 2002-16 6-11-2002   Cooperative agreement for planning of a state water
                       project
R. 2002-25 7-9-2002    Contract for sewer line project
R. 2002-28 7-23-2002   Contract for drainage and road improvements project
R. 2003-6  3-25-2003   Contract for street improvement project
R. 2003-12 5-13-2003   Amending contract to include engineering service for
                       water well development
R. 2003-14 5-27-2003   Agreement to conduct technical assistance of the
                       design standards
R. 2003-15 5-27-2003   Agreement to conduct technical assistance of the
                       design standards
R. 2003-28 6-10-2003   Amending R. 2002-28 contract amount
R. 2003-29 6-10-2003   Amending R. 2002-25 contract amount
2003-28    7-8-2003    Contract for road stabilization project
2003-39    9-23-2003   Contract for handicap access lift installation
2003-41    12-9-2003   Contract for waste removal
R. 2003-45 12-9-2003   Contract for emergency medical services
2004-12    4-13-2004   Franchise for cable television franchise
R. 2004-14 4-13-2004   Contract for cemetery mowing
2004-24    6-8-2004    Contract for financial support for the Main Street
                       Program
2004-32    8-24-2004   Agreement for participation in a public safety radio
                       repair bank
R. 2004-38 9-14-2004   Cooperative agreement for construction of a state
                       water project
R. 2004-40 10-12-2004  Contract to repair a new water pump station
R. 2004-44 12-14-2004  Agreement for administration of a Housing Revolving
                       Loan Fund
2004-46    12-14-2004  Contract for legal counsel
R. 2005-12 4-12-2005   Contract for cemetery mowing
2005-26    5-24-2005   Contract for engineering for road stabilization
                       project
2005-12    5-25-2005   Contract for the maintenance of a detention basin
2005-28    6-14-2005   Contract for Main Street repairs
2005-33    7-26-2005   Franchise for the cable system
R. 2005-43 9-27-2005   Contract for Police Department management review
2005-46    10-11-2005  Contract for the road stabilization project
2005-50    11-22-2005  Agreement for administration and enforcement of flood
                       damage control
R. 2005-50 12-13-2005  Contract for emergency fire and medical protection
                       services
2006-15    5-23-2006   Contract for upgrading a portion of the sewer
                       collection system
2006-26    7-25-2006   Contract for boat ramp project
2006-28    8-6-2006    Agreement to establish water line service boundaries
R. 2006-36 9-12-2006   Contract for storm drainage improvements
R. 2006-44 11-14-2006  Contract for scenic overlook deck
2006-43    12-12-2006  Contract for residential garbage pick up
2007-03    1-9-2007    Agreement for enforcement of the State Residential
                       Code
2007-15    3-27-2007   Agreement for the purchase of bulk water
2007-14    4-24-2007   Contract for the maintenance of a detention basin
2007-25    5-22-2007   Contract for legal counsel
2007-29    6-26-2007   Agreement for administration of a Housing Revolving
                       Loan Fund
2007-43    9-11-2007   Contract for road stabilization project
2007-51    11-13-2007  Depository agreement
R. 2008-30 9-9-2008    Agreement to provide CPR and first aid training
                       services
2009-19    3-24-2009   Agreement for radio equipment
R. 2009-9  4-14-2009   Agreement to accept emergency electric generation
                       equipment
R. 2009-12 4-14-2009   Agreement for a back- up generator
R. 2009-13 4-14-2009   Agreement for installation of back-up generator
2009-31    6-9-2009    Cooperative agreement for water development project
R. 2009-17 7-14-2009   Agreement for maintenance of water tower
R. 2009-19 7-28-2009   Contract for construction of park project
2009-37    8-25-2009   Contract for property disposal
2009-41    8-25-2009   Depository agreement
R. 2009-23 10-13-2009  Contract for sewer clarifier project
R. 2009-24 10-13-2009  Contract for sanitary sewer lining project
2009-55    11-24-2009  Agreement for participation in a Regional Council of
                       Governments
R. 2010-4  2-23-2010   Contract for culvert replacement project
R. 2010-14 4-13-2010   Agreement for administration of Housing Revolving Loan
                       Fund
R. 2010-20 5-11-2010   Contract for street resurfacing project
R. 2010-21 5-25-2010   Contract for Village Hall window replacement project
2010-19    6-22-2010   Mutual aid agreement for radio service
R. 2010-25 7-13-2010   Contract for Front Street revitalization project
R. 2011-6  2-8-2011    Agreement for radio equipment
R. 2011-8  3-8-2011    Mutual assistance agreement for fire and emergency
                       medical services
R. 2011-12 3-22-2011   Contract for street resurfacing project
R. 2011-13 4-12-2011   Contract for boat dock ramp project
R. 2011-14 6-28-2011   Contract for water plant high service pump project
R. 2011-23 11-8-2011   Contract for sanitary sewer lining project
R. 2012-3  - -2012     Agreement to provide fire and EMS protection
2012-8     2-28-2012   Agreement for property and liability insurance
R. 2012-7  6-12-2012   Contract for street improvement project
R. 2012-6  8-14-2012   Agreement for delinquent debt collection
R. 2012-9  8-14-2012   Agreement for equipment use
R. 2012-9  12-11-2012  Contract for legal services
R. 2013-3  2-26-2013   Agreement for administration of Housing Revolving Loan
                       Fund
2013-10    2-26-2013   Agreement for property and liability insurance
R. 2013-7  3-26-2013   Agreement for road paving
R. 2013-9  5-14-2013   Contract for water reservoir main project
R. 2013-18 9-10-2013   Agreement to accept donation of real estate
R. 2013-26 11-26-2013  Contract for pump station project
R. 2014-2  2-25-2014   Agreement for use of property
R. 2014-4  2-25-2014   Agreement for care and housing of K9
2014-5     3-11-2014   Contract for bridge inspection program services
2014-21    7-15-2014   Agreement for road paving
2014-24    8-12-2014   Cooperative agreement for participation in County
                       Community Development Program
2014-36    9-23-2014   Amending cooperative agreement for County Community
                       Development Program
2014-40    10-14-2014  Contracts for roofing and electric
R. 2015-02 1-13-2015   Mutual aid agreement for emergency support services
R. 2015-5  2-10-2015   Agreement for Police Department administrative
                       services
R. 2015-10 5-12-2015   Contract for road salt
R. 2015-12 6-9-2015    Contract for engineering services for boat ramp
R. 2015-11 8-11-2015   Agreement for electronic patient care reports
R. 2015-18 10-27-2015  Cooperative agreement for planning loan for a waste
                       water project
R. 2016-02 1-12-2016   Agreement for administration of Housing Revolving Loan
                       Fund
R. 2016-03 1-12-2016   Cooperative agreement for construction of a waste
                       water project
R. 2016-04 2-9-2016    Agreement to accept donation of real estate
R. 2016-11 10-11-2016  Contract for bridge inspection services
R. 2017-02 1-30-2017   Contract for solid waste and curbside recycling
                       collection and disposal services
R. 2017-03 4-11-2017   Agreement for Police Department administrative
                       services
R. 2017-06 7-25-2017   Agreement authorizing connection to county’s water
                       system
R. 2017-07 7-20-2017   Contract for asphalt repairs and paving
R. 2017-09 7-25-2017   Cooperation agreement for participation in County
                       Community Development Program
R. 2018-06 6-25-2018   Contract for waste water treatment plant flow
                       balancing project
R. 2018-09 8-14-2018   Contract for asphalt repairs and paving
R. 2018-10 9-25-2018   Agreement for administration and enforcement of water
                       management and sediment control regulations
R. 2018-14 10-9-2018   Agreement for phone and fiber optic internet services
R. 2019-11 8-27-2019   Contract for asphalt repairs and paving
R. 2019-12 8-27-2019   Contract for storm wall improvements
R. 2019-09 9-10-2019   Contract for bridge inspection services
R. 2019-15 9-24-2019   Contract for waste water system repair/replacement
R. 2020-09 4-28-2020   Contract for asphalt repairs and paving
R. 2020-15 8-11-2020   Agreement for road improvement project
R. 2021-11 5-25-2021   Contract for emergency fire and EMS services
R. 2021-12 5-25-2021   Agreement for water supply revolving loan account
R. 2021-13 6-22-2021   Agreement for removal and control of snow and ice
R. 2021-18 9-28-2021   Agreement for a capital improvement community park,
                       recreation/conservation project
R. 2022-19 10-11-2022  Agreement for road improvements
R. 2023-17 6-27-2023   Cooperation agreement for community development
R. 2023-21 8-22-2023   Agreement for professional services for riverfront
                       development
                      
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
References to Non-Historical Ohio Revised Code Sections
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code 2025 Code
Prior Code 2025 Code
30.50      30.13
30.51      30.14
30.52      40.01
30.53      40.02
34.50      34.16
37.01      37.01
37.25      37.15
37.26      37.16
37.27      37.17
37.28      37.18
37.29      37.19
37.30      37.20
37.31      37.21
38.01      38.01
38.02      38.01
38.03      38.01
38.12      38.03
38.14      38.04
38.15      38.05
51.01      51.01
51.02      51.02
51.03      51.03
51.04      51.04
51.05      51.05
51.06      51.06
51.99      51.99
52.01      52.01
70.50      70.13
72.18      92.07
72.64      72.064
73.01      73.01
73.09      73.17
74.02      74.02
74.31      74.31
76.04      Ch. 78, Sched. I
76.15      76.13
76.16      76.14
77.01      Ch. 77, Sched. II
90.26      90.38
90.27      90.39;
           90.99
90.28      90.40
91.60      91.59;
           91.99
92.99      92.99
92.99      92.99
93.15      93.007
93.60      94.15
93.70      93.075
93.71      93.076
93.72      93.077
93.73      93.078
93.74      93.079
93.75      93.080
93.76      93.081
93.77      93.082
93.78      93.083
93.79      93.084
93.80      93.085
93.81      93.086
93.82      93.087
93.83      93.088
93.84      93.089
93.85      93.090
93.99      93.999
94.15      94.16
95.01      95.01
95.02      95.02
95.03      95.03
95.04      95.04
95.05      95.05
95.06      95.06
95.07      95.07
95.08      95.08
97.01      97.03
97.03      97.04
98.01      98.01
98.02      98.02
98.99      98.99
113.06     113.06;
           113.99
113.07     113.07;
           113.99
114A.01    111.45
114A.02    111.46
114A.03    111.47
114A.04    111.48
114A.05    111.49
114A.06    111.50
114A.99    111.99
115.01     115.15
115.02     115.16
115.03     115.17
115.04     115.18
115.05     115.19
115.06     115.20
115.99     115.99
116.01     116.01
116.02     116.02
116.03     116.03
116.04     116.04
116.05     116.05
116.06     116.06
116.07     116.07
116.08     116.08
116.09     116.09
117.01     50.15
117.02     50.16
117.03     50.17
117.04     50.18
117.05     50.19
117.06     50.40
117.07     50.41
117.08     50.42
117.09     50.43
117.10     50.44
117.11     50.20
117.12     50.21
117.13     50.22
117.14     50.45
117.15     50.46
117.16     50.23
117.17     50.24
118.01     118.01
118.02     118.02
118.03     118.03
118.04     118.04
118.05     118.05
118.06     118.06
118.07     118.07
118.08     118.08
118.09     118.09
118.10     118.10
118.11     118.11
118.12     118.12
118.13     118.13
118.14     118.14
118.15     118.15
118.16     118.16
118.25     118.30
118.26     118.31
118.27     118.32
118.28     118.33
118.29     118.34
118.30     118.35
118.31     118.36
118.32     118.99
118.33     118.37
119.01     94.17
130.50     130.22
132.50     132.16
132.51     132.17
132.52     132.18
135.50     135.29
150.50     150.01
150.51     150.02
150.52     150.03
150.53     150.04
150.54     150.05
153.01     153.01
153.02     153.02
           
 
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
2000-06  - -         TSO Table VII
2000-07  - -         TSO Table VII
2004-    - -         TSO Table VII
2005-37  - -         TSO Table VII
2007-42  - -         TSO Table VII
2009-28  - -         TSO Table VII
2013-5   - -         TSO Table VII
1980-12  4-28-1980   TSO Table VII
1980-14  6-9-1980    TSO Table V
1980-16  6-9-1980    TSO Table III
1980-25  9-30-1980   TSO Table VII
1980-26  10-13-1980  TSO Table VII
1980-34  12-8-1980   TSO Table V
86-05    3-31-1986   TSO Table VII
2000-09  7-25-2000   40.20
2000-10  7-25-2000   40.20
2000-11  7-25-2000   40.20
2000-12  7-25-2000   40.20
2000-13  7-25-2000   40.20
2000-15  8-8-2000    40.20
2000-15  10-10-2000  40.20
2000-16  10-10-2000  40.20
2000-17  10-10-2000  40.20
2000-19  10-10-2000  40.20
2000-20  10-10-2000  40.20
2001-19  7-24-2001   TSO Table VII
2001-20  7-24-2001   TSO Table VII
2002-2   1-8-2002    TSO Table VII
2002-16  6-11-2002   TSO Table VII
2002-25  7-9-2002    TSO Table VII
2002-28  7-23-2002   TSO Table VII
2003-6   3-25-2003   TSO Table VII
2003-12  5-13-2003   TSO Table VII
2003-14  5-27-2003   TSO Table VII
2003-15  5-27-2003   TSO Table VII
2003-28  6-10-2003   TSO Table VII
2003-29  6-10-2003   TSO Table VII
2003-29  7-8-2003    TSO Table VI
2003-45  12-9-2003   TSO Table VII
2003-44  1-13-2004   TSO Table II
2004-8   4-13-2004   TSO Table V
2004-14  4-13-2004   TSO Table VII
2004-13  5-26-2004   TSO Table II
2004-38  9-14-2004   TSO Table VII
2004-40  10-12-2004  TSO Table VII
2004-44  12-14-2004  TSO Table VII
2005-1   1-11-2005   35.18
2005-12  4-12-2005   TSO Table VII
2005-14  4-26-2005   TSO Table VI
2005-43  9-27-2005   TSO Table VII
2005-47  11-22-2005  37.22
2005-50  12-13-2005  TSO Table VII
2006-36  9-12-2006   TSO Table VII
2006-44  11-14-2006  TSO Table VII
2008-10  3-25-2008   40.20
2008-14  5-13-2008   40.20
2008-30  9-9-2008    TSO Table VII
2008-28  11-18-2008  40.20
2009-1   1-13-2009   38.02
2009-4   2-10-2009   40.20
2009-9   4-14-2009   TSO Table VII
2009-12  4-14-2009   TSO Table VII
2009-13  4-14-2009   TSO Table VII
2009-17  7-14-2009   TSO Table VII
2009-19  7-28-2009   TSO Table VII
2009-21  8-25-2009   40.20
2009-23  10-13-2009  TSO Table VII
2009-24  10-13-2009  TSO Table VII
2010-2   1-12-2010   40.20
2010-4   2-23-2010   TSO Table VII
2010-14  4-13-2010   TSO Table VII
2010-20  5-11-2010   TSO Table VII
2010-21  5-25-2010   TSO Table VII
2010-25  7-13-2010   TSO Table VII
2010-27  8-10-2010   TSO Table II
2010-34  12-14-2010  154.01
2011-2   1-11-2011   40.20
2011-5   1-25-2011   40.20
2011-6   2-8-2011    TSO Table VII
2011-7   2-22-2011   40.20
2011-8   3-8-2011    TSO Table VII
2011-12  3-22-2011   TSO Table VII
2011-13  4-12-2011   TSO Table VII
2011-14  6-28-2011   TSO Table VII
2011-23  11-8-2011   TSO Table VII
2012-3   - -2012     TSO Table VII
2012-18  1-8-2012    TSO Table VI
2012-7   6-12-2012   TSO Table VII
2012-6   8-14-2012   TSO Table VII
2012-9   8-14-2012   TSO Table VII
2012-15  11-27-2012  53.02
2012-9   12-11-2012  TSO Table VII
2013-3   2-26-2013   TSO Table VII
2013-7   3-26-2013   TSO Table VII
2013-9   5-14-2013   TSO Table VII
2013-17  8-13-2013   TSO Table V
2013-18  9-10-2013   TSO Table VII
2013-26  11-26-2013  TSO Table VII
2014-2   2-25-2014   TSO Table VII
2014-4   2-25-2014   TSO Table VII
2014-9   5-27-2014   154.01
2014-12  9-9-2014    TSO Table I
2015-02  1-13-2015   TSO Table VII
2015-4   2-10-2015   TSO Table I
2015-5   2-10-2015   TSO Table VII
2015-10  5-12-2015   TSO Table VII
2015-12  6-9-2015    TSO Table VII
2015-11  8-11-2015   TSO Table VII
2015-18  10-27-2015  TSO Table VII
2016-02  1-12-2016   TSO Table VII
2016-03  1-12-2016   TSO Table VII
2016-04  2-9-2016    TSO Table VII
                     39.01;
2016-09  7-26-2016   39.03;
                     39.04
2016-11  10-11-2016  TSO Table VII
2017-02  1-30-2017   TSO Table VII
2017-03  4-11-2017   TSO Table VII
2017-07  7-20-2017   TSO Table VII
2017-06  7-25-2017   TSO Table VII
2017-09  7-25-2017   TSO Table VII
2018-06  6-25-2018   TSO Table VII
2018-07  7-10-2018   38.11
2018-09  8-14-2018   TSO Table VII
2018-10  9-25-2018   TSO Table VII
2018-14  10-9-2018   TSO Table VII
2019-02  1-22-2019   38.07
2019-06  5-14-2019   53.02
2019-11  8-27-2019   TSO Table VII
2019-12  8-27-2019   TSO Table VII
2019-09  9-10-2019   TSO Table VII
2019-15  9-24-2019   TSO Table VII
2019-19  12-10-2019  34.17
2020-03  3-24-2020   TSO Table V
2020-09  4-28-2020   TSO Table VII
2020-15  8-11-2020   TSO Table VII
2021-11  5-25-2021   TSO Table VII
2021-12  5-25-2021   TSO Table VII
2021-13  6-22-2021   TSO Table VII
2021-18  9-28-2021   TSO Table VII
2021-17  10-12-2021  40.20
2022-01  2-8-2022    40.20
2022-19  10-11-2022  TSO Table VII
2023-17  6-27-2023   TSO Table VII
2023-21  8-22-2023   TSO Table VII
2024-06  5-14-2024   35.19
                    
 
2024-06   5-14-2024   35.19
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
1984-19  - -         Ch. 77, Sched. I
1984-27  - -         Ch. 78, Sched. I
1984-36  - -         TSO Table VI
1992-34  - -         40.05
1992-37  - -         TSO Table III
1992-64  - -         TSO Table VII
1993-17  - -         153.01
1993-26  - -         40.02
1994-19  - -         31.096
1995-09  - -         TSO Table VII
1995-14  - -         Ch. 77, Sched. I
1995-25  - -         TSO Table VII
1995-28  - -         TSO Table VII
1996-10  - -         40.02
2001-29  - -         37.01
2006-3   - -         TSO Table III
2006-25  - -         TSO Table VII
2007-19  - -         91.59;
                     91.99
2007-60  - -         95.01—
                     95.07
2008-31  - -         TSO Table VI
2010-13  - -         Ch. 77, Sched. I
1886-23  6-10-1886   72.064
1973-4   1-22-1973   73.17
1975-7   3-24-1975   76.14
1975-6   5-12-1975   76.13
1975-14  8-11-1975   76.14
1976-B   1-9-1976    150.01
1977-5   2-14-1977   113.07;
                     113.99
1977-15  6-13-1977   97.03
1979-9   4-9-1979    Ch. 78, Sched. I
1980-1   1-14-1980   40.01
1980-3   2-25-1980   TSO Table II
1980-4   3-10-1980   TSO Table VII
1980-7A  4-14-1980   TSO Table IV
1980-13A 7-14-1980   TSO Table V
1981-2   1-13-1981   TSO Table VII
1981-3   1-13-1981   TSO Table VI
1981-3A  2-24-1981   TSO Table V
1980-07  4-14-1981   Ch. 78, Sched. I
1981-7   7-28-1981   130.22
1981-9   9-22-1981   90.38
1982-5   4-27-1982   TSO Table V
1982-07  5-25-1982   Ch. 78, Sched. I
82-10    6-22-1982   TSO Table VII
1982-15  11-9-1982   TSO Table II
1983-4   1-25-1983   TSO Table II
1983-5   3-8-1983    TSO Table V
                     115.15—
1983-7   3-22-1983   115.20;
                     115.99
1983-8   3-22-1983   TSO Table V
1983-13  4-26-1983   TSO Table III
1983-11  5-24-1983   32.053
1984-31  6-12-1983   TSO Table III
1983-15  6-28-1983   TSO Table V
1983-16  6-28-1983   TSO Table IV
1983-17  7-28-1983   TSO Table V
1983-26  11-22-1983  74.62
1983-24  12-13-1983  TSO Table V
1984-18  4-10-1984   TSO Table VI
1984-21  5-8-1984    TSO Table V
1984-28  6-12-1984   TSO Table VII
1984-23  9-11-1984   TSO Table VI
1984-32  9-11-1984   TSO Table IV
1984-43  11-13-1984  TSO Table V
1984-44  2-26-1985   72.018
1984-45  2-26-1985   76.17
1985-3   2-26-1985   TSO Table VII
1985-7   3-12-1985   TSO Table VI
1985-8   3-12-1985   TSO Table VII
1985-14  7-9-1985    TSO Table IV
1985-15  7-9-1985    31.046
1985-21  10-8-1985   31.045
1985-22  10-29-1985  TSO Table V
1986-3   2-11-1986   TSO Table VII
1986-5   2-11-1986   74.62
1986-12  4-8-1986    70.13
1986-19  5-8-1986    113.06;
                     113.99
1986-31  11-6-1986   TSO Table VII
1986-34  12-9-1986   TSO Table VII
1986-35  12-9-1986   TSO Table VII
1987-3   12-17-1986  TSO Table VII
1987-01  1-13-1987   TSO Table III
1987-05  1-13-1987   TSO Table VII
1987-08  1-27-1987   31.100
1987-10  2-10-1987   TSO Table VII
-        4-21-1987   TSO Table VII
1987-22A 5-12-1987   TSO Table VII
87-32    12-14-1987  TSO Table VII
1988-5   4-12-1988   TSO Table VI
1988-13  6-28-1988   TSO Table VII
1988-16  6-28-1988   TSO Table VII
1988-9   7-26-1988   Ch. 78, Sched. I
1988-12  7-26-1988   TSO Table V
1988-15  8-9-1988    TSO Table VI
1988-20  9-13-1988   TSO Table V
1988-25  10-11-1988  TSO Table VI
1988-32  11-8-1988   31.099
1988-35  12-13-1988  TSO Table VII
1989-2   1-10-1989   TSO Table VII
1989-4   2-20-1989   TSO Table VII
1989-5   2-20-1989   TSO Table VI
1989-9   3-14-1989   TSO Table VII
1989-11  3-14-1989   TSO Table VII
1989-12  4-11-1989   TSO Table VII
1989-13  4-11-1989   40.01
1989-25  10-10-1989  TSO Table III
1989-26  10-10-1989  40.20
1989-36  11-14-1989  TSO Table VII
1989-38  12-12-1989  TSO Table VII
1991-23  - -1990     TSO Table IV
1990-15  3-20-1990   TSO Table VII
1990-20  4-8-1990    TSO Table V
1990-14  4-10-1990   TSO Table VI
1990-12  5-8-1990    TSO Table III
                     111.45—
1990-13  5-8-1990    111.50;
                     111.99
1990-21  6-12-1990   TSO Table VII
1990-23  6-12-1990   TSO Table VII
1990-25  8-14-1990   74.31
1990-26  8-14-1990   74.02
                     73.01;
1990-30  8-14-1990   92.07;
                     92.99
1990-27  9-11-1990   TSO Table IV
1990-35  9-11-1990   40.20
1990-40  9-20-1990   TSO Table VII
1990-29  10-9-1990   97.20
1990-43  10-9-1990   Ch. 77, Sched. I
1990-45  11-13-1990  TSO Table VII
1990-47  11-13-1990  TSO Table VI
1990-46  12-11-1990  31.101
1990-48  12-11-1990  TSO Table V
1990-57  12-11-1990  TSO Table VII
1990-59  12-11-1990  TSO Table VII
1991-01  1-8-1991    TSO Table VII
1991-03  2-12-1991   94.16
1991-4   2-12-1991   TSO Table VII
1991-6   2-12-1991   TSO Table III
1991-08  2-12-1991   94.16
1991-09  2-12-1991   TSO Table VI
1991-15  3-12-1991   TSO Table VII
1991-16  3-12-1991   TSO Table III
1991-10  4-9-1991    30.14
1991-15A 6-11-1991   113.06;
                     113.99
1991-18  6-11-1991   TSO Table IV
1991-24  9-10-1991   TSO Table V
1991-28  10-8-1991   TSO Table VII
1991-34  11-12-1991  30.13
1991-35  12-10-1991  TSO Table VII
1991-36  12-10-1991  TSO Table VII
1991-44  12-10-1991  TSO Table VII
1991-45  12-10-1991  TSO Table VII
1991-37  2-11-1992   52.15—
                     52.27
1992-15  2-11-1992   TSO Table VII
1992-19  2-11-1992   TSO Table VII
1992-20  2-15-1992   TSO Table VII
1992-25  3-10-1992   TSO Table VII
1992-26  3-10-1992   TSO Table VII
1991-02  3-31-1992   TSO Table III
1992-13  4-14-1992   113.06;
                     113.99
1992-21  4-14-1992   TSO Table V
1992-29  5-12-1992   53.02
1993-33  - -1993     34.16
1993-01  1-11-1993   TSO Table II
1993-02  1-12-1993   TSO Table VII
1993-16  4-13-1993   TSO Table III
1993-36  12-14-1993  90.40
1994-5   - -1994     37.02
1994-9   3-8-1994    Ch. 77, Sched. I
1994-15  6-14-1994   TSO Table V
                     51.01;
                     51.02;
1994-16  6-14-1994   51.04;
                     51.05;
                     51.99
1994-18  8-9-1994    TSO Table VII
1994-30  11-1-1994   TSO Table VII
1995-01  1-10-1995   TSO Table VII
1995-02  1-10-1995   TSO Table VII
1995-16  8-8-1995    TSO Table VII
1995-22  9-26-1995   TSO Table VI
1996-11  4-23-1996   TSO Table VII
1996-2   12-13-1996  TSO Table VII
                     118.01—
                     118.16;
1996-24  2-11-1997   118.30—
                     118.37;
                     118.99
1997-10  5-27-1997   40.01
1998-04  1-13-1998   38.03
1998-06  3-10-1998   TSO Table V
1998-02  4-14-1998   37.01;
                     132.16
1998-16  9-8-1998    116.01—
                     116.09
1999-01  1-12-1999   135.29
1999-02  2-9-1999    38.01
                     98.01;
1999-12  6-8-1999    98.02;
                     98.99
1999-16A 6-16-1999   TSO Table VI
1999-16B 6-16-1999   TSO Table VI
1999-42  9-14-1999   40.05
1999-22  10-19-1999  TSO Table VI
2000-3   3-14-2000   97.04
2000-22  5-10-2000   TSO Table II
2000-16  5-23-2000   Ch. 78, Sched. I
2000-29  6-13-2000   93.007
2000-20  6-27-2000   98.02
2000-28  7-11-2000   53.02
2000-32  8-8-2000    TSO Table VI
2000-42  11-28-2000  TSO Table VI
2000-52  12-12-2000  31.047
2000-53  12-12-2000  TSO Table VII
2001-1   1-9-2001    TSO Table VI
2001-2   1-9-2001    TSO Table VI
2001-7   1-23-2001   TSO Table VII
2001-8   2-27-2001   TSO Table IV
2001-19  5-8-2001    TSO Table VII
2001-38  8-21-2001   150.02
2001-43  10-9-2001   TSO Table VII
2001-44  12-4-2001   TSO Table VII
2002-1   1-8-2002    TSO Table VII
2002-8   2-12-2002   TSO Table VII
2002-11  2-12-2002   40.01
2002-4   2-13-2002   116.01—
                     116.09
2002-13  3-12-2002   TSO Table VII
2002-16  3-12-2002   40.01
2002-9   3-13-2002   TSO Table VII
2002-12  3-26-2002   TSO Table V
2002-18  4-9-2002    TSO Table VII
2002-17  4-23-2002   TSO Table VII
2002-23  7-9-2002    153.02
2002-40  9-10-2002   Ch. 77, Sched. I
2002-35  9-24-2002   37.15—
                     37.21
2002-41  9-24-2002   TSO Table V
2002-44  11-12-2002  38.04
2002-22  12-10-2002  94.17
2002-56  12-30-2002  40.20
2003-8   3-25-2003   TSO Table V
2003-13  4-22-2003   150.03
2003-15  5-13-2003   TSO Table II
2003-24  6-3-2003    TSO Table VII
2003-28  7-8-2003    TSO Table VII
2003-30  7-22-2003   TSO Table V
2003-39  9-23-2003   TSO Table VII
2003-41  12-9-2003   TSO Table VII
2004-1   3-9-2004    TSO Table VI
2004-4   3-9-2004    TSO Table IV
2004-5   3-23-2004   153.02
2004-14  3-23-2004   TSO Table V
2004-12  4-13-2004   TSO Table VII
2004-24  6-8-2004    TSO Table VII
2004-32  8-24-2004   TSO Table VII
2004-35  9-28-2004   TSO Table V
2004-44  11-9-2004   40.02
2004-46  12-14-2004  TSO Table VII
2004-47  1-25-2005   TSO Table IV
2004-48  1-25-2005   113.06;
                     113.99
2005-5   2-22-2005   153.01
2005-9   3-8-2005    TSO Table V
2003-40  3-22-2005   150.04
2005-10  3-22-2005   153.02
2005-11  3-22-2005   TSO Table VI
2005-16  4-26-2005   153.01
2005-20  5-24-2005   113.06;
                     113.99
2005-26  5-24-2005   TSO Table VII
2005-12  5-25-2005   TSO Table VII
2005-18  6-14-2005   TSO Table II
2005-28  6-14-2005   TSO Table VII
2005-33  7-26-2005   TSO Table VII
2005-30  9-27-2005   TSO Table I
2005-38  10-11-2005  37.01
                     93.075—
2005-39  10-11-2005  93.090;
                     93.999
2005-46  10-11-2005  TSO Table VII
2005-42  10-25-2005  TSO Table V
2005-43  10-25-2005  TSO Table III
2005-47  11-8-2005   TSO Table V
2005-48  11-22-2005  TSO Table III
2005-50  11-22-2005  TSO Table VII
2005-54  11-22-2005  35.16
2005-56  11-22-2005  TSO Table III
                     99.01—
2006-2   2-14-2006   99.15;
                     99.99
2006-8   2-14-2006   153.02
2006-9   2-28-2006   TSO Table I
2006-10  3-14-2006   40.01
                     51.01;
                     51.02;
2006-13  4-25-2006   51.04—
                     51.06;
                     51.99
2006-14  5-9-2006    Ch. 77, Sched. II
2006-15  5-23-2006   TSO Table VII
2006-22  7-25-2006   TSO Table IV
2006-26  7-25-2006   TSO Table VII
2006-28  8-6-2006    TSO Table VII
2006-24  8-8-2006    35.17
2006-23  10-10-2006  153.01
2006-32  10-10-2006  TSO Table V
2006-33  10-10-2006  153.02
2006-40  12-12-2006  132.17
2006-41  12-12-2006  40.02
2006-43  12-12-2006  TSO Table VII
2006-44  12-18-2006  TSO Table V
2007-02  1-9-2007    150.05
2007-03  1-9-2007    TSO Table VII
2007-4   2-27-2007   40.03
2007-7   3-13-2007   37.03
2007-15  3-27-2007   TSO Table VII
2007-8   4-10-2007   Ch. 78, Sched. I
2007-18  4-10-2007   TSO Table II
2007-14  4-24-2007   TSO Table VII
                     99.03—
2007-16  4-24-2007   99.16;
                     99.99
2007-25  5-22-2007   TSO Table VII
2007-29  6-26-2007   TSO Table VI
2007-28  7-10-2007   Ch. 77, Sched. I
2007-33  7-10-2007   52.01
2007-20  7-24-2007   132.18
2007-36  7-24-2007   95.08
2007-43  9-11-2007   TSO Table VII
2007-48  11-13-2007  94.15
2007-49  11-13-2007  38.05
2007-51  11-13-2007  TSO Table VII
2007-53  12-11-2007  90.39;
                     90.99
2007-54  12-11-2007  40.02
2007-57  1-22-2008   TSO Table III
2008-06  3-11-2008   Ch. 78, Sched. I
2008-10  3-11-2008   40.02
2008-11  3-11-2008   40.05
                     152.15—
2008-18  6-10-2008   152.31;
                     152.99
2008-19  6-10-2008   53.01;
                     53.99
2008-21  7-22-2008   153.01
                     152.15—
2008-27  7-22-2008   152.31;
                     152.99
2008-22  10-28-2008  153.01
2008-37  11-18-2008  40.02
2008-36  12-9-2008   40.03
2009-15  2-24-2009   TSO Table VI
2009-14  3-24-2009   40.02
2009-19  3-24-2009   TSO Table VII
2009-31  6-9-2009    TSO Table VII
2009-29  6-23-2009   TSO Table IV
2009-35  7-15-2009   40.03
2009-37  8-25-2009   TSO Table VII
2009-41  8-25-2009   TSO Table VII
2009-2   10-13-2009  40.01
2009-49  11-10-2009  76.15
2009-53  11-24-2009  40.03
                     39.01—
2009-54  11-24-2009  39.24;
                     39.99
2009-55  11-24-2009  TSO Table VII
2009-50  12-8-2009   TSO Table V
2010-4   1-12-2010   40.03
2010-2   2-23-2010   TSO Table IV
2010-3   2-23-2010   76.17
2010-9   3-23-2010   TSO Table III
2010-16  5-11-2010   40.20
2010-19  6-22-2010   TSO Table VII
2010-22  7-13-2010   40.20
2010-21  8-10-2010   40.03
2010-41  12-14-2010  40.03
2010-43  12-14-2010  40.02
2011-15  8-23-2011   151.43
2011-20  10-25-2011  51.03
2011-30  12-13-2011  40.02
2011-33  12-13-2011  40.01
2012-8   2-28-2012   TSO Table VII
2012-6   3-13-2012   38.06
2012-12  5-8-2012    TSO Table VI
2012-19  7-24-2012   91.60
2013-7   - -2013     TSO Table I
2012-27  1-22-2013   97.03
2013-10  2-26-2013   TSO Table VII
                     50.15—
2013-4   3-12-2013   50.25;
                     50.40—
                     50.46
2013-5   3-12-2013   153.02
2013-9   3-26-2013   40.03
2013-13  4-9-2013    40.20
2013-15  5-28-2013   TSO Table V
2013-16  6-11-2013   40.20
2013-18  8-13-2013   TSO Table I
2013-26  10-8-2013   40.20
2013-28  11-12-2013  50.21
2013-29  11-12-2013  38.08
2013-32  11-26-2013  38.10
2013-33  12-10-2013  40.03
2013-36  12-17-2013  153.02
2013-38  12-17-2013  152.19
2013-39  12-17-2013  40.20
2014-3   3-11-2014   TSO Table V
2014-5   3-11-2014   TSO Table VII
2014-10  4-22-2014   38.08
2014-16  4-22-2014   40.20
2014-12  5-13-2014   38.06
2014-15  5-27-2014   50.15
2014-17  6-10-2014   40.20
2014-21  7-15-2014   TSO Table VII
2014-23  7-22-2014   TSO Table IV
2014-24  8-12-2014   TSO Table VII
2014-27  8-12-2014   TSO Table I
2014-26  9-9-2014    38.06
2014-28  9-9-2014    39.02
2014-36  9-23-2014   TSO Table VII
2014-40  10-14-2014  TSO Table VII
                     151.01—
                     151.11;
                     151.25—
2015-6   3-24-2015   151.29;
                     151.40—
                     151.43;
                     151.99
2015-4   4-14-2015   39.06
2015-20  10-13-2015  Ch. 78, Sched. I
2015-21  11-10-2015  Ch. 78, Sched. I
2015-22  11-24-2015  39.01—
                     39.24
2015-27  11-24-2015  TSO Table III
                     39.01;
2016-11  7-26-2016   39.01;
                     39.04
2017-13  7-11-2017   154.01
2017-17  8-22-2017   38.06
2017-15  9-12-2017   154.01
2018-03  3-27-2018   154.01
2018-11  5-22-2018   TSO Table III
2018-09  6-25-2018   38.09
2018-16  9-25-2018   52.01
2019-03  2-26-2019   TSO Table V
2019-05  4-9-2019    93.105—
                     93.109
2019-07  5-28-2019   70.39
2019-09  6-11-2019   93.040—
                     93.048
2019-08  8-13-2019   38.09
2019-10  10-8-2019   151.55—
                     151.57
2020-03  2-11-2020   76.16;
                     76.99
                     152.01—
2020-05  4-28-2020   152.04;
                     152.99
2021-06  4-13-2021   TSO Table IV
2021-03  2-23-2021   TSO Table I
                     117.01—
2021-05  4-27-2021   117.13;
                     117.99
2021-07  4-27-2021   TSO Table V
2021-08  5-11-2021   TSO Table I
                     75.45—
2021-09  6-8-2021    75.50;
                     75.99
2021-11  7-27-2021   TSO Table IV
2021-14  7-27-2021   TSO Table V
2022-    2-8-2022    38.06
2022-11  11-22-2022  TSO Table IV
2022-14  12-13-2022  Ch. 77, Sched. I
2023-03  3-13-2023   115.01
                     50.16;
                     50.20;
2023-05  4-11-2023   50.41;
                     50.45;
                     50.46
2023-06  5-23-2023   40.20
2023-07  6-13-2023   40.20
                     39.02;
                     39.03;
2024-01  1-9-2024    39.05;
                     39.18;
                     39.25
2024-07  1-25-2024   37.01
2024-09  12-10-2024  97.15—
                     97.19
2024-11  12-10-2024  50.01
                    
 
REFERENCES TO NON-HISTORICAL OHIO
REVISED CODE SECTIONS
Code Section ORC Cite
Code Section ORC Cite
31.040       733.58
32.053       731.25(A)
34.16        109.71 et seq.
34.16        737.161
35.19        128.08
38.07        9.21
38.07        717.31
38.10        9.312
38.10        Chapter 125
38.10        Chapter 731
38.11        9.312
39.01        718
39.02        Title LVII
39.02        125.30
39.02        709.023
39.02        715.691
39.02        715.70
39.02        715.71
39.02        715.74
39.02        Chapter 718
39.02        718.01(L)
39.02        718.03
39.02        Chapter 1705
39.02        3501.28
39.02        3502.36
39.02        3770.21
39.02        3772.01
39.02        4313.02
39.02        Chapter 5701
39.02        5703.056
39.02        5703.056(B)(3)
39.02        5717.011
39.02        5717.03
39.02        5727.24
39.02        5727.30
39.02        Chapter 5745
39.02        5747.01
39.03        Chapter 5745
39.05        4927.01
39.05        5727.01
39.05        5747.08(G)
39.06        715.691
39.06        715.70 through 715.72
39.14        5703.056
39.21        121.22
39.21        149.43
39.21        5717.011
39.25        718.01
39.25        718.80 to 718.95
39.25        Chapter 5745
39.26        718.04
40.06        149.43
50.44        735.29
52.16        6109.01
52.16        6109.02
52.18        6109.13
52.23        6109.13
70.13        Title 45
70.39        121.22
70.39        4510.036
70.39        4511.21
72.064       733.40
72.064       4501.01
72.064       4511.01
72.064       4511.81
72.064       4513.99
72.064       Chapter 4731
72.064       Chapter 4734
74.01        4501.01
74.31        4513.241
74.31        4517.01
75.45        4501(B)
75.47        Chapter 4513
75.50        4511.81
76.17        4513.61
93.046       Chapter 3734
93.046       4737.05 to 4737.12
93.105       2903.11 to 2903.13
93.105       2903.21
93.105       2903.22
93.105       2903.211
93.105       2905.01
93.105       2907.21 to 2907.25
93.105       2909.04
93.105       2915.02 to 2915.04
93.105       2917.11
93.105       2917.31 to 2917.33
93.105       2921.31
93.105       Chapter 2925
93.105       3321.03
93.105       3743.65
95.01        4513.60
95.01        4513.61 to 4513.65
95.02        4513.61
95.03        4513.62
95.03        4737.05
95.04        4738.01
95.04        4513.63
95.04        4737.05
95.05        4513.60
95.05        4513.61
95.05        4513.63
95.06        4513.65
95.06        4737.05 to 4737.12
97.15        Chapter 517
97.15        Chapter 759
97.20        759.19 through 759.23
115.01       5739.08(A)
115.15       Chapter 4704
116.08       715.26
116.08       715.261
118.34       2907.01(H)
132.16       Chapter 2151
150.02       5722.03
150.02       5722.08
150.02       5722.10
150.02       5723.01
151.05       Chapter 4781
151.29       Chapter 2506
152.03       715.26(B)
152.03       3737.14(A)
152.16       3731.01 et seq.
152.16       4511.01
152.26       715.261
152.99       715.67
             
 
