VILLAGE OF RISINGSUN, OHIO
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Supplement 2025 S-2 contains:
Local legislation current through September 23, 2025
State legislation current through December 31, 2024
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PART TWO – ADMINISTRATION CODE
   
TITLE TWO – General Provisions
      
Chap. 202.   Rules of Construction; Definitions; General Code Penalty
      
Chap. 204.   Public Meetings
   
TITLE FOUR – Legislation
      
Chap. 220.   Council
      
Chap. 222.   Ordinances and Resolutions
      
Chap. 224.   Initiative and Referendum
      
Chap. 226.   Contracts
   
TITLE SIX – Administration
      
Chap. 230.   Administration Generally
      
Chap. 232.   Mayor
      
Chap. 234.   Village Administrator
      
Chap. 236.   Village Legal Counsel
      
Chap. 238.   Village Clerk
      
Chap. 240.   Village Treasurer
      
Chap. 242.   Village Street Commissioner
      
Chap. 244.   Police Department
      
Chap. 246.   Fire Department
      
Chap. 248.   Officers and Employees Generally
   
TITLE EIGHT – Boards and Commissions
      
Chap. 270.   Board of Trustees of Public Affairs
      
Chap. 272.   Records Commission
      
Chap. 274.   Planning Commission
      
Chap. 276.   Board of Zoning Appeals
      
Chap. 278.   Volunteer Firefighters’ Dependents Fund Board
      
Chap. 280.   Recreation Board
      
Chap. 282.   Board of Park Trustees
   
TITLE TEN – Judiciary
      
Chap. 298.   Mayor’s Court
TITLE TWO – GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
Chap. 202.   Rules of Construction; Definitions; General Code Penalty
      
Chap. 204.   Public Meetings
CHAPTER 202: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION;
DEFINITIONS; GENERAL CODE PENALTY
Section
   
202.01   Designation; citation; headings
   
202.02   General definitions
   
202.03   Rules of construction
   
202.04   Revivor; effect of re-enactment, amendment or repeal
   
202.05   Construction of section references
   
202.06   General repealer; conflicts
   
202.07   Separability
   
202.99   General Code penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Codification in book form, see R.C. § 731.23
   General offenses code penalties and sentencing, see
Ch. 698
   Imprisonment until fine paid, see R.C. §§ 1905.30, 2947.14
   Ordinances and resolutions, see
Ch. 222
   Statute of limitations on prosecutions, see §
606.06
   Traffic code penalties, see
Ch. 408
§ 202.01 DESIGNATION; CITATION; HEADINGS.
   This document, consisting of general and permanent legislation relating to
Ohio villages in general, together with such general and permanent legislation
of the municipality that Council may wish to include herein, as revised,
arranged, compiled, numbered, codified and printed herewith, consolidated into
component codes, titles, chapters and sections, shall be known, designated and
cited as the code of ordinances, for which designation the term “Codified
Ordinances” or “Codified Ordinances of the Village” may be substituted. Code,
title, chapter and section headings do not constitute any part of the law as
contained in this Model Code.
§ 202.02 GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
   As used in the code of ordinances, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   AND. May be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the sense requires it.
   (b)   ANOTHER. When used to designate the owner of property which is the
subject of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other
owner of property.
   (c)   BOND. Includes an undertaking.
   (d)   CHILD. Includes child by adoption.
   (e)   COUNCIL. The legislative authority of the municipality.
   (f)   COUNTY. The county or counties in which the municipality is located.
   (g)   FIRE CHIEF. Shall include the Chief of the Fire Department if such
Fire Department has been established in the municipality, and shall include the
Fire Prevention Officer if no Fire Department has been established in the
municipality.
   (h)   IMPRISONED. Shall have the same meaning as in R.C. § 1.05.
   (i)   INTERNET. The international computer network of both federal and non-
federal interoperable packet switched data networks, including the graphical
subnetwork known as the world wide web.
   (j)   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by
themselves or as a servant, agent or employee.
   (k)   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes rights and easements of incorporeal
nature.
   (l)   LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY. The legislative authority of the municipality.
   (m)   MAY. The action referred to is permissive.
   (n)   MUNICIPALITY or VILLAGE. When used in this code of ordinances, shall
denote the municipality irrespective of its population or legal classification.
   (o)   O.A.C. Refers to the Ohio Administrative Code.
   (p)   OATH. Includes affirmation; and SWEAR includes affirm.
   (q)   OF UNSOUND MIND. The person lacks the relevant mental capacity.
   (r)   OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner
or tenant in common of the whole or part of the property.
   (s)   PERSON. Includes an individual, corporation, business trust, estate,
trust, partnership and association.
   (t)   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property except real property.
   (u)   PLAN OF SEWERAGE, SYSTEM OF SEWERAGE, SEWER and SEWERS. Includes
sewers, sewage disposal works and treatment plants, and sewage pumping
stations, together with facilities and appurtenances necessary and proper
therefor.
   (v)   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   (w)   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates and interests.
   (x)   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes boards of education; the municipal, county,
state or federal government, its officers or an agency thereof; or any duly
authorized public official.
   (y)   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school
yard, body of water or watercourse, public conveyance or any other place for
the sale of merchandise, public accommodation or amusement.
   (z)   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   (aa)   REGISTERED MAIL. Includes certified mail; and CERTIFIED MAIL includes
registered mail.
   (bb)   REVISED CODE or R.C. Refers to the Ohio Revised Code.
   (cc)   SHALL. The action referred to is mandatory.
   (dd)   SIDEWALK. That portion of the street between the curb line and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   (ee)   STATE. The State of Ohio.
   (ff)   STREET. Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways,
viaducts and all other public thoroughfares within the municipality.
   (gg)   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person
holding a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part
of the premises, alone or with others.
   (hh)   UNDERTAKING. Includes a bond.
   (ii)   WEEK. Seven consecutive days.
   (jj)   WHOEVER. Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners;
principals, agents and employees; and all officials, public or private.
   (kk)   WRITING. Includes printing.
   (ll)   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. Include any representation of words, letters,
symbols or figures; this provision does not affect any law relating to
signatures.
   (mm)   YEAR. Twelve consecutive months.
(R.C. §§ 1.02, 1.05, 1.44, 1.59, 701.01)
§ 202.03 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   Common and technical use. Words and phrases shall be read in context
and construed according to the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and
phrases that have acquired a technical or particular meaning, whether by
legislative definition or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
(R.C. § 1.42)
   (b)   Singular and plural; gender; tense. As used in this code of
ordinances, unless the context otherwise requires:
      (1)   The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the
singular.
      (2)   Words of one gender include the other genders.
      (3)   Words in the present tense include the future tense.
(R.C. § 1.43)
   (c)   Computation of time.
      (1)   The time within which an act is required by law to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day; except that when
the last day falls on Sunday or a legal holiday, then the act may be done on
the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal holiday.
      (2)   When a public office, in which an act required by law is to be
performed, is closed to the public for the entire day that constitutes the last
day for doing the act or before its usual closing time on that day, the act may
be performed on the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal
holiday.
      (3)   LEGAL HOLIDAY, as used in divisions (c)(1) and (c)(2) of this
section, means the following days:
         A.   The first day of January, known as New Year’s Day;
         B.   The third Monday in January, known as Martin Luther King, Jr.
Day;
         C.   The third Monday in February, known as President’s Day;
         D.   The day designated in the “Act of June 28, 1968”, 82 Stat. 250, 5
U.S.C. 6103, as amended, for the commemoration of Memorial Day;
         E.   The nineteenth day of June, known as Juneteenth day;
         F.   The fourth day of July, known as Independence Day;
         G.   The first Monday in September, known as Labor Day;
         H.   The second Monday in October, known as Columbus Day;
         I.   The eleventh day of November, known as Veteran’s Day;
         J.   The fourth Thursday in November, known as Thanksgiving Day;
         K.   The twenty-fifth day of December, known as Christmas Day;
         L.   Any day appointed and recommended by the Governor of this state
or the President of the United States as a holiday.
      (4)   If any day designated in this section as a legal holiday falls on a
Sunday, the next succeeding day is a legal holiday.
(R.C. § 1.14)
      (5)   When an act is to take effect or become operative from and after a
day named, no part of that day shall be included. If priority of legal rights
depends upon the order of events on the same day, the priority shall be
determined by the times in the day at which they respectively occurred.
(R.C. § 1.15)
      (6)   If a number of months is to be computed by counting the months from
a particular day, the period ends on the same numerical day in the concluding
month as the day of the month from which the computation is begun, unless there
are not that many days in the concluding month, in which case the period ends
on the last day of that month.
(R.C. § 1.45)
§ 202.04 REVIVOR; EFFECT OF RE-ENACTMENT, AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
   (a)   The repeal of a repealing provision of this code of ordinances does
not revive the provision originally repealed nor impair the effect of any
saving clause therein.
(R.C. § 1.57)
   (b)   The re-enactment, amendment or repeal of this code of ordinances does
not, except as provided in division (c) of this section:
      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the provision or any prior action
taken thereunder.
      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation or
liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded or incurred thereunder.
      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture or punishment
incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal.
      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding or remedy in respect of any
privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment; and the
investigation, proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced,
and the penalty, forfeiture or punishment imposed, as if the provision had not
been repealed or amended.
   (c)   If the penalty, forfeiture or punishment for any offense is reduced by
a re-enactment or amendment of this code of ordinances, the penalty, forfeiture
or punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according to this code
of ordinances as amended.
(R.C. § 1.58)
§ 202.05 CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.
   (a)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, or of divisions or subdivisions of a
section, the reference shall be construed to mean a violation of any provision
of the section, sections, divisions or subdivisions included in the reference.
   (b)   References in this code of ordinances to action taken or authorized
under designated sections of this code of ordinances include, in every case,
action taken or authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is
superseded by this code of ordinances.
(R.C. § 1.23)
   (c)   A reference to any portion of a provision of the code of ordinances
applies to all re-enactments or amendments thereof.
(R.C. § 1.55)
   (d)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered, unless the subject matter be
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 202.06 GENERAL REPEALER; CONFLICTS.
   (a)   All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the
municipality, and all parts of the same, enacted prior to the date of the
adoption of this code of ordinances and inconsistent or in conflict with any of
the provisions of this code, are hereby repealed, save and except any
ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation, or part of the same, expressly
excepted from repeal by the ordinance that adopts this code. No ordinance,
resolution, rule or regulation, or part of the same, of the municipality, that
is not inconsistent or in conflict with any of the provisions of this code and/
or that can be reasonably interpreted to be compatible with the provisions of
this code, shall be deemed to be repealed by the adoption of this code. Such
ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations, and all parts of the same,
shall continue to be viable and enforceable by the municipality.
   (b)   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of this code
of ordinances, or between any of the provisions of this code and a provision of
any standard code adopted by the municipality pursuant to R.C. § 731.231, the
provision that establishes the higher or stricter standard shall control. In
the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of this code and any
provision of state law, including rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to
state law, the state law, rule or regulation shall control.
§ 202.07 SEPARABILITY.
   If any provisions of a section of this code of ordinances or the application
thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not
affect other provisions or applications of the section or related sections
which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to
this end the provisions are severable.
(R.C. § 1.50)
§ 202.99 GENERAL CODE PENALTY.
   (a)   Whenever, in this code of ordinances or in any ordinance of the
municipality, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an
offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the
failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is
otherwise provided, whoever violates any such provision shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding $500, a term of imprisonment not exceeding six months, or
both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which
a violation continues or occurs.
   (b)   The failure of any officer or employee of the municipality to perform
any official duty imposed by this code of ordinances shall not subject the
officer or employee to the penalty imposed for a violation unless a penalty is
specifically provided for the failure.
Statutory reference:
   Ordinance violations and penalties, see R.C. § 715.67
CHAPTER 204: PUBLIC MEETINGS
Section
   
204.01   Adoption of rules
   
204.02   Definitions
   
204.03   Notice of regular and organizational meetings
   
204.04   Notice of special meetings
   
204.05   Notice to news media of special meetings
   
204.06   Notification of discussion of specific types of public business
   
204.07   General provisions
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Council meetings, see §§ 220.07, 220.09
   Meetings of Records Commission, see § 272.01
   Meetings of the Board of Park Trustees, see § 282.05
   Public meetings, see R.C. § 121.22
§ 204.01 ADOPTION OF RULES.
   The following rules are hereby adopted pursuant to R.C. § 121.22(F) for
notification of the public and news media of the time and place of meetings of
Council, boards and other bodies of the municipality.
§ 204.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   FISCAL OFFICER. The Village Fiscal Officer; or, if there is no such
officer, the Clerk of Council.
   (b)   DAY. A calendar day.
   (c)   MEETING. Any prearranged discussion of the public business of a
municipal body by a majority of the members of the municipal body.
   (d)   MUNICIPAL BODY. Any legislative authority or board, commission,
committee, agency, authority or similar decision-making body of the
municipality.
   (e)   ORAL NOTIFICATION. Notification given orally either in person or by
telephone, directly to the person for whom the notification is intended, or by
leaving an oral message for the person at the address, or if by telephone at
the telephone number, of the person as shown on the records kept by the Fiscal
Officer under this chapter.
   (f)   POST. To post in an area accessible to the public during the usual
business hours at the office of the Fiscal Officer and in the lobby of the
Municipal Building.
   (g)   SPECIAL MEETING. A meeting which is neither a regular meeting nor an
adjournment of a regular (or special) meeting to another time or day to
consider items specifically stated on the original agenda of the regular (or
special) meeting.
   (h)   WRITTEN NOTIFICATION. Notification in writing mailed, telegraphed or
delivered to the address of the person for whom the notification is intended,
as shown on the records kept by the Fiscal Officer under this chapter, or in
any way delivered to the person. If mailed, the notification shall be mailed by
first-class mail, deposited in a U.S. Postal Service mailbox not later than the
second day preceding the day of the meeting to which the notification refers,
provided that at least one regular mail delivery day falls between the day of
mailing and the day of the meeting.
§ 204.03 NOTICE OF REGULAR AND ORGANIZATIONAL MEETINGS.
   (a)   The Fiscal Officer shall post a statement of the time and place of
regular meetings of each municipal body for each calendar year not later than
the second day preceding the day of the first regular meeting (other than the
organizational meeting) of the calendar year of that municipal body. The Fiscal
Officer shall check at reasonable intervals to ensure that the statement
remains so posted during the calendar year. If, at any time during the calendar
year, the time or place of regular meetings, or of any regular meeting, is
changed on a permanent or temporary basis, a statement of the time and place of
the changed regular meetings shall be so posted by the Fiscal Officer at least
24 hours before the time of the first changed regular meeting.
   (b)   The Fiscal Officer shall post a statement of the time and place of any
organizational meeting of a municipal body at least 24 hours before the time of
the organizational meeting.
   (c)   Upon the adjournment of any regular or special meeting to another day,
the Fiscal Officer shall promptly post notice of the time and place of the
adjourned meeting.
§ 204.04 NOTICE OF SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (a)   Except in the case of a special meeting provided for in §
204.05(e), the Fiscal Officer shall, not later than 24 hours before the time of
a special meeting of a municipal body, post a statement of the time, place and
purpose of the special meeting.
   (b)   The statement required under division (a) of this section, and the
notifications required under §
204.05, shall state such specific or general purpose then known to the Fiscal
Officer to be intended to be considered at the special meeting and may state,
as an additional general purpose, that any other business as may properly come
before the municipal body at the meeting may be considered and acted upon.
§ 204.05 NOTICE TO NEWS MEDIA OF SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (a)   Any news media organization that wishes to be given advance
notification of special meetings of a municipal body shall file with the Fiscal
Officer a written request therefor.
   (b)   Except in the event of an emergency requiring immediate official
action as provided for in division (e) of this section, a special meeting shall
not be held unless at least 24 hours’ advance notice of the time, place and
purposes of the special meeting is given to the news media that have requested
the advance notification in accordance with division (c) of this section.
   (c)   (1)   News media requests for such advance notification of special
meetings shall specify the following:
         A.   The municipal body that is the subject of the request;
         B.   The name of the medium;
         C.   The name and address of the person to whom written notifications
to the medium may be mailed, telegraphed or delivered; and
         D.   The names, addresses and telephone numbers (including addresses
and telephone numbers at which notification may be given either during or
outside of business hours) of at least two persons to either one of whom oral
notifications to the medium may be given.
      (2)   The request shall be effective for one year from the date of filing
with the Fiscal Officer or until the Fiscal Officer receives written notice
from the medium canceling or modifying the request, whichever is earlier. Each
requesting news medium shall be informed of the period of effectiveness at the
time it files its request. The request may be modified or extended only by
filing a completely new request with the Fiscal Officer. A request shall not be
deemed to be made unless it is complete, in all respects, and the request may
be conclusively relied on by the municipality, the municipal body that is the
subject of the request and the Fiscal Officer.
   (d)   The Fiscal Officer shall give the oral notification or written
notification, or both, as the Fiscal Officer determines, to the news media that
have requested the advance notification, in accordance with division (c) of
this section, of the time, place and purposes of each special meeting, at least
24 hours prior to the time of the special meeting.
   (e)   In the event of an emergency requiring immediate official action, a
special meeting may be held without giving 24 hours’ advance notification
thereof to the requesting news media. The persons calling the meeting, or any
one or more of the persons or the Fiscal Officer on their behalf, shall
immediately give oral notification or written notification, or both, as the
person giving the notification determines, of the time, place and purposes of
the special meeting, to such news media that have requested the advance
notification in accordance with division (c) of this section. The minutes or
the call, or both, of any such special meeting shall state the general nature
of the emergency requiring immediate official action.
§ 204.06 NOTIFICATION OF DISCUSSION OF SPECIFIC TYPES OF PUBLIC BUSINESS.
   (a)   Any person, upon written request and as provided for in this chapter,
may obtain reasonable advance notification of all meetings at which any
specific type of public business is scheduled to be discussed.
   (b)   The person may file a written request with the Fiscal Officer
specifying: the person’s name, the address(es) and telephone number(s) at or
through which the person can be reached during and outside of business hours;
the specific type of public business the discussion of which the person is
requesting advance notification of; the municipal body that is the subject of
the request; and the number of calendar months (not to exceed three) which the
request covers. The request may be canceled by request from the person to the
Fiscal Officer.
   (c)   Each written request must be accompanied by cash, or a check or money
order payable to the municipality, in the amount of $10 for each month covered
by the request, which amount has been determined by Council to represent a
reasonable fee to cover costs of providing the advance notification.
   (d)   The Fiscal Officer shall, if possible, give the advance notification
under this section in writing. If the written notification cannot be given or
has not been given, the Fiscal Officer shall give oral notification.
§ 204.07 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Any notification provided in this chapter to be given by the Fiscal
Officer may be given by any person acting on behalf of or under the authority
of the Fiscal Officer.
   (b)   A reasonable attempt at notification shall constitute notification in
compliance with this chapter.
   (c)   A certificate by the Fiscal Officer as to compliance with this chapter
shall be conclusive upon the municipality and the municipal body involved.
   (d)   The Fiscal Officer shall maintain a record of the date and manner, and
the time, if pertinent under this chapter, of all actions taken with regard to
notices and notifications under this chapter.
   (e)   To better ensure compliance with this chapter as to notice and
notification, it shall be the responsibility of the Chairperson or Secretary of
a municipal body other than Council, or the person calling the meetings, to
timely advise the Fiscal Officer of future meetings, and of the subject matters
to be discussed thereat, of the municipal body.
TITLE FOUR – LEGISLATION
      
Chap. 220.   Council
      
Chap. 222.   Ordinances and Resolutions
      
Chap. 224.   Initiative and Referendum
      
Chap. 226.   Contracts
CHAPTER 220: COUNCIL
Section
   
220.01   Membership; election; terms of office
   
220.02   President Pro Tempore
   
220.03   Vacancy when President Pro Tempore becomes Mayor
   
220.04   Qualifications of members
   
220.05   Compensation and bonds of village officers and employees
   
220.06   Vacancies
   
220.07   Judge of election and qualification of members; quorum and special
meetings
   
220.08   Rules; journal; expulsion of members
   
220.09   Meetings
   
220.10   General powers
   
220.11   Failure to take oath or give bond
   
220.12   Notice when new bond required
   
220.13   Care, supervision and management of public institutions
CROSS REFERENCES
   Contracts by Council, see §§
226.01,
226.02
   Emergency ordinances, see §
222.13
   Mayor’s annual report to Council, see §
232.13
   Mayor’s communications to Council, see §
232.04
   Passage of ordinances and resolutions, see §§
222.01 et seq.
   Publication of ordinances and resolutions, see §§
222.05 et seq.
   Traffic-control powers, see § 406.07
   Treasurer’s annual report to Council, see §
240.04
§ 220.01 MEMBERSHIP; ELECTION; TERMS OF OFFICE.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b) or (c) of this section,
the legislative power of the municipality shall be vested in, and exercised by,
a Legislative Authority, composed of six members, who shall be elected by the
electors of the municipality at large, for terms of four years.
   (b)   The Legislative Authority may adopt an ordinance or resolution that,
if approved by a majority of the electors voting on the issue, would reduce the
number of members of the Legislative Authority to five. A certified copy of the
ordinance or resolution shall be filed with the Board of Elections no later
than 4:00 p.m. of the ninetieth day before the day of the next election at
which members of the Legislative Authority are to be elected.
   (c)   The electors may propose a reduction in the number of members of the
Legislative Authority from six to five by initiative petition in accordance
with the procedure set forth in R.C. § 731.28.
   (d)   If a majority of the votes cast on the question proposed under
division (b) or (c) of this section is in the affirmative, the Legislative
Authority shall be composed of five members, who shall be elected at large, for
terms of four years. If members of the Legislative Authority have staggered
terms of office as required by this section, the decrease in number of members
shall be implemented as necessary over the next two municipal elections at
which members of the Legislative Authority would be elected. If the Legislative
Authority has adopted an ordinance or resolution to eliminate staggered terms
of office under division (e) of this section, the five members shall be elected
as set forth in division (e)(2)B. of this section.
(R.C. § 731.09)
   (e)   (1)   The Legislative Authority may, by the adoption of an ordinance
or resolution to eliminate staggered terms of office, determine that all
members of the Legislative Authority shall be elected at the same municipal
election as provided for in this section.
      (2)   At the regular municipal election occurring not less than 90 days
after the certification of the ordinance or resolution to the Board of
Elections eliminating staggered terms of office, the following apply:
         A.   If there are six members of the Legislative Authority, the number
of members eligible for election at that regular municipal election shall be
elected to two-year nonstaggered terms, and all members of the Legislative
Authority shall be elected to four-year nonstaggered terms at all following
municipal elections.
         B.   If there are five members of the Legislative Authority, a number
of members that is one less than the number of members that would otherwise be
eligible for election at that regular municipal election but for the first-time
implementation of the new membership of five, or, in the case of a village that
has previously reduced its number of members to five, then the number of
members eligible for election at that regular municipal election shall be
elected to two-year nonstaggered terms, and all members shall be elected to
four-year nonstaggered terms at all following municipal elections.
(R.C. § 731.091)
§ 220.02 PRESIDENT PRO TEMPORE.
   (a)   At the first meeting in January of each year, the Council shall
immediately proceed to elect a President Pro Tempore from its own number, who
shall serve until the first meeting in January next after his or her election.
The Council may provide employees for the municipality as it determines, and
employees may be removed at any regular meeting by a majority of the members
elected to the Council.
   (b)   When the Mayor is absent from the municipality or is unable, for any
cause, to perform his or her duties, the President Pro Tempore shall be the
acting Mayor, and shall have the same powers and perform the same duties as the
Mayor.
(R.C. § 731.10)
§ 220.03 VACANCY WHEN PRESIDENT PRO TEMPORE BECOMES MAYOR.
   When the President Pro Tempore of the Council becomes the Mayor, the vacancy
thus created shall be filled as provided in §
220.06, and the Council shall elect another President Pro Tempore from its own
number, who shall have the same rights, powers and duties as his or her
predecessor.
(R.C. § 731.11)
§ 220.04 QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS.
   (a)   Each member of the Council shall have resided in the municipality for
at least one year immediately preceding the member’s election, and shall be an
elector of the municipality. No member of the Council shall hold any other
public office, be interested in any contract with the municipality or hold
employment with the municipality, except that the member may be a notary
public, a member of the state militia or a volunteer firefighter of the
village; provided that the member shall not receive any compensation for his or
her services as a volunteer firefighter of the village in addition to his or
her regular compensation as a member of the Council. Any member who ceases to
possess any of these qualifications, or who moves from the municipality, shall
forfeit his or her office.
   (b)   The purpose of establishing a one-year residency requirement in this
section is to recognize that the municipality has a substantial and compelling
interest in encouraging qualified candidacies for election to the office of
member of the Council by ensuring that a candidate for the office has every
opportunity to become knowledgeable with and concerned about the problems and
needs of the area the candidate seeks to represent. In enacting this
requirement, the municipality finds that the one-year period is reasonably
related to this purpose, while leaving unimpaired a person’s right to travel,
to vote and to be a candidate for public office.
(R.C. § 731.12)
§ 220.05 COMPENSATION AND BONDS OF VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   The Council shall fix the compensation and bonds of all officers, clerks and
employees of the municipality, except as otherwise provided by law. The Council
shall, in the case of elective officers, fix their compensation for the ensuing
term of office at a meeting held not later than five days prior to the last day
fixed by law for filing as a candidate for the office. All bonds shall be made
with sureties subject to the approval of the Mayor. The compensation so fixed
shall not be increased or diminished during the term for which any officer is
elected or appointed. This section does not prohibit the payment of any
increased costs of continuing to provide the identical benefits provided to an
officer at the commencement of his or her term of office.
(R.C. § 731.13)
§ 220.06 VACANCIES.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b) of this section, when the
office of a member of the Council becomes vacant, the vacancy shall be filled
by election by the Council for the unexpired term. If the Council fails within
30 days to fill the vacancy, the Mayor shall fill it by appointment, except
that subject to division (b) of this section, when the vacancy occurs because
of the operation of R.C. § 733.25, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the successor shall hold office only for the period the President
Pro Tempore of the Council holds the office of Mayor.
   (b)   When a vacancy occurs in the office of a member of the Council of a
village with a population of less than 2,000 because of the operation of R.C. §
733.25, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, at the time the
President Pro Tempore becomes Mayor, the President Pro Tempore shall decide
whether he or she wishes to serve the remainder of his or her unexpired term as
a member of the Council when the Mayor’s successor is elected and qualified in
accordance with R.C. § 733.25, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance. If the President Pro Tempore decides to serve the remainder of his
or her unexpired term as a member of the Council, the vacancy on the Council
shall not be filled and the President Pro Tempore shall resume serving his or
her unexpired term on the Council as soon as the Mayor’s successor is elected
and qualified. If the President Pro Tempore decides not to resume serving the
remainder of his or her unexpired term as a member of the Council as soon as
the Mayor’s successor is elected and qualified, then the vacancy in the office
of the member of the Council shall be filled in accordance with this section.
(R.C. § 731.43(A))
§ 220.07 JUDGE OF ELECTION AND QUALIFICATION OF MEMBERS; QUORUM AND SPECIAL
MEETINGS.
   The Council shall be the judge of the election and qualification of its
members. A majority of all the members elected shall be a quorum, but a less
number may adjourn from day to day and compel attendance of absent members in a
manner and under penalties as are prescribed by ordinance. The Council shall
provide rules for the manner of calling special meetings.
(R.C. § 731.44)
§ 220.08 RULES; JOURNAL; EXPULSION OF MEMBERS.
   The Council shall determine its own rules and keep a journal of its
proceedings. It may punish or expel any member for disorderly conduct or
violation of its rules, and declare his or her seat vacant for absence without
valid excuse, where the absence has continued for two months. No expulsion
shall take place without the concurrence of two-thirds of all the members
elected, and until the delinquent member has been notified of the charge
against him or her, and has had an opportunity to be heard.
(R.C. § 731.45)
§ 220.09 MEETINGS.
   The Council shall not be required to hold more than one regular meeting in
each week. The meetings may be held at a time and place as is prescribed by
ordinance, and shall, at all times, be open to the public. The Mayor, or any
three members of the Council, may call special meetings upon at least 12 hours’
notice to each member, served personally or left at his or her usual place of
residence.
(R.C. § 731.46)
§ 220.10 GENERAL POWERS.
   The Council shall have the management and control of the finances and
property of the municipality, except as otherwise provided.
(R.C. § 731.47)
§ 220.11 FAILURE TO TAKE OATH OR GIVE BOND.
   The Council may declare vacant the office of any person elected or appointed
to the office who, within ten days after he or she has been notified of his or
her appointment or election, or obligation to give a new or additional bond,
fails to take the required official oath or to give any bond required of him or
her.
(R.C. § 731.49)
§ 220.12 NOTICE WHEN NEW BOND REQUIRED.
   (a)   When the Council declares by resolution that an officer shall give a
new bond, written notice shall be served by the Fiscal Officer upon the officer
designated, and a copy of the notice, with a statement of the time and place of
service, shall be recorded in the proceedings of the Council.
   (b)   If the officer fails to give such new bond, with sureties, to the
satisfaction of the Mayor, within ten days after the service, the Council shall
declare the office vacant, and the vacancy shall be filled in the manner
provided in Title VII of the Ohio Revised Code.
   (c)   When a new bond is accepted or the Council declares the office vacant,
the sureties of the original bond shall cease to be liable for the acts of that
officer done thereafter, but shall continue to be liable for his or her acts
then already done.
(R.C. § 731.50)
§ 220.13 CARE, SUPERVISION AND MANAGEMENT OF PUBLIC INSTITUTIONS.
   Council shall provide by resolution or ordinance for the care, supervision
and management of all public parks, baths, libraries, market houses,
crematories, sewage disposal plants, houses of refuge and correction,
workhouses, infirmaries, hospitals, pesthouses or any of such institutions
owned, maintained or established by the municipality. When Council determines
to plat any of the streets, it shall provide for the platting thereof.
(R.C. § 735.27)
CHAPTER 222: ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
Section
   
222.01   Passage procedure
   
222.02   Style of ordinances
   
222.03   Subject and amendment of ordinances and resolutions
   
222.04   Authentication and recording of ordinances and resolutions
   
222.05   Publication of ordinances and resolutions; proof of publication and
circulation
   
222.06   Notice for proposed amendments to the Municipal Charter
   
222.07   Times of publication required
   
222.08   Publication and certification of ordinances in book form
   
222.09   Adoption of technical ordinances and codes
   
222.10   Certificate of Fiscal Officer as to publication
   
222.11   Effect of not making publication
   
222.12   Ordinances providing for appropriations or street improvements;
emergency ordinances
   
222.13   Ordinances and resolutions as evidence
   
222.14   Designating site for posting ordinances
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Annexation, see R.C. §§ 709.23 et seq.
   Assessments, see R.C. §§ 727.25 et seq., 729.09, 729.11
   Charter method of passage or publication, see R.C. § 701.05
   Declaratory judgments, see R.C. § 2721.03
   Improvements, see R.C. §§ 727.09, 727.12, 727.23
   Initiated ordinances, see §§
224.01 et seq.
   Publication where no newspaper printed, see R.C. § 731.25
   Referendums, see §§
224.02 et seq.
§ 222.01 PASSAGE PROCEDURE.
   (a)   The following procedures shall apply to the passage of ordinances and
resolutions of the municipality:
      (1)   Each ordinance and resolution shall be read by title only, provided
that Council may, by a majority vote of its members, require any reading to be
in full.
      (2)   Each ordinance or resolution shall be read on three different days,
provided that Council may dispense with this rule by a vote of at least three-
fourths of its members.
      (3)   The vote on the passage of each ordinance or resolution shall be
taken by yeas and nays and entered upon the journal.
      (4)   Each ordinance or resolution shall be passed, except as otherwise
provided by law, by a vote of at least a majority of all the members of
Council.
   (b)   Action by Council, not required by law to be by ordinance or
resolution, may be taken by motion approved by at least a majority vote of the
members present at the meeting when the action is taken.
(R.C. § 731.17)
§ 222.02 STYLE OF ORDINANCES.
   The style of all ordinances shall be: “Be it ordained by the [name of
Council of the municipality] of [name of municipality], State of Ohio.”
(R.C. § 731.18)
§ 222.03 SUBJECT AND AMENDMENT OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   No ordinance or resolution shall contain more than one subject, which shall
be clearly expressed in its title. No ordinance or section thereof shall be
revived or amended unless the new ordinance contains the entire ordinance or
section revived or amended and unless the ordinance or section so amended is
repealed. Each such resolution and ordinance shall be adopted or passed by a
separate vote of Council and the yeas and nays shall be entered upon the
journal.
(R.C. § 731.19)
§ 222.04 AUTHENTICATION AND RECORDING OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   Ordinances and resolutions shall be authenticated by the signature of the
Presiding Officer and Fiscal Officer of the municipality. A succinct summary of
ordinances of a general nature or providing for improvements shall be published
as provided by §§
222.05 and
222.07 before going into operation. No ordinance shall take effect until the
expiration of ten days after the first publication of the notice. As soon as a
resolution or ordinance is passed and signed, it shall be recorded by the
Fiscal Officer in a book furnished by Council for that purpose.
(R.C. § 731.20)
§ 222.05 PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS; PROOF OF PUBLICATION AND
CIRCULATION.
   (a)   (1)   A succinct summary of each municipal ordinance or resolution and
all statements, orders, proclamations, notices and reports required by law or
ordinance to be published, shall be published using at least one of the
following methods:
         A.   In a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality;
         B.   On the official public notice web site established under R.C. §
125.182;
         C.   On the web site and social media account of the municipality.
      (2)   Proof of the publication shall be made by affidavit of the
proprietor of the newspaper or the operator of the official public notice web
site, as applicable, and shall be filed with the Fiscal Officer of the
Legislative Authority.
   (b)   The publication shall contain notice that the complete text of each
such ordinance or resolution may be obtained or viewed at the office of the
Fiscal Officer and may be viewed at any other location designated by the
Legislative Authority. The Legal Counsel of the municipality shall review the
summary of an ordinance or resolution published under this section before
forwarding it to the Fiscal Officer for publication, to ensure that the summary
is legally accurate and sufficient.
   (c)   Upon publication of a summary of an ordinance or resolution in
accordance with this section, the Fiscal Officer shall supply a copy of the
complete text of each such ordinance or resolution to any person, upon request,
and may charge a reasonable fee, set by Council, for each copy supplied. The
Fiscal Officer shall post a copy of the text at the Fiscal Officer’s office and
at every other location designated by Council.
(R.C. § 731.21)
§ 222.06 NOTICE FOR PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE MUNICIPAL CHARTER.
   In accordance with § 9 of Article XVIII of the Ohio Constitution, notice of
proposed amendments to the Municipal Charter, if and when one is adopted by and
for the municipality, shall be given in one of the following ways:
   (a)   Not less than 30 days prior to the election at which the amendment is
to be submitted to the electors, the Fiscal Officer of the village shall mail a
copy of the proposed Charter amendment to each elector whose name appears upon
the poll or registration books of the last regular or general election held
therein.
   (b)   The full text of the proposed Charter amendment shall be published
once a week for not less than two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general
circulation in the municipality or as provided in R.C. § 7.16, with the first
publication being at least 15 days prior to the election at which the amendment
is to be submitted to the electors.
(R.C. § 731.211)
§ 222.07 TIMES OF PUBLICATION REQUIRED.
   The publication required in §
222.05 shall be for the following times:
   (a)   Summaries of ordinances or resolutions, and proclamations of
elections, once a week for two consecutive weeks;
   (b)   Notices, not less than two nor more than four consecutive weeks;
   (c)   All other matters shall be published once.
(R.C. § 731.22)
§ 222.08 PUBLICATION AND CERTIFICATION OF ORDINANCES IN BOOK FORM.
   (a)   When ordinances are revised, codified, rearranged, published in book
form and certified as correct by the Fiscal Officer and the Mayor, that
publication shall be a sufficient publication, and the ordinances so published,
under appropriate titles, chapters and sections, shall be held the same in law
as though they had been published in accordance with §
222.05. A new ordinance so published in book form, a summary of which has not
been published as required by §§
222.05 and
222.07 and which contains entirely new matter, shall be published as required
by those sections. If the revision or codification is made by the municipality
and contains new matter, it shall be a sufficient publication of the
codification, including the new matter, to publish, in the manner required by
those sections, a notice of the enactment of the codifying ordinance,
containing the title of the ordinance and a summary of the new matters covered
by it. This revision and codification may be made under appropriate titles,
chapters and sections and in one ordinance containing one or more subjects.
   (b)   Except as provided by this section, a succinct summary of all
ordinances, including emergency ordinances, shall be published in accordance
with §
222.05.
(R.C. § 731.23)
§ 222.09 ADOPTION OF TECHNICAL ORDINANCES AND CODES.
   (a)   Council may adopt standard ordinances and codes, prepared and
promulgated by the state, or any department, board or other agency thereof, or
any code prepared and promulgated by a public or private organization which
publishes a model or standard code, including but not limited to codes and
regulations pertaining to fire, fire hazards, fire prevention, plumbing,
electricity, buildings, refrigeration machinery, piping, boilers, heating or
air conditioning, by incorporation by reference.
   (b)   The publication required by §§
222.05 through
222.10 shall clearly identify the code, shall state the purpose of the code,
shall state that a complete copy of the code is on file with the Fiscal Officer
for inspection by the public and also on file in the County Law Library and
that the Fiscal Officer has copies available for distribution to the public at
cost. If Council amends or deletes any provision of the code, the publication
shall contain a brief summary of the deletion or amendment.
   (c)   If the agency which originally promulgated or published the code
thereafter amends the code, Council may adopt the amendment or change by
incorporation by reference in an amending ordinance by the same procedure as
required for the adoption of the original code, without the necessity of
setting forth in full in the amending ordinance the provisions of the original
ordinance or code.
   (d)   Ordinances or codes adopted by the municipality under this section
shall be deemed to be a full and complete compliance with §§
222.05 through
222.10, and no other publication is necessary.
(R.C. § 731.231)
§ 222.10 CERTIFICATE OF CLERK AS TO PUBLICATION.
   Immediately after the expiration of the period of publication of summaries
of ordinances required by §
222.07, the Fiscal Officer shall enter on the record of ordinances, in a blank
to be left for that purpose under the recorded ordinance, a certificate stating
in which manner and on what dates the publication was made, and shall sign the
Fiscal Officer’s name thereto officially. The certificate shall be prima facie
evidence that legal publication of the ordinance or summary of the ordinance
was made.
(R.C. § 731.24)
§ 222.11 EFFECT OF NOT MAKING PUBLICATION.
   It is a sufficient defense to any suit or prosecution under an ordinance, to
show that no publication or posting was made as required by §§
222.05 through
222.10.
(R.C. § 731.25)
§ 222.12 ORDINANCES PROVIDING FOR APPROPRIATIONS OR STREET IMPROVEMENTS;
EMERGENCY ORDINANCES.
   Ordinances or other measures providing for appropriations for the current
expenses of the municipality, or for street improvements petitioned for by the
owners of a majority of the feet front of the property benefitted and to be
especially assessed for the cost thereof, and emergency ordinances or measures
necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety
in the municipality, shall go into immediate effect. Such emergency ordinances
or measures must, upon a yea and nay vote, receive a two-thirds vote of all the
members elected to the Council, and the reasons for the necessity shall be set
forth in one section of the ordinance or other measure.
(R.C. § 731.30)
§ 222.13 ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS AS EVIDENCE.
   Printed copies of the ordinances and resolutions of the municipality,
published under its authority, and transcripts of any resolutions or
ordinances, or of any act or proceeding of the municipality, recorded in any
book or entered on any minutes or journal kept under the direction of the
municipality, and certified by the Fiscal Officer, shall be received in
evidence throughout the state for any purpose for which the original books,
ordinances, minutes or journals would be received.
(R.C. § 731.42)
§ 222.14 DESIGNATING SITE FOR POSTING ORDINANCES.
   The five most suitable sites designated in or on which to post ordinances
and minutes duly enacted by said village:
   (a)   Village Town Hall;
   (b)   County Line Co-Op;
   (c)   M&D Automotive;
   (d)   Buddy’s Place; and
   (e)   U.S. Post Office.
(Ord. 870, passed 12-18-2018)
CHAPTER 224: INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
Section
   
224.01   Initiative petitions
   
224.02   Referendum petitions
   
224.03   More than one ordinance required; application of chapter
   
224.04   Presentation of petitions
   
224.05   Copy of proposed ordinance or measure to be filed with Fiscal Officer
   
224.06   Words to be printed in red
   
224.07   Designation of committee filing petition; public inspection of
petitions; ordinances passed or repealed prior to election
   
224.08   Itemized statement by circulator of petition
   
224.09   Prohibited practices relative to petitions
   
224.10   Accepting premiums for signing
   
224.11   Threats in securing signatures
   
224.12   Application of chapter if Charter adopted
CROSS REFERENCES
   Acquisition of public utility, see Ohio Const. Art. XVIII, § 5
   Adoption of Charter, see Ohio Const. Art. XVIII, §§ 7, 8, 9
   Application to various plans of government, see R.C. § 705.91
   Charter municipalities may adopt own provisions as to, see R.C. § 705.91
   Initiative and referendum, see Ohio Const. Art. II, §§ 1 et seq.; R.C. §§
3519.01 et seq.
   Recall of elective officer, see R.C. §§ 705.91, 705.92
   Transfer of powers to county, see Ohio Const. Art. X, § 1
§ 224.01 INITIATIVE PETITIONS.
   (a)   Ordinances and other measures providing for the exercise of any powers
of government granted by the Constitution or delegated to the municipality by
the General Assembly may be proposed by initiative petition. Such initiative
petition must contain the signatures of not less than 10% of the number of
electors who voted for Governor at the most recent general election for the
office of Governor in the municipality.
   (b)   When a petition is filed with the Fiscal Officer, signed by the
required number of electors proposing an ordinance or other measure, the Fiscal
Officer shall, after ten days, transmit a certified copy of the text of the
proposed ordinance or measure to the Board of Elections. The Fiscal Officer
shall transmit the petition to the Board, together with the certified copy of
the proposed ordinance or other measure. The Board shall examine all signatures
on the petition to determine the number of electors of the municipality who
signed the petition. The Board shall return the petition to the Fiscal Officer
within ten days after receiving it, together with a statement attesting to the
number of the electors who signed the petition.
   (c)   The Board shall submit the proposed ordinance or measure for the
approval or rejection of the electors of the municipality at the next general
election occurring subsequent to 90 days after the Fiscal Officer certifies the
sufficiency and validity of the initiative petition to the Board. No ordinance
or other measure proposed by initiative petition and approved by a majority of
the electors voting upon the measure in the municipality shall be subject to
the veto of the Mayor.
   (d)   As used in this section, CERTIFIED COPY means a copy containing a
written statement attesting that it is a true and exact reproduction of the
original proposed ordinance or other measure.
(R.C. § 731.28)
§ 224.02 REFERENDUM PETITIONS.
   (a)   Any ordinance or other measure passed by Council shall be subject to
the referendum except as provided in §
224.03. No ordinance or other measure shall go into effect until 30 days after
it is passed by Council, except as provided in §
224.03.
   (b)   When a petition, signed by 10% of the number of electors who voted for
Governor at the most recent general election for the office of Governor in the
municipality, is filed with the Fiscal Officer within 30 days after any
ordinance or other measure is filed with the Mayor or passed by Council, or, if
the Mayor has vetoed the ordinance or any measure and returned it to Council,
the petition may be filed within 30 days after Council has passed the ordinance
or measure over the veto, ordering that the ordinance or measure be submitted
to the electors of the municipality for their approval or rejection, the Fiscal
Officer shall, after ten days, and not later than 4:00 p.m. of the 90th day
before the day of election, transmit a certified copy of the text of the
ordinance or measure to the Board of Elections. The Fiscal Officer shall
transmit the petition to the Board, together with the certified copy of the
ordinance or measure. The Board shall examine all signatures on the petition to
determine the number of electors of the municipality who signed the petition.
The Board shall return the petition to the Fiscal Officer within ten days after
receiving it, together with a statement attesting to the number of the electors
who signed the petition. The Board shall submit the ordinance or measure to the
electors of the municipality, for their approval or rejection, at the next
general election occurring subsequent to 90 days after the Fiscal Officer
certifies the sufficiency and validity of the petition to the Board.
   (c)   No such ordinance or measure shall go into effect until approved by
the majority of those voting upon it. Sections
224.01 through
224.12 do not prevent the municipality, after the passage of any ordinance or
other measure, from proceeding at once to give any notice or make any
publication required by the ordinance or other measure.
   (d)   As used in this section, “certified copy” means a copy containing a
written statement attesting that it is a true and exact reproduction of the
original ordinance or other measure.
(R.C. § 731.29)
§ 224.03 MORE THAN ONE ORDINANCE REQUIRED; APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   Whenever Council is required to pass more than one ordinance or other
measure to complete the legislation necessary to make and pay for any public
improvement, §§
224.01 through
224.12 shall apply only to the first ordinance or other measure required to be
passed and not to any subsequent ordinances and other measures relating
thereto. Ordinances or other measures providing for appropriations for the
current expenses of the municipality, or for street improvements petitioned for
by the owners of a majority of the feet front of the property benefitted and to
be especially assessed for the cost thereof, and emergency ordinances or
measures necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
or safety in the municipality, shall go into immediate effect. Such emergency
ordinances or measures must, upon a yea and nay vote, receive a two-thirds vote
of all the members elected to the legislative authority, and the reasons for
such necessity shall be set forth in one section of the ordinance or other
measure.
(R.C. § 731.30)
§ 224.04 PRESENTATION OF PETITIONS.
   (a)   Any initiative or referendum petition may be presented in separate
parts, but each part of any initiative petition shall contain a full and
correct copy of the title and text of the proposed ordinance or other measure,
and each part of any referendum petition shall contain the number and a full
and correct copy of the title of the ordinance or other measure sought to be
referred. Each signer of any such petition must be an elector of the
municipality in which the election, upon the ordinance or measure proposed by
the initiative petition, or the ordinance or measure referred to by the
referendum petition, is to be held. Petitions shall be governed in all other
respects by the rules set forth in R.C. § 3501.38. In determining the validity
of any such petition, all signatures which are found to be irregular shall be
rejected, but no petition shall be declared invalid in its entirety when one or
more signatures are found to be invalid, except when the number of valid
signatures is found to be less than the total number required by this section.
   (b)   The petitions and signatures upon the petitions shall be prima facie
presumed to be in all respects sufficient. No ordinance or other measure
submitted to the electors of the municipality, and receiving an affirmative
majority of the votes cast thereon, shall be held ineffective or void on
account of the insufficiency of the petitions by which the submission of the
ordinance or measure was procured, nor shall the rejection, by a majority of
the votes cast thereon, of any ordinance or other measure submitted to the
electors of the municipality, be held invalid for the insufficiency.
   (c)   Ordinances proposed by initiative petition and referendums receiving
an affirmative majority of the votes cast thereon, shall become effective on
the fifth day after the day on which the Board of Elections certifies the
official vote on the question.
(R.C. § 731.31)
§ 224.05 COPY OF PROPOSED ORDINANCE OR MEASURE TO BE FILED WITH FISCAL OFFICER.
   (a)   Whoever seeks to propose an ordinance or measure in the municipality
by initiative petition or files a referendum petition against any ordinance or
measure shall, before circulating the petition, file a certified copy of the
proposed ordinance or measure with the Fiscal Officer.
   (b)   As used in this section, CERTIFIED COPY means a copy containing a
written statement attesting that it is a true and exact reproduction of the
original proposed ordinance or measure or of the original ordinance or measure.
(R.C. § 731.32)
§ 224.06 WORDS TO BE PRINTED IN RED.
   At the top of each part of the petition mentioned in §
224.05, the following words shall be printed in red:
   NOTICE
   Whoever knowingly signs this petition more than once, signs a name other
than his or her own, or signs when not a legal voter is liable to prosecution.
(R.C. § 731.33)
§ 224.07 DESIGNATION OF COMMITTEE FILING PETITION; PUBLIC INSPECTION OF
PETITIONS; ORDINANCES PASSED OR REPEALED PRIOR TO ELECTION.
   (a)   The petitioners may designate in any initiative or referendum petition
a committee of not less than three of their number, who shall be regarded as
filing the petition.
   (b)   After a petition has been filed with the Fiscal Officer, it shall be
kept open for public inspection for ten days.
   (c)   If, after a petition proposing an ordinance or other measure has been
filed with the Fiscal Officer, the proposed ordinance or other measure, or a
substitute for the proposed ordinance or measure approved by the committee, is
passed by Council, the majority of the committee shall notify the Board of
Elections in writing and the proposed ordinance or measure shall not be
submitted to a vote of the electors.
   (d)   If, after a verified referendum petition has been filed against any
ordinance or measure, Council repeals the ordinance or measure, or it is held
to be invalid, the Board shall not submit the ordinance or measure to a vote of
the electors.
(R.C. § 731.34)
§ 224.08 ITEMIZED STATEMENT BY CIRCULATOR OF PETITION.
   (a)   The circulator of an initiative or referendum petition, or his or her
agent, shall, within five days after the petition is filed with the Fiscal
Officer, file an itemized statement, made under penalty of election
falsification, showing in detail:
      (1)   All moneys or things of value paid, given or promised for
circulating the petition;
      (2)   Full names and addresses of all persons to whom the payments or
promises were made;
      (3)   Full names and addresses of all persons who contributed anything of
value to be used in circulating the petitions; and
      (4)   Time spent and salaries earned while circulating or soliciting
signatures to petitions by persons who were regular salaried employees of some
person who authorized them to solicit signatures for or circulate the petition
as a part of their regular duties.
   (b)   The statement provided for in division (a) of this section shall not
be required from persons who take no other part in circulating a petition than
signing declarations to parts of the petition and soliciting signatures to
them.
   (c)   The statement shall be open to public inspection for a period of one
year.
(R.C. § 731.35)
§ 224.09 PROHIBITED PRACTICES RELATIVE TO PETITIONS.
   No person shall, directly or indirectly:
   (a)   Willfully misrepresent the contents of any initiative or referendum
petition;
   (b)   Pay or offer to pay any elector anything of value for signing an
initiative or referendum petition;
   (c)   Promise to help another person to obtain appointment to any office
provided for by the Constitution or laws of the state or by the ordinances of
any municipal corporation, or to any position or employment in the service of
the state or any political subdivision thereof, as a consideration for
obtaining signatures to an initiative or referendum petition;
   (d)   Obtain signatures to any initiative or referendum petition as a
consideration for the assistance or promise of assistance of another person in
securing an appointment to any office or position provided for by the
Constitution or laws of the state or by the ordinances of any municipal
corporation therein, or employment in the service of the state or any
subdivision thereof;
   (e)   Alter, add to or erase any signature or name on the parts of a
petition after the parts have been filed with the Fiscal Officer; or
   (f)   Fail to file the sworn itemized statement required by §
224.08.
(R.C. § 731.36)
§ 224.10 ACCEPTING PREMIUMS FOR SIGNING.
   No person shall accept anything of value for signing an initiative or
referendum petition.
(R.C. § 731.38)
§ 224.11 THREATS IN SECURING SIGNATURES.
   No person shall, directly or indirectly, by intimidation or threats,
influence or seek to influence any person to sign or abstain from signing, or
to solicit signatures to or abstain from soliciting signatures to, an
initiative or referendum petition.
(R.C. § 731.40)
§ 224.12 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER IF CHARTER ADOPTED.
   Sections
224.01 through
224.11 will not apply to the municipality if and when it adopts its own Charter
containing an initiative and referendum provision for its own ordinances and
other legislative measures.
(R.C. § 731.41)
CHAPTER 226: CONTRACTS
Section
   
226.01   General restriction
   
226.02   Contracts by Council
   
226.03   Contracts by Village Administrator; central purchasing
   
226.04   Bids and proceedings
   
226.05   Award to lowest responsive and responsible bidder
   
226.06   Alterations or modifications of contracts
CROSS REFERENCES
   Contracts for utility services without advertising for bids, see R.C. § 9.30
   Contracts for work on public buildings and improvements, see R.C. §§ 153.50
et seq.
   Fire protection contracts, see §
246.11
   Gas company monopolies prohibited, see R.C. § 743.33
   Police protection contracts, see § 244.15 and R.C. §§ 505.43, 737.04
   Service contracts with county, see R.C. §§ 307.14 et seq.
   Unlawful interest in contracts, see §
654.10
§ 226.01 GENERAL RESTRICTION.
   The Council shall not enter into any contract which is not to go into full
operation during the term for which all the members of the Council are elected.
(R.C. § 731.48)
§ 226.02 CONTRACTS BY COUNCIL.
   (a)   All contracts made by the Legislative Authority shall be executed in
the name of the municipality and signed on its behalf by the Mayor and Clerk.
Except where the contract is for equipment, services, materials or supplies to
be purchased under R.C. § 125.04, 713.23(D), or 5513.01, or available from a
qualified nonprofit agency pursuant to R.C. §§ 4115.31 through 4115.35, or
required to be purchased from a qualified nonprofit agency under R.C. §§ 125.60
through 125.6012, when any expenditure, other than the compensation of persons
employed in the municipality, exceeds the amount specified in R.C. § 9.17, such
contracts shall be in writing and made to the lowest and best bidder after
advertising once a week for not less than two consecutive weeks in a newspaper
of general circulation within the municipality. The Legislative Authority may
also cause notice to be inserted in trade papers or other publications
designated by it or to be distributed by electronic means, including posting
the notice on the Legislative Authority's internet web site. If the Legislative
Authority posts the notice on its web site, it may eliminate the second notice
otherwise required to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within
the municipality, provided that the first notice published in such newspaper
meets all of the following requirements:
      (1)   It is published at least two weeks before the opening of bids.
      (2)   It includes a statement that the notice is posted on the Council’s
internet web site.
      (3)   It includes the internet address of the Council’s internet web
site.
      (4)   It includes instructions describing how the notice may be accessed
on the Council’s internet web site.
   (b)   The bids shall be opened and shall be publicly read by the Fiscal
Officer or a person designated by the Fiscal Officer at the time, date and
place specified in the advertisement to bidders or specifications. The time,
date and place of bid openings may be extended to a late date by the Council,
provided that written or oral notice of the change shall be given to all
persons who have received or requested specifications no later than 96 hours
prior to the original time and date fixed for the opening. This section does
not apply to the municipality if an Administrator has been appointed pursuant
to the provisions of R.C. § 735.271, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
(R.C. § 731.14)
§ 226.03 CONTRACTS BY VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR; CENTRAL PURCHASING.
   (a)   In those municipalities that have established the position of
Administrator as provided by R.C. § 735.271, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the Administrator shall make contracts, purchase supplies
and materials, and provide labor for any work under the Administrator’s
supervision involving the amount specified in R.C. § 9.17. When an expenditure,
other than the compensation of persons employed by the municipality, exceeds
the amount specified in R.C. § 9.17, the expenditure shall first be authorized
and directed by ordinance of the Legislative Authority. When so authorized and
directed, except where the contract is for equipment, services, materials, or
supplies to be purchased under R.C. § 125.04, 713.23(D), or 5513.01 or
available from a qualified nonprofit agency pursuant to R.C. §§ 4115.31 through
4115.35, or required to be purchased from a qualified nonprofit agency under
R.C. §§ 125.60 through 125.6012, the Administrator shall make a written
contract with the lowest and best bidder after advertisement for not less than
two nor more than four consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation
within the municipality or as provided in R.C. § 7.16. The bids shall be opened
and shall be publicly read by the Administrator or a person designated by the
Administrator at the time, date and place specified in the advertisement to
bidders or specifications. The time, date and place of bid openings may be
extended to a later date by the Administrator, provided that written or oral
notice of the change shall be given to all persons who have received or
requested specifications no later than 96 hours prior to the original time and
date fixed for the opening. All contracts shall be executed in the name of the
municipality and signed on its behalf by the Administrator and the Fiscal
Officer. No expenditure subject to this division (b) shall be divided into
component parts, separate projects, or separate items of work in order to avoid
the requirements of this division (b).
   (b)   The Council may provide, by ordinance, for central purchasing for all
offices, departments, divisions, boards and commissions of the municipality,
under the direction of the Administrator who shall make contracts, purchase
supplies or materials, and provide labor for any work of the municipality in
the manner provided by this section.
(R.C. § 731.141)
§ 226.04 BIDS AND PROCEEDINGS.
   Each bid on any contract under §
226.02 or
226.03 shall contain the full name of every person interested in the bid. If
the bid is for the construction, demolition, alteration, repair or
reconstruction of an improvement, it shall meet the requirements of R.C. §
153.54. If the bid is for any other contract authorized by §
226.02 or
226.03, it shall be accompanied by a sufficient bond or certified check,
cashier’s check or money order on a solvent bank or savings and loan
association that, if the bid is accepted, a contract will be entered into and
the performance of it properly secured. If the bid for work embraces both labor
and materials, it shall be separately stated, with the price thereof. The
Council or Administrator, in the event an Administrator has been appointed as
provided by R.C. § 735.271, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
may reject any and all bids. The contract shall be between the municipality and
the bidder, and the municipality shall pay the contract price in cash. When a
bonus is offered for completion of a contract prior to a specified date, the
Council or Administrator, in the event an Administrator has been appointed as
provided in R.C. § 735.271, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
may exact a prorated penalty in like sum for each day or delay beyond the
specified date. When there is reason to believe there is collusion or
combination among bidders, the bids of those concerned therein shall be
rejected.
(R.C. § 731.15)
§ 226.05 AWARD TO LOWEST RESPONSIVE AND RESPONSIBLE BIDDER.
   (a)   (1)   If the municipality is required by law or by an ordinance or
resolution adopted under division (c) of this section to award a contract to
the lowest responsive and responsible bidder, a bidder on the contract shall be
considered responsive if the bidder’s proposal responds to bid specifications
in all material respects and contains no irregularities or deviations from the
specifications which would affect the amount of the bid or otherwise give the
bidder a competitive advantage. The factors that the municipality shall
consider in determining whether a bidder on the contract is responsible include
the experience of the bidder, the bidder’s financial condition, conduct and
performance on previous contracts, facilities, management skills and ability to
execute the contract properly.
      (2)   For purposes of this division, the provision of a bid guaranty in
accordance with R.C. § 153.54(A)(1) and (B) issued by a surety licensed to do
business in this state is evidence of financial responsibility, but the
municipality may request additional financial information for review from an
apparent low bidder after it opens all submitted bids. The municipality shall
keep additional financial information it receives pursuant to a request under
this division confidential, except under proper order of a court. The
additional financial information is not a public record under R.C. § 149.43.
      (3)   An apparent low bidder found not to be responsive and responsible
shall be notified by the municipality of that finding and the reasons for it.
The notification shall be given in writing and either by certified mail or, if
the municipality has record of an internet identifier of record associated with
the bidder, by ordinary mail and by that internet identifier of record.
   (b)   Where the municipality has adopted an ordinance or resolution under
division (c) of this section and determines to award a contract to a bidder
other than the apparent low bidder or bidders for the construction,
reconstruction, improvement, enlargement, alteration, repair, painting or
decoration of a public improvement, it shall meet with the apparent low bidder
or bidders upon a filing of a timely written protest. The protest must be
received within five days of the notification required in division (a) of this
section. No final award shall be made until the municipality either affirms or
reverses its earlier determination. Notwithstanding any other provision of the
Ohio Revised Code, the procedure described in this division is not subject to
R.C. Chapter 119.
   (c)   The municipality may, by ordinance or resolution, adopt a policy of
requiring each competitively bid contract it awards to be awarded to the lowest
responsive and responsible bidder in accordance with this section.
   (d)   As used in this section, INTERNET IDENTIFIER OF RECORD means an
electronic mail address, or any other designation used for self-identification
or routing in internet communication or posting, provided for the purpose of
receiving communication.
(R.C. § 9.312)
§ 226.06 ALTERATIONS OR MODIFICATIONS OF CONTRACTS.
   When it becomes necessary in the opinion of the Council or Administrator, in
the event an Administrator has been appointed as provided in R.C. § 735.271, or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, in the prosecution of any work
under contract, to make alterations or modifications in the contract, the
alterations or modifications shall be made only by the Council by resolution or
by the Administrator in writing, in the event an Administrator had been
appointed as provided in R.C. § 735.271, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, but the resolution or written modification shall be of no
effect until the price to be paid for the work and material, or both, under the
altered or modified contract has been agreed upon in writing and signed by the
contractor, and by the Mayor or Administrator in the event an Administrator has
been appointed as provided in R.C. § 735.271, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, on behalf of the municipality. No contractor shall recover
anything for work or material because of any alteration or modification unless
the contract is made as provided in this section, nor shall the contractor
recover for the work or material, or either, more than the agreed price. The
law relating to requiring bids and the awarding of contracts for public
buildings, so far as they apply, shall remain in effect. A duplicate copy of
each contract shall be filed in the office of the Treasurer.
(R.C. § 731.16)
TITLE SIX – ADMINISTRATION
      
Chap. 230.   Administration Generally
      
Chap. 232.   Mayor
      
Chap. 234.   Village Administrator
      
Chap. 236.   Village Legal Counsel
      
Chap. 238.   Village Clerk
      
Chap. 240.   Village Treasurer
      
Chap. 242.   Village Street Commissioner
      
Chap. 244.   Police Department
      
Chap. 246.   Fire Department
      
Chap. 248.   Officers and Employees Generally
CHAPTER 230: ADMINISTRATION GENERALLY
Section
   
230.01   Executive power in general
   
230.02   Tax Commissioner created
   
230.03   Credit card policy
   
230.04   Financial recovery plan
   
230.05   Blanket purchase limits
CROSS REFERENCES
   Adoption of plan of government, see R.C. §§ 705.01 et seq.
   City Manager plan of government, see R.C. §§ 705.51 et seq.
   Classification of cities and villages, see Ohio Const. Art. XVIII, § 1
   Commission plan of government, see R.C. §§ 705.41 et seq.
   Federal plan of government, see R.C. §§ 705.71 et seq.
   General provisions applicable to all statutory plans of government, see R.C.
§§ 705.07 et seq.
§ 230.01 EXECUTIVE POWER IN GENERAL.
   The executive power and authority of the municipality shall be vested in the
Mayor, Fiscal Officer, Treasurer, Marshal, Street Commissioner and such other
officers and departments as are created by law.
(R.C. § 733.23)
§ 230.02 TAX COMMISSIONER CREATED.
   (a)   The position of Village Tax Commissioner is hereby created.
   (b)   The Village Tax Commissioner shall fulfill all of the duties and
obligations incumbent of that office as set forth in the ordinance incorporated
herein, any amendments thereto and as otherwise required by law or rule.
(Ord. 875, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 230.03 CREDIT CARD POLICY.
   The following village credit card policy is hereby adopted.
   (a)   Purpose of policy. The purpose of this policy is to establish
guidelines for the village to provide for the issuance of charge cards to
officers and employees for the purposes of covering expenses incident to
authorized travel and a cost-effective streamlined process for purchasing items
for the operation of the village for business purposes.
   (b)   Appointment of Compliance Officer. There shall be a compliance officer
appointed by the Mayor who shall maintain physical control of village credit
cards.
      (1)   The Village Fiscal Officer cannot fill this position.
      (2)   Employees who are authorized to use a village credit card are not
eligible.
      (3)   The Compliance Officer shall be an employee who shall be available
during regular business hours in order to issue and monitor card usage.
      (4)   The Compliance Officer is not eligible to use the village credit
card, subject to the limitations set forth hereinbelow.
   (c)   Debit cards prohibited. No political subdivision may hold or utilize a
debit card account, except for law enforcement purposes. Use of a debit card is
a violation of R.C. § 2913.21.
   (d)   Officers or positions authorized to use village credit card. The
following positions are authorized to use a village credit card:
      (1)   Village department heads, including the Police Chief, Fire Chief,
Fiscal Officer, Street/Maintenance Superintendent and Mayor’s Court Clerk;
      (2)   Building and grounds supervisor;
      (3)   Vehicle maintenance technician; and
      (4)   Other employees (including the Compliance Officer under special
circumstances with additional approval by the Mayor, per occurrence) may be
issued a credit card for travel purposes only if they are attending training or
a conference on behalf of the village. They must acknowledge receipt of the
credit card policy prior to issuance of card.
   (e)   Types of credit cards permitted. The following types of cards are
permitted:
      (1)   Visa; the village shall utilize First Federal Bank of the Midwest;
and
      (2)   Online purchasing accounts (i.e. Amazon Business and the like).
   (f)   Number of village credit cards.
      (1)   Issued cards.
         A.   Police Department: Police Chief;
         B.   Fire Department: Fire Chief;
         C.   Fiscal Officer;
         D.   Mayor; and
         E.   Village Street/Maintenance Superintendent.
      (2)   Non-issued (sign out) cards: three.
         A.   In possession of Compliance Officer; and
         B.   The Compliance Officer shall have three separate cards to issue/
monitor
   (g)   Types of expenses permitted for village credit card use. The following
types of expenses are permitted for use of the village credit card:
      (1)   Travel accommodations;
      (2)   Gasoline/fuel;
      (3)   Office supplies;
      (4)   One-time purchases with vendors for whom the village does not have
an open account;
      (5)   Utilities, including gas, electric, telephone and internet; and
      (6)   Administrative benefits such as Workers Compensation premiums and
health care premiums.
   (h)   Procedures for usage of non-issued credit card.
      (1)   The Compliance Officer shall maintain a log for checking in and out
credit cards.
      (2)   Credit cards shall be stored in a locked cabinet or drawer.
      (3)   The employee or officer using the card shall provide the receipt
along with a purchase requisition upon returning the credit card to the
Compliance Officer.
   (i)   Procedure for credit card issuance.
      (1)   A village department head may request that a new card be issued
from an existing vendor or a new vendor.
      (2)   The Fiscal Officer shall determine issuance of any new cards.
      (3)   The Compliance Officer shall report lost or stolen cards and keep
track of card associated pin numbers.
   (j)   Maximum credit limit.
      (1)   Visa.
         A.   Each card shall have a limit of not more than $6,000.
         B.   The Fiscal Officer shall have the authority to temporarily
increase an individual’s credit limit for an unusually high one-time
expenditure.
      (2)   Virtual credit cards. Virtual credit cards shall have an individual
approved limit by the Fiscal Officer and the Mayor.
   (k)   Rebates, points and rewards.
      (1)   Any rebates, points and rewards issued by the credit card company
shall be the property of the village and shall be credited to the general
administration of the village. No employee or officer of the village shall be
permitted to personally benefit from any of such rebates, points or awards.
      (2)   The Fiscal Officer annually must file a report with the legislative
authority detailing all rewards received based on the use of the political
subdivision’s credit card account.
   (l)   Credit card usage report. Department heads will be distributed a
credit card statement report from time to time showing all open purchases for
their respective department. Purchase orders need to be in place for purchases
made on the credit card.
   (m)   Unauthorized use.
      (1)   The use of a credit card account for expenses beyond those
authorized by the Legislative Authority constitutes misuse of a credit card
account. An officer or employee of the political subdivision or a public
servant as defined under section R.C. § 2921.01 who knowingly misuses a credit
card account held by the Legislative Authority violates R.C.§ 2913.21, which is
a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (2)   Credit cards may never be used to purchase items for personal use
or for non-village purposes, even if the cardholder intends to reimburse the
village.
   (n)   Miscellaneous provisions.
      (1)   All village credit cards must include the village on their faces,
in addition to any other name.
      (2)   The Compliance Officer and the Legislative Authority, at least
quarterly, must review the number of cards and accounts issued, the number of
active cards and accounts issued, the cards’ and accounts’ expiration dates,
and the cards and accounts’ credit limits.
      (3)   The Fiscal Officer must annually file a report with the Legislative
Authority detailing all rewards received based on the use of the municipal
corporation’s credit card account.
(Ord. 874, passed 1-22-2019; Ord. O2021-014, passed 12-14-2021)
§ 230.04 FINANCIAL RECOVERY PLAN.
   The financial recovery plan, dated December 14, 2021, is adopted by Village
Council, a copy of which is now on file in the office of the Fiscal Officer.
(Ord. O2021-015, passed 12-14-2021)
§ 230.05 BLANKET PURCHASE LIMITS.
   (a)   There is hereby established a blanket purchase limit of $30,000.
   (b)   The Fiscal Officer is authorized to establish and adopt policies and
procedures for the issuance of blanket and super blanket purchase orders by the
village, subject to the monetary limit set forth herein.
(Ord. 02022-005, passed 6-28-2022)
CHAPTER 232: MAYOR
Section
   
232.01   Term; qualifications; powers
   
232.02   Vacancy
   
232.03   General duties
   
232.04   Communications to Council
   
232.05   Protest against excess of expenditures
   
232.06   Supervision of conduct of officers
   
232.07   Charges against delinquent officers
   
232.08   Hearing of charges; action of Council
   
232.09   Suspension of accused pending hearing
   
232.10   Power of Council as to process
   
232.11   Oaths; compulsory testimony; costs
   
232.12   Disposition of fines and other moneys
   
232.13   Annual report to Council
CROSS REFERENCES
   Appointment of Administrator, see §
234.01
   Appointment of Street Commissioner, see §
242.01
   Appointments of Board of Trustees of Public Affairs, see §
270.01
   Appointments of deputies and special police, see §
244.03
   Mayor’s Court, see
Ch. 298
§ 232.01 TERM; QUALIFICATIONS; POWERS.
   The Mayor shall be elected for a term of four years commencing on the first
day of January next after his or her election. He or she shall be an elector of
the municipality and shall have resided in the municipality for at least one
year immediately preceding his or her election. He or she shall be the chief
conservator of the peace within the municipality and shall have the powers and
duties provided by law. He or she shall be the President of the Council and
shall preside at all regular and special meetings thereof, but shall have no
vote except in case of a tie.
(R.C. § 733.24)
§ 232.02 VACANCY.
   When the Mayor is absent from the municipality or is unable for any cause to
perform his or her duties, the President Pro Tempore of the Council shall be
acting Mayor. In case of the death, resignation or removal of the Mayor, the
President Pro Tempore shall become the Mayor and shall hold office until his or
her successor is elected and qualified. The successor shall be elected to the
office for the unexpired term at the first regular municipal election that
occurs more than 40 days after the vacancy has occurred, except that when the
unexpired term ends within one year immediately following the date of the
election, an election to fill the unexpired term shall not be held and the
President of the Council shall hold the office for the unexpired term.
(R.C. § 733.25)
§ 232.03 GENERAL DUTIES.
   The Mayor shall perform all the duties prescribed by the bylaws and
ordinances of the municipality. He or she shall see that all ordinances, bylaws
and resolutions of the Council are faithfully obeyed and enforced. He or she
shall sign all commissions, licenses and permits granted by the Council, or
authorized by Title VII of the Ohio Revised Code, and such other instruments as
by law or ordinance require his or her certificate.
(R.C. § 733.30)
§ 232.04 COMMUNICATIONS TO COUNCIL.
   The Mayor shall communicate to the Council from time to time a statement of
the finances of the municipality and other information relating thereto, and
the general condition of the affairs of the municipality as he or she deems
proper, or as is required by the Council.
(R.C. § 733.32)
§ 232.05 PROTEST AGAINST EXCESS OF EXPENDITURES.
   If, in the opinion of the Mayor, an expenditure authorized by the Council
exceeds the revenues of the municipality for the current year, he or she shall
protest against the expenditure and enter the protest, and the reason therefor,
on the journal of the Council.
(R.C. § 733.33)
§ 232.06 SUPERVISION OF CONDUCT OF OFFICERS.
   The Mayor shall supervise the conduct of all the officers of the
municipality, inquire into and examine the grounds of all reasonable complaints
against any officers and cause their violations or neglect of duty to be
punished promptly or reported to the proper authority for correction.
(R.C. § 733.34)
§ 232.07 CHARGES AGAINST DELINQUENT OFFICERS.
   The Mayor shall have general supervision over each department and the
officers provided for in Title VII of the Ohio Revised Code. When the Mayor has
reason to believe that the head of a department or an officer has been guilty,
in the performance of his or her official duty, of bribery, misfeasance,
malfeasance, nonfeasance, misconduct in office, gross neglect of duty, gross
immorality or habitual drunkenness, he or she shall immediately file with the
Council, except when the removal of the head of the department or officer is
otherwise provided for, written charges against the person, setting forth in
detail a statement of alleged guilt, and, at the same time, or as soon
thereafter as possible, serve a true copy of the charges upon the person
against whom they are made. Service may be made on the person or by leaving a
copy of the charges at the office of the person. Return thereof shall be made
to the Council, as is provided for the return of the service of summons in a
civil action.
(R.C. § 733.35)
§ 232.08 HEARING OF CHARGES; ACTION OF COUNCIL.
   Charges filed with Council under §
232.07 shall be heard at the next regular meeting thereof, unless Council
extends the time for the hearing, which shall be done only on the application
of the accused. The accused may appear in person and by counsel, examine all
witnesses and answer all charges against him or her. The judgment or action of
Council shall be final, but to remove the officer the votes of two-thirds of
all members elected thereto shall be required.
(R.C. § 733.36)
§ 232.09 SUSPENSION OF ACCUSED PENDING HEARING.
   Pending any proceedings under §§
232.07 and
232.08, an accused person may be suspended by a majority vote of all members
elected to Council, but the suspension shall not be for a longer period than 15
days, unless the hearing of the charges is extended upon the application of the
accused, in which event the suspension shall not exceed 30 days.
(R.C. § 733.37)
§ 232.10 POWER OF COUNCIL AS TO PROCESS.
   For the purpose of investigating charges filed pursuant to §
232.07 against the head of any department or officer, Council may issue
subpoenas or compulsory process to compel the attendance of persons and the
production of books and papers before it, and Council may provide by ordinance
for exercising and enforcing this section.
(R.C. § 733.38)
§ 232.11 OATHS; COMPULSORY TESTIMONY; COSTS.
   In all cases in which the attendance of witnesses may be compelled for an
investigation under §
232.10, any member of Council may administer the requisite oaths, and Council
has the same power to compel the giving of testimony by attending witnesses as
is conferred upon courts. In all such cases, witnesses shall be entitled to the
same privileges and immunities as are allowed witnesses in civil cases.
Witnesses shall be paid the same fees and mileage provided for under R.C. §
1901.26, and the costs of all the proceedings shall be payable from the General
Fund of the municipality.
(R.C. § 733.39)
§ 232.12 DISPOSITION OF FINES AND OTHER MONEYS.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4511.193, all fines,
forfeitures and costs in ordinance cases and all fees that are collected by the
Mayor, that in any manner come into the Mayor’s hands, or that are due the
Mayor or the Chief of Police or other officer of the municipality, any other
fees and expenses that have been advanced out of the treasury of the
municipality, and all money received by the Mayor for the use of the
municipality shall be paid by the Mayor into the treasury of the municipality
on the first Monday of each month. At the first regular meeting of the
legislative authority each month, the Mayor shall submit a full statement of
all money received, from whom and for what purposes received, and when paid
into the treasury. Except as otherwise provided by R.C. § 307.515 or 4511.19,
all fines and forfeitures collected by the Mayor in state cases, together with
all fees and expenses collected that have been advanced out of the county
treasury, shall be paid by the Mayor to the county treasury on the first
business day of each month. Except as otherwise provided by R.C. § 307.515 or
4511.19, the Mayor shall pay all court costs and fees collected by the Mayor in
state cases into the municipal treasury on the first business day of each
month.
   (b)   This section does not apply to fines collected by the Mayor’s Court
for violations of R.C. § 4513.263(B), or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, all of which shall be forwarded to the Treasurer of State as
provided in R.C. § 4513.263(E).
(R.C. § 733.40)
§ 232.13 ANNUAL REPORT TO COUNCIL.
   At the first regular meeting in January of each year, and at other times as
the Mayor deems expedient, he or she shall report to the Council concerning the
affairs of the municipality, and recommend such measures as seem proper to him
or her.
(R.C. § 733.41)
CHAPTER 234: VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR
Section
   
234.01   Appointment; removal; abolishment of position
   
234.02   Abolishment and re-establishment of Board of Trustees of Public
Affairs
   
234.03   Powers and duties of Village Administrator
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Board of Trustees of Public Affairs, see
Ch. 270
   Care, supervision and management of public institutions, see §
220.13
   Contracts by Village Administrator, see §
226.03
   Gas, water and electricity, see R.C. §§ 743.26 et seq.
   Sidewalks and sewers, see R.C. Ch. 729
   Street Commissioner, see
Ch. 242
   Streets and public grounds, see R.C. Ch. 723
   Water pollution, see R.C. § 743.25
   Water works, see R.C. §§ 743.01 et seq.
§ 234.01 APPOINTMENT; REMOVAL; ABOLISHMENT OF POSITION.
   The Council may establish the position of Administrator by ordinance. The
Administrator established under this section shall have those powers provided
by §
234.03. The Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor, but shall not take
office unless his or her appointment has been approved by a majority vote of
the members elected to the Council. The Administrator need not be an elector or
reside in the municipality at the time of his or her appointment; however, he
or she shall become a resident of the municipality within six months after his
or her appointment by the Mayor and confirmation by the Council, unless his or
her residence outside the municipality is approved by ordinance. The
Administrator shall not be an elected official of the municipality at the time
of his or her appointment or during his or her tenure in office. The
Administrator shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and Council and may be
removed without cause by the Mayor with the consent of a majority of the
members elected to the Council, or he or she may be removed without cause by
the affirmative vote of three-fourths of the members elected to the Council,
without the consent of the Mayor. The Council may abolish the position of
Administrator by ordinance.
(R.C. § 735.271)
§ 234.02 ABOLISHMENT AND RE-ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF PUBLIC
AFFAIRS.
   (a)   Upon the establishment of the position of Village Administrator, his
or her appointment by the Mayor and confirmation by Council, as provided by §
234.01, the Board of Trustees of Public Affairs, if such a Board has been
created in accordance with §
270.01, shall be abolished and the term of office of members of the Board shall
terminate. All contracts entered into by the Board and rules and regulations
promulgated and other action taken by the Board shall continue in effect until
they have terminated of their own accord or until they have been modified,
changed, revised, amended or repealed in the manner provided by law.
   (b)   If Council abolishes the position of Village Administrator, as
provided by §
234.01, a Board of Trustees of Public Affairs shall be established by operation
of law and the Mayor shall appoint three members of the Board, subject to the
confirmation of Council, who shall serve until the successors of the appointed
members have been elected at the next regular election of municipal officers
held in the municipality occurring more than 100 days after the appointment of
such members by the Mayor, as provided by §
270.01. The Board shall have those powers and duties provided by §§
270.01 and
270.02 and as otherwise provided by law.
(R.C. § 735.272)
§ 234.03 POWERS AND DUTIES OF VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR.
   (a)   The Administrator shall manage, conduct and control the water works,
electric light plants, artificial or natural gas plants or other similar public
utilities, furnish supplies of water, electricity or gas, and collect all
water, electric and gas rents.
   (b)   The Administrator may make such bylaws and regulations as it deems
necessary for the safe, economical and efficient management and protection of
the works, plants and public utilities. Such bylaws and regulations, when not
repugnant to municipal ordinances and resolutions or to the Ohio Constitution,
shall have the same validity of ordinances.
   (c)   The rates for service and charges for municipally owned utilities
shall be determined by the Council.
   (d)   The Administrator shall have the same powers or perform the same
duties as are provided in R.C. §§ 743.05 to 743.07, 743.10, 743.11, 743.18 and
743.24, and all the powers and duties relating to water works in any such
sections shall extend to and include electric light, power, gas plants and
other similar public utilities.
   (e)   The Administrator shall supervise the improvement and repair of
streets, avenues, alleys, lands, lanes, squares, landings, market houses,
bridges, viaducts, sidewalks, sewers, drains, ditches, culverts, streams and
water courses as well as lighting, sprinkling and cleaning of all streets,
alleys and public buildings and places.
   (f)   The Administrator shall appoint officers, employees, agents, clerks
and assistants, provided the positions are first authorized by the Council, but
the appointments shall be subject to approval by the Mayor. The appointments
and the Mayor’s approval shall be in writing, and shall be filed with the
Fiscal Officer.
   (g)   The Administrator shall be under the general supervision and control
of the Mayor, and shall have such other powers and duties as are prescribed by
ordinance or by law and which are not inconsistent herewith. The Administrator
shall perform all duties and shall have all powers of Boards of Public Affairs
and Street Commissioners as prescribed by law, except as otherwise provided by
§§
234.01 and
234.02.
(R.C. § 735.273)
CHAPTER 236: VILLAGE LEGAL COUNSEL
Section
   
236.01   Appointment; term; compensation
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Appointment in commission plan of government, see R.C. § 705.46
   Approval of leases, see R.C. § 715.011
   Attorneys, see R.C. Ch. 4705
   Legal advisor for Volunteer Firefighters’ Dependents Fund Board, see §
278.06
   Member of Records Commission, see §
272.01
   Preparation of bonds, see R.C. § 733.70
   Prosecution of village officers, see §§
248.06 et seq.
§ 236.01 APPOINTMENT; TERM; COMPENSATION.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, when it considers
it necessary, the legislative authority may provide legal counsel for the
municipality, or for any department or official of the municipality, for a
period not to exceed two years and shall provide compensation for the legal
counsel.
   (b)   (1)   A petition may be filed with the Fiscal Officer, signed by
registered electors residing in the municipality equal in number to not less
than 10% of the total vote cast for all candidates for Governor in the
municipality at the most recent general election at which a Governor was
elected, requesting that the question be placed before the electors whether,
instead of the legislative authority appointing legal counsel for the
municipality or for any department or official of the municipality, the Mayor
shall appoint an attorney or law firm as the legal counsel with the advice and
consent of the legislative authority. Within two weeks after receipt of the
petition, the Fiscal Officer shall certify it to the Board of Elections, which
shall determine its sufficiency and validity. The petition shall be certified
to the Board of Elections not less than 90 days prior to the election at which
the question is to be voted upon.
      (2)   At the election, if a majority of the electors of the municipality
approves the question, then effective immediately when the Mayor considers it
necessary, the Mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the
legislative authority, an attorney or law firm as legal counsel for the
municipality, or for any department or official of the municipality, for a
period not to exceed two years. The appointment of legal counsel under this
division shall be pursuant to a contract approved by the Mayor and a majority
vote of the legislative authority. The contract shall provide for the
compensation and other terms of the engagement of the legal counsel, and the
legislative authority shall provide that compensation for the legal counsel.
   (c)   When acting under this section, the legislative authority acts in its
administrative capacity.
(R.C. § 733.48)
CHAPTER 238: VILLAGE CLERK
Section
   
238.01   Election; term; qualifications
   
238.02   Combined Offices of Clerk and Treasurer; Fiscal Officer
   
238.03   Powers and duties of Village Clerk
   
238.04   Books and accounts; merger of offices of Village Clerk and Clerk of
Board of Public Affairs
   
238.05   Seal
   
238.06   Combining Village Clerk and Treasurer
   
238.07   Handling public moneys
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Annexation duties, see R.C. §§ 709.03, 709.06
   Authentication of ordinances and resolutions, see §
222.04
   Certification of assessments, see R.C. §§ 727.30, 727.33
   Fiscal Officer to act as Clerk of the Board of Park Trustees, see §
282.05
   Income tax collection, see R.C. § 733.85
   Initiative petitions, see §
224.01
   Publication of ordinances, see §
222.10
§ 238.01 ELECTION; TERM; QUALIFICATIONS.
   The Clerk shall be elected for a term of four years, commencing on the first
day of April next after his or her election. He or she shall be an elector of
the municipality.
(R.C. § 733.26)
§ 238.02 COMBINED OFFICES OF CLERK AND TREASURER; FISCAL OFFICER.
   (a)   Office of Clerk-Treasurer.
      (1)   A.   The Legislative Authority may, by ordinance or resolution
passed by at least a majority vote, combine the duties of the Clerk and the
Treasurer into one office, to be known as the Clerk-Treasurer. The combination
shall be effective on January 1 following the next regular municipal election
at which the Clerk is to be elected, provided that a Clerk-Treasurer shall be
elected at such election pursuant to this section and shall be elected for a
term of four years, commencing on the first day of April following his or her
election. Between the first day of January and the first day of April following
such an election, the Clerk shall perform the duties of Clerk-Treasurer.
Council shall file certification of the action with the Board of Elections not
less than 120 days before the day of the next municipal primary election at
which the Clerk is to be elected, provided that in villages under 2,000
population in which no petition for a primary election was filed pursuant to
R.C. § 3513.01, or in villages in which no primary is held pursuant to R.C. §
3513.02, the action shall be certified to the Board of Elections not less than
120 days before the next general election at which the Clerk is to be elected.
         B.   At the succeeding regular municipal election and thereafter, the
Clerk-Treasurer shall be elected for a term of four years, commencing on the
first day of April following the Clerk-Treasurer’s election. The Clerk-
Treasurer shall be an elector of the municipality.
      (2)   In addition to the circumstances described in division (a)(1) of
this section, when a vacancy exists in the office of Treasurer or Clerk, the
Legislative Authority may, by ordinance or resolution passed by at least a
majority vote, combine the duties of the Clerk and the Treasurer into one
office, to be known as the Clerk-Treasurer. The combination shall be effective
on the effective date of the ordinance or resolution combining the duties of
the offices of Clerk and Treasurer. At the next regular municipal election at
which the Clerk would have been elected and each four years thereafter, the
Clerk- Treasurer shall be elected for a term of four years, commencing on the
first day of April following the Clerk-Treasurer’s election. The Clerk-
Treasurer shall be an elector of the municipality.
      (3)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall perform the duties provided by law for
the Clerk and the Treasurer. All laws pertaining to the Clerk and to the
Treasurer shall be construed to apply to the Clerk-Treasurer, provided that the
initial compensation for the office of Clerk-Treasurer shall be established by
the Legislative Authority and that action shall not be subject to R.C. §
      (4)   If and when the municipality has a Clerk-Treasurer, the Legislative
Authority may separate the offices by ordinance or resolution passed by at
least a majority vote. The action to separate the offices may be taken in
either of the following circumstances:
         A.   When a vacancy exists in the office of Clerk-Treasurer, in which
case the separation shall be effective upon the effective date of the ordinance
or resolution.
         B.   When the action of the Legislative Authority is certified to and
filed with the Board of Elections not less than 120 days before the day of the
next primary election at which the Clerk and Treasurer are to be elected,
provided that in villages under 2,000 population in which no petition for a
primary election was filed pursuant to R.C. § 3513.01, or in villages in which
no primary is held pursuant to R.C. § 3513.02, the action shall be certified to
the Board of Elections not less than 120 days before the next general election
at which the Clerk and Treasurer are to be elected.
(R.C. § 733.261)
   (b)   Office of Fiscal Officer.
      (1)   A.   In lieu of having the elected office of Clerk and the office
of Treasurer, or the combined elected office of Clerk-Treasurer, the
municipality may combine the duties of the Clerk and Treasurer into one
appointed office, to be known as the Fiscal Officer. To make this change, the
Legislative Authority shall pass, by a two-thirds vote, an ordinance or
resolution proposing to make the change effective on the first day of January
following the next regular municipal election at which the Clerk or Clerk-
Treasurer is to be elected.
         B.   So that no election for the office of Clerk or Clerk-Treasurer is
held after the passage of the ordinance or resolution, the Legislative
Authority shall file a certified copy of the ordinance or resolution with the
Board of Elections not less than 120 days before the day of the next succeeding
municipal primary election at which candidates for the office of Clerk or
Clerk-Treasurer are to be nominated, or, in villages with a population of under
2,000 in which no petition for a primary election is filed under R.C. § 3513.01
or in villages in which no primary is held under R.C. § 3513.02, not less than
120 days before the next succeeding regular municipal election at which the
Clerk or Clerk- Treasurer is to be elected.
      (2)   In addition to the circumstances described in division (b)(1) of
this section, when a vacancy exists in the office of Clerk or Clerk-Treasurer,
the Legislative Authority may pass, by a two-thirds vote, an ordinance or
resolution to combine the duties of the Clerk and the Treasurer into the
appointed office of Fiscal Officer. That change shall take effect on the
effective date of the ordinance or resolution.
      (3)   A Fiscal Officer appointed under this section shall perform the
duties provided by law for the Clerk and Treasurer and any other duties
consistent with the nature of the office that are provided for by municipal
ordinance.
      (4)   A.   A Fiscal Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor, but that
appointment does not become effective until it is approved by a majority vote
of the Legislative Authority. The Fiscal Officer need not be an elector of the
village or reside in the village at the time of appointment; however, the
Fiscal Officer shall become a resident of the village within six months after
the appointment takes effect, unless an ordinance is passed approving the
Fiscal Officer’s residence outside of the village.
         B.   The Fiscal Officer may be removed without cause either by the
Mayor with the consent of a majority of the members of the Legislative
Authority or by a three-fourths vote of the Legislative Authority with or
without the consent of the Mayor.
      (5)   A.   The Legislative Authority of a village that has a Fiscal
Officer may abolish that appointed office and return to an elected office of
Clerk-Treasurer by passing an ordinance or resolution by a two-thirds vote.
         B.   If a vacancy exists in the office of Fiscal Officer when this
ordinance or resolution is passed, the abolition shall take effect on the
effective date of the ordinance or resolution, and the Mayor shall appoint a
Clerk-Treasurer to serve until the first day of April following the next
regular municipal election at which a Clerk-Treasurer can be elected. So an
election can be held, the Legislative Authority shall file a certified copy of
the ordinance or resolution with the Board of Elections not less than 120 days
before the day of the next succeeding municipal primary election.
         C.   If a vacancy does not exist in the office of Fiscal Officer when
the abolishing ordinance or resolution is passed, the Legislative Authority
shall certify a copy of the ordinance or resolution to the Board of Elections
not less than 120 days before the day of the next succeeding municipal primary
election.
         D.   The person elected at the next regular municipal election as
Clerk-Treasurer under the circumstances described in this division shall serve
a four-year term commencing on the first day of April following that election.
(R.C. § 733.262)
§ 238.03 POWERS AND DUTIES OF VILLAGE CLERK.
   (a)   The Clerk shall attend all meetings of the Council and keep a record
of its proceedings and of all rules, bylaws, resolutions and ordinances passed
or adopted, which shall be subject to the inspection of all persons interested.
In case of the absence of the Clerk, the Council shall appoint one of its
members to perform his or her duties.
   (b)   The Clerk shall attend training programs for new Clerks and annual
training programs of continuing education for Clerks that are provided by the
Auditor of State pursuant to R.C. § 117.44.
(R.C. § 733.27)
§ 238.04 BOOKS AND ACCOUNTS; MERGER OF OFFICES OF VILLAGE CLERK AND CLERK OF
BOARD OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS.
   The Clerk shall keep the books of the municipality, exhibit accurate
statements of all moneys received and expended, of all the property owned by
the municipality and the income derived therefrom, and of all taxes and
assessments. The Council may, by majority vote, merge the duties of the Clerk
of the Board of Trustees of Public Affairs with those of the Clerk, allowing
the Clerk such additional assistance and compensation in performing the
additional duties as the Council determines.
(R.C. § 733.28)
§ 238.05 SEAL.
   The Council shall provide a seal for the Clerk, in the center of which shall
be the name of the municipality, and around the margin “Village Clerk”, an
impression of which seal shall be affixed to all transcripts, orders,
certificates or other papers requiring authentication.
(R.C. § 733.29)
§ 238.06 COMBINING VILLAGE CLERK AND TREASURER.
   After January 1, 1960, the office of Village Clerk and Treasurer shall be
combined into the one office of Clerk-Treasurer.
(Ord. 423, passed 10-19-1959)
§ 238.07 HANDLING PUBLIC MONEYS.
   (a)   State law requires that public monies received by the Fiscal Officer
are deposited within 24 hours upon receipt.
   (b)   State statute allows for the legislative authority to adopt a policy
under R.C. § 9.38 to allow the Fiscal Officer to hold public moneys up to three
days if the amount received does not exceed $1,000.
   (c)   Said legislative authority adopts this policy allowing the Fiscal
Officer to hold public moneys for up to three business days, as long as the
total does not exceed $1,000.
(Ord. O2021-009, passed 6-22-2021)
CHAPTER 240: VILLAGE TREASURER
Section
   
240.01   Election; term; qualification
   
240.02   Accounts
   
240.03   Powers and duties
   
240.04   Quarterly account; annual report
   
240.05   Receipt and disbursement of funds
   
240.06   Duty of delivering money and property
   
240.07   Liability for loss of public funds
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Agreements for care of indigents, see R.C. §§ 751.01, 751.02
   Clerk-Treasurer, see §
238.02
   Custodian of Sanitary Police Pension Fund, see R.C. § 738.08
   Custody of water supply revenues, see R.C. § 743.06
   Loss of funds; release of liability, see R.C. §§ 131.18 et seq.
   Reports regarding Police and Firefighter’s Disability and Pension Fund, see
R.C. § 742.32
   “Uniform Depository Act”, see R.C. Ch. 135
§ 240.01 ELECTION; TERM; QUALIFICATION.
   The Treasurer shall be elected for a term of four years, commencing on the
first day of January next after his or her election. He or she shall be an
elector of the municipality.
(R.C. § 733.42)
§ 240.02 ACCOUNTS.
   (a)   The Treasurer shall keep an accurate account of:
      (1)   All moneys received by him or her, showing the amount thereof, the
time received, from whom and on what account received;
      (2)   All disbursements made by him or her, showing the amount thereof,
the time made, to whom and on what account paid.
   (b)   He or she shall so arrange his or her books so that the amount
received and paid on account of separate funds, or specified appropriations,
shall be exhibited in separate accounts. In addition to the ordinary duties of
the Treasurer, he or she shall have such powers and perform such duties as are
required by any ordinance of the municipality, not inconsistent with Title VII
of the Ohio Revised Code, and not incompatible with the nature of the office.
(R.C. § 733.43)
§ 240.03 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (a)   The Treasurer shall demand and receive from the County Treasurer taxes
levied and assessments made and certified to the County Auditor by the Council,
and placed on the tax list by the Auditor for collection, moneys from persons
authorized to collect or required to pay them, accruing to the municipality
from any judgments, fines, penalties, forfeitures, licenses and costs taxed in
Mayor’s Court, and debts due the municipality. These funds shall be disbursed
by the Treasurer and County Auditor on the order of any person authorized by
law or ordinance to issue orders therefor.
   (b)   The Treasurer of a village that does not have a charter form of
government shall not disburse any funds except upon an order signed by at least
one member of the Legislative Authority or the Village Clerk and countersigned
by the Treasurer. The Clerk-Treasurer or fiscal officer of a village that does
not have a charter form of government shall not disburse any funds except upon
an order signed by at least one member of the Legislative Authority and
countersigned by the Clerk-Treasurer or village fiscal officer.
(R.C. § 733.44)
§ 240.04 QUARTERLY ACCOUNT; ANNUAL REPORT.
   The Treasurer shall settle and account with the Council, quarterly, and at
any other time which it by resolution or ordinance requires. At the first
regular meeting of the Council in January of each year, the Treasurer shall
report to it the condition of the finances of the municipality, the amount
received by the Treasurer, the sources of the receipts, the disbursements made
by him or her, and on what account, during the year preceding. This account
shall exhibit the balance due on each fund which has come into the Treasurer’s
hands during the year.
(R.C. § 733.45)
§ 240.05 RECEIPT AND DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS.
   (a)   The Treasurer shall receive and disburse all funds of the municipality
and such other funds as arise in or belong to any department or part of the
municipality, except as provided in division (b) of this section.
   (b)   The Treasurer of a village that does not have a charter form of
government shall not disburse any funds except upon an order signed by at least
one member of the Legislative Authority or the Village Clerk and countersigned
by the Treasurer. The Clerk-Treasurer or fiscal officer of a village that does
not have a charter form of government shall not disburse any funds except upon
an order signed by at least one member of the Legislative Authority and
countersigned by the Clerk-Treasurer or village fiscal officer.
(R.C. § 733.46)
§ 240.06 DUTY OF DELIVERING MONEY AND PROPERTY.
   The Treasurer, at the expiration of his or her term of office, or on his or
her resignation or removal, shall deliver to his or her successor, all moneys,
books, papers and other property in his or her possession as Treasurer. In the
case of the death or incapacity of the Treasurer, his or her legal
representatives shall, in like manner, deliver the money and property which
were in the Treasurer’s hands to the person entitled thereto.
(R.C. § 733.47)
§ 240.07 LIABILITY FOR LOSS OF PUBLIC FUNDS.
   The Treasurer, or other officer of the municipality having the duties of a
treasurer or of a city auditor, shall not be held liable for a loss of public
funds when the officer has performed all official duties required of the
officer with reasonable care, but shall be liable only when a loss of public
funds results from the officer’s negligence or other wrongful act.
(R.C. § 733.82)
CHAPTER 242: VILLAGE STREET COMMISSIONER
Section
   
242.01   Appointment; term; qualifications; vacancy; eligibility of Police
Chief
   
242.02   General duties
   
242.03   Assistants
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Animals on streets, see §
404.05
   Assessments, see R.C. Ch. 727, Ch. 729
   Municipal electric, gas and water service, see R.C. Ch. 743
   Parking in streets, see §§
452.01,
452.12
   Sidewalk maintenance, obstructions and the like, see §§
660.05,
660.10
   Sidewalks and sewers, see R.C. Ch. 729
   Street obstructions and special uses, see §
Ch. 412
   Streets and public grounds, see R.C. Ch. 723
§ 242.01 APPOINTMENT; TERM; QUALIFICATIONS; VACANCY; ELIGIBILITY OF POLICE
CHIEF.
   (a)   So long as the municipality has not provided for the appointment of an
Administrator under R.C. § 735.271 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, a Street Commissioner shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed
by the Council for a term of one year. He or she need not be a resident of the
municipality at the time of his or her appointment, but shall become a resident
thereof within six months after his or her appointment and confirmation, unless
the residence requirement is waived by ordinance. Vacancies in the office of
Street Commissioner shall be filled by the Mayor for the unexpired term.
   (b)   The appointment of a Street Commissioner shall include a probationary
period of six months. If an appointment is made for an unexpired term, and if
the same Street Commissioner is reappointed at the end of that term, the
probationary period shall continue into his or her next term. No appointment is
final until the appointee has satisfactorily completed his or her probationary
period. If the service of the appointee is unsatisfactory during the
probationary period, he or she may be removed by the Mayor and the reasons for
the removal shall be communicated to the Council. If a person is appointed to
successive terms as Street Commissioner, he or she shall serve only one six-
month probationary period during those successive terms.
   (c)   The Marshal (Chief of Police) shall be eligible to appointment as
Street Commissioner.
(R.C. § 735.31)
§ 242.02 GENERAL DUTIES.
   Under the direction of the Mayor or other chief executive officer, the
Street Commissioner, or an engineer, when one is provided by the Council, shall
supervise the improvement and repair of streets, avenues, alleys, lands, lanes,
squares, wards, landings, market houses, bridges, viaducts, sidewalks, sewers,
drains, ditches, culverts, ship channels, streams and water courses. The Street
Commissioner or engineer shall also supervise the lighting, sprinkling and
cleaning of all public places, and shall perform such other duties, consistent
with the nature of his or her office, as the Mayor or other chief executive
officer requires.
(R.C. § 735.32)
§ 242.03 ASSISTANTS.
   The Street Commissioner or engineer mentioned in §
242.02 shall have such assistants as the Council provides, who shall be
employed by the Street Commissioner, and serve for such time and compensation
as is fixed by the Council.
(R.C. § 735.33)
CHAPTER 244: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
244.01   Marshal and Chief of Police synonymous
   
244.02   Appointment of Chief; qualifications
   
244.03   Deputy Marshals and police officers
   
244.04   Auxiliary Police Unit; Parking Enforcement Unit
   
244.05   Appointment of felons and certain misdemeanants; termination
   
244.06   Probationary period; final appointment
   
244.07   Removal proceedings; suspension; appeals
   
244.08   General powers of officers
   
244.09   Powers and duties of Police Chief
   
244.10   Disposition of moneys collected by Police Chief
   
244.11   Disposition of property recovered by police
   
244.12   Disposition of property to claimant
   
244.13   Sale of unclaimed property; disposition of proceeds
   
244.14   Expenses of storage and sale; notice
   
244.15   Contracts for police protection
   
244.16   Nonresident service without contract
   
244.17   Creation of reserve police unit
   
244.18   Appointment of members
   
244.19   Period of service
   
244.20   Qualifications
   
244.21   Role of Chief of Police
   
244.22   Additional rules and regulations
   
244.23   Uniforms
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Compliance with lawful order of police officers; fleeing, see §
654.09
   Dereliction of duty, see §
654.12
   Eligibility of Police Chief to be Street Commissioner, see §
242.01
   Failure to aid a police officer, see §
654.05
   Impersonating/personating an officer, see §§
654.14,
672.19
   Police officer may arrest on view, see R.C. §§ 2935.03, 2935.05, 2935.07
   Police Pension and Disability Fund, see R.C. Ch. 742
   Recovered property and disposition, see §
654.16 and R.C. §§ 737.29 et seq., 4513.60 et seq.
   Resisting an officer, see §§
404.02,
654.08
   Use of force to suppress riot, see §
648.03
§ 244.01 MARSHAL AND CHIEF OF POLICE SYNONYMOUS.
   The designation “Marshal”, wherever used in this code of ordinances, is
hereby defined to include “Chief of Police”, and “Chief of Police” is defined
to include “Marshal”.
§ 244.02 APPOINTMENT OF CHIEF; QUALIFICATIONS.
   (a)   Each municipality shall have a Marshal or designated Police Chief,
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council, who need not
be a resident of the municipality at the time of appointment, but shall become
a resident thereof within six months after appointment by the Mayor and
confirmation by the Council, unless the residence requirement is waived by
ordinance, and who shall continue in office until removed therefrom as provided
by §
244.07.
   (b)   No person shall receive an appointment under this section unless, not
more than 60 days prior to receiving an appointment, the person has passed a
physical examination given by a licensed physician, a physician assistant, a
clinical nurse specialist, a certified nurse practitioner or a certified nurse-
midwife, showing that the person meets the physical requirements necessary to
perform the duties of Marshal as established by the Council. The appointing
authority shall, prior to making any appointment, file with the Ohio Police and
Fire Pension Fund a copy of the report or findings of this licensed physician,
physician assistant, clinical nurse specialist, certified nurse practitioner or
certified nurse-midwife. The professional fee for the physical examination
shall be paid for by the Council.
(R.C. § 737.15)
§ 244.03 DEPUTY MARSHALS AND POLICE OFFICERS.
   (a)   The Mayor shall, when provided for by the Council, and subject to its
confirmation, appoint all Deputy Marshals, police officers, night guards and
special police officers. All officers shall continue in office until removed
therefrom for the cause and in the manner provided by §
244.09.
   (b)   No person shall receive an appointment under this section unless the
person has, not more than 60 days prior to receiving appointment, passed a
physical examination given by a licensed physician, a physician assistant, a
clinical nurse specialist, a certified nurse practitioner or a certified nurse-
midwife, showing that the person meets the physical requirements necessary to
perform the duties of the position to which the person is to be appointed as
established by the Council. The appointing authority shall, prior to making any
appointment, file with the Ohio Police and Fire Pension Fund a copy of the
report or findings of the licensed physician, physician assistant, clinical
nurse specialist, certified nurse practitioner or certified nurse-midwife. The
professional fee for the physical examination shall be paid for by the Council.
(R.C. § 737.16)
§ 244.04 AUXILIARY POLICE UNIT; PARKING ENFORCEMENT UNIT.
   (a)   The Council may establish, by ordinance, an Auxiliary Police Unit
within the Police Department, and provide for the regulation of auxiliary
police officers. The Mayor shall be the executive head of the Auxiliary Police
Unit, shall make all appointments and removals of auxiliary police officers,
subject to any general rules prescribed by the Council by ordinance, and shall
prescribe rules for the organization, training, administration, control and
conduct of the Auxiliary Police Unit. The Marshal shall have exclusive control
of the stationing and transferring of all auxiliary police officers, under such
general rules as the Mayor prescribes.
   (b)   (1)   The Council may establish, by ordinance, a Parking Enforcement
Unit within the Police Department, and provide for the regulation of parking
enforcement officers. The Mayor shall be the executive head of the Parking
Enforcement Unit, shall make all appointments and removals of parking
enforcement officers, subject to any general rules prescribed by the Council by
ordinance, and shall prescribe rules for the organization, training,
administration, control and conduct of the Parking Enforcement Unit. The Mayor
may appoint parking enforcement officers who agree to serve for nominal
compensation, and persons with physical disabilities may receive appointments
as parking enforcement officers.
      (2)   The authority of the parking enforcement officers shall be limited
to the enforcement of ordinances governing parking in accessible parking
locations and fire lanes and any other parking ordinances specified in the
ordinance creating the Parking Enforcement Unit. Parking enforcement officers
shall have no other powers.
      (3)   The training of parking enforcement officers shall include
instruction in general administrative rules and procedures governing the
Parking Enforcement Unit, the role of the judicial system as it relates to
parking regulations and enforcement, proper techniques and methods relating to
the enforcement of parking ordinances, human interaction skills and first aid.
(R.C. § 737.161)
§ 244.05 APPOINTMENT OF FELONS AND CERTAIN MISDEMEANANTS; TERMINATION.
   (a)   As used in this section, FELONY has the same meaning as in R.C. §
109.511.
   (b)   (1)   The Mayor shall not appoint a person as a Marshal, a Deputy
Marshal, a police officer, a night security officer, a special police officer
or an auxiliary police officer on a permanent basis, on a temporary basis, for
a probationary term or on other than a permanent basis if the person previously
has been convicted of or has pleaded guilty to a felony.
      (2)   A.   The Mayor shall terminate the employment of a Marshal, Deputy
Marshal, police officer, night security officer, special police officer or
auxiliary police officer who does either of the following: pleads guilty to a
felony; or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor pursuant to a negotiated plea
agreement as provided in R.C. § 2929.43(D) in which the Marshal, Deputy
Marshal, police officer, night security officer, special police officer or
auxiliary police officer agrees to surrender the certificate awarded to that
person under R.C. § 109.77.
         B.   The Mayor shall suspend from employment a Marshal, Deputy
Marshal, police officer, night security officer, special police officer or
auxiliary police officer who is convicted, after trial, of a felony. If the
Marshal, Deputy Marshal, police officer, night security officer, special police
officer or auxiliary police officer files an appeal from that conviction and
the conviction is upheld by the highest court to which the appeal is taken or
if that person does not file a timely appeal, the Mayor shall terminate that
person’s employment. If the Marshal, Deputy Marshal, police officer, night
security officer, special police officer or auxiliary police officer files an
appeal that results in that person’s acquittal of the felony or conviction of a
misdemeanor, or in the dismissal of the felony charge against that person, the
Mayor shall reinstate that person. A Marshal, Deputy Marshal, police officer,
night security officer, special police officer or auxiliary police officer who
is reinstated under this division shall not receive any back pay unless that
person’s conviction of the felony was reversed on appeal, or the felony charge
was dismissed, because the court found insufficient evidence to convict that
person of the felony.
      (3)   This division (b) of this section does not apply regarding an
offense that was committed prior to January 1, 1997.
      (4)   The suspension from employment, or the termination of the
employment, of a Marshal, Deputy Marshal, police officer, night security
officer, special police officer or auxiliary police officer under division (b)
(2) of this section shall be in accordance with R.C. Chapter 119.
(R.C. § 737.162)
§ 244.06 PROBATIONARY PERIOD; FINAL APPOINTMENT.
   Any appointments made shall be for a probationary period of six months’
continuous service, and no appointments shall be deemed finally made until the
appointee has satisfactorily served his or her probationary period. At the end
of the probationary period the Mayor shall transmit to the Council a record of
the employee’s service with his or her recommendations thereon; and with the
concurrence of the Council, the Mayor may remove or finally appoint the
employee.
(R.C. § 737.17)
§ 244.07 REMOVAL PROCEEDINGS; SUSPENSION; APPEALS.
   (a)   Except as provided in §
244.05, if the Mayor has reason to believe that a duly appointed Marshal of the
municipality has been guilty of incompetency, inefficiency, dishonesty,
drunkenness, immoral conduct, insubordination, discourteous treatment of the
public, neglect of duty or any other acts of misfeasance, malfeasance or
nonfeasance in the performance of his or her official duty, the Mayor shall
file with the Council written charges against the person, setting forth in
detail the reason therefor and immediately shall serve a true copy thereof upon
the person against whom they are made.
   (b)   Charges filed under this section shall be heard at the next regular
meeting of the Council occurring not less than five days after the date the
charges have been served on the person against whom they are made. The person
against whom charges are filed may appear in person and by counsel at the
hearing, examine all witnesses and answer all charges against him or her.
   (c)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Council may dismiss the charges,
suspend the accused from office for not more than 60 days or remove the accused
from office.
   (d)   Action of the Council removing or suspending the accused from office
shall require the affirmative vote of two-thirds of all elected members.
   (e)   In the case of removal from office, the person so removed may appeal
on questions of law and fact the decision of the Council to the Court of Common
Pleas. The person shall take the appeal within ten days from the date of the
finding of the Council.
(R.C. § 737.171)
§ 244.08 GENERAL POWERS OF OFFICERS.
   (a)   The Marshal shall be the peace officer of the municipality and the
executive head, under the Mayor, of the police force. The Marshal, and the
Deputy Marshals, police officers or night security officers under him or her,
shall have the powers conferred by law upon police officers in all
municipalities of the state, and other powers not inconsistent with the nature
of their offices as are conferred by ordinance.
   (b)   A Marshal, Deputy Marshal or police officer of the municipality may
participate, as the director of an organized crime task force established under
R.C. § 177.02 or as a member of the investigatory staff of such a task force,
in an investigation of organized criminal activity in any counties in this
state under R.C. §§ 177.01 through 177.03.
(R.C. § 737.18)
§ 244.09 POWERS AND DUTIES OF POLICE CHIEF.
   (a)   The Marshal has exclusive authority over the stationing and transfer
of all deputies, officers and employees within the Police Department under the
general rules that the Mayor prescribes.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in §
244.05, the Marshal has the exclusive right to suspend any of the deputies,
officers or employees in the Police Department who are under the management and
control of the Marshal for incompetence, gross neglect of duty, gross
immorality, habitual drunkenness, failure to obey orders given them by the
proper authority, or for any other reasonable or just cause.
      (2)   If an employee is suspended under this section, the Marshal
immediately shall certify that fact in writing, together with the cause for the
suspension, to the Mayor and immediately shall serve a true copy of the charge
upon the person against whom they are made. Within five days after receiving
this certification, the Mayor shall inquire into the cause of the suspension
and shall render a judgment on it. If the Mayor sustains the charges, the
judgment of the Mayor may be for the person’s suspension, reduction in rank or
removal from the Department.
      (3)   Suspensions of more than three days, reduction in rank or removal
from the Department under this section may be appealed to the Council within
five days from the date of the Mayor’s judgment. The Council shall hear the
appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting. The person against whom the
judgment has been rendered may appear in person and by counsel at the hearing,
examine all witnesses and answer all charges against him or her.
      (4)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Council may dismiss the
charges, uphold the Mayor’s judgment or modify the judgment to one of
suspension for not more than 60 days, reduction in rank or removal from the
Department.
      (5)   Action of the Council removing or suspending the accused from the
Department requires the affirmative vote of two-thirds of all members elected
to it.
      (6)   In the case of removal from the Department, the person so removed
may appeal on questions of law and fact the decision of the Council to the
Court of Common Pleas of the county in which the municipality is situated. The
person shall take the appeal within ten days from the date of the finding of
the Council.
   (c)   The Marshal shall suppress all riots, disturbances and breaches of the
peace, and to that end may call upon the citizens to aid him or her. The
Marshal shall arrest all disorderly persons in the municipality and pursue and
arrest any person fleeing from justice in any part of the state. The Marshal
shall arrest any person in the act of committing an offense against the laws of
the state or the ordinances of the municipality, and forthwith bring the person
before the Mayor or other competent authority for examination or trial. The
Marshal shall receive and execute proper authority for the arrest and detention
of criminals fleeing or escaping from other places or states.
   (d)   In the discharge of his or her duties, the Marshal shall have the
powers and be subject to the responsibilities of constables, and for services
performed by the Marshal or his or her deputies the same fees and expenses
shall be taxed as are allowed constables.
(R.C. § 737.19)
§ 244.10 DISPOSITION OF MONEYS COLLECTED BY POLICE CHIEF.
   All fees, costs, fines and penalties collected by the Marshal shall
immediately be paid to the Mayor, who shall report to the Council monthly the
amount thereof, from whom and for what purpose collected, and when paid to the
Mayor.
(R.C. § 737.20)
§ 244.11 DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY RECOVERED BY POLICE.
   (a)   Stolen or other property recovered by members of the police force
shall be deposited and kept in a place designated by the Mayor. Each article
shall be entered in a book kept for that purpose, with the name of the owner,
if ascertained, the person from whom taken, the place where found with general
circumstances, the date of its receipt and the name of the officer recovering
it.
   (b)   An inventory of all money or other property shall be given to the
party from whom taken, and, in case it is not claimed by some person within 30
days after arrest and seizure, it shall be delivered to the person from whom
taken, and to no other person, either attorney, agent, factor or clerk, except
by special order of the Mayor.
(R.C. § 737.29)
§ 244.12 DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY TO CLAIMANT.
   If, within 30 days, the money or property recovered under §
244.11 is claimed by any person other than the person from whom the property
was recovered, it shall be retained by the custodian thereof until after the
discharge or conviction of the person from whom it was taken, and so long as it
may be required as evidence in any case in court. If the claimant establishes
to the satisfaction of the court that he or she is the rightful owner, it shall
be restored to him or her; otherwise, it shall be returned to the accused
person, personally, and not to any attorney, agent, factor or clerk of the
accused person, except upon special order of the Mayor after all liens and
claims in favor of the municipality have first been discharged and satisfied.
(R.C. § 737.31)
§ 244.13 SALE OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY; DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this section and unless the property
involved is required to be disposed of pursuant to another section of the Ohio
Revised Code, property that is unclaimed for 90 days or more shall be sold by
the Marshal, Police Chief or licensed auctioneer at public auction, after
notice of the sale has been provided by publication once a week for three
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the county or as
provided in R.C. § 7.16. The proceeds of the sale shall be paid to the
Treasurer and shall be credited to the General Fund of the municipality.
   (b)   If authorized to do so by an ordinance adopted by the Council and if
the property involved is not required to be disposed of pursuant to another
section of the Ohio Revised Code, the Police Chief or Marshal may contribute
property that is unclaimed for 90 days or more to one or more public agencies,
to one or more nonprofit organizations no part of the net income of which
inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no
substantial part of the activities of which consists of carrying on propaganda
or otherwise attempting to influence legislation, or to one or more
organizations satisfying I.R.C. § 501(c)(3) or (c)(19).
(R.C. § 737.32)
§ 244.14 EXPENSES OF STORAGE AND SALE; NOTICE.
   Upon the sale of any unclaimed or impounded property as provided in §
244.13, if any such unclaimed or impounded property was ordered removed to a
place of storage or stored, or both, by or under the direction of the Police
Chief or Marshal, any expenses or charges for the removal or storage, or both,
and costs of sale, provided the same are approved by the Police Chief or
Marshal, shall first be paid from the proceeds of the sale. Notice shall be
given by registered mail 30 days before the date of sale to the owner and
mortgagee, or other lien holder, at their last known address.
(R.C. § 737.33)
§ 244.15 CONTRACTS FOR POLICE PROTECTION.
   (a)   Council, in order to obtain police protection or to obtain additional
police protection or to allow police officers to work in multi-jurisdictional
drug, gang or career criminal task forces, may enter into contracts with one or
more municipal corporations, townships, township police districts, joint police
districts, or County Sheriffs in the state, with one or more park districts
created pursuant to R.C. §§ 511.18 or 1545.01, with one or more port
authorities, or with a contiguous municipal corporation in an adjoining state,
upon any terms that are agreed upon, for services of police departments or the
use of police equipment or for the interchange of services of police
departments or police equipment within the several territories of the
contracting subdivisions.
   (b)   R.C. Chapter 2744, insofar as it applies to the operation of police
departments, shall apply to the contracting political subdivisions and to the
Police Department members when they are rendering service outside their own
subdivisions pursuant to the contracts.
   (c)   Police Department members acting outside the subdivision in which they
are employed, pursuant to a contract entered into under this section, shall be
entitled to participate in any indemnity fund established by their employer to
the same extent as while acting within the employing subdivision. Those members
shall be entitled to all the rights and benefits of R.C. Chapter 4123, to the
same extent as while performing service within the subdivision.
   (d)   The contracts may provide for:
      (1)   A fixed annual charge to be paid at the times agreed upon and
stipulated in the contract;
      (2)   Compensation based upon:
         A.   A stipulated price for each call or emergency;
         B.   The number of members or pieces of equipment employed; or
         C.   The elapsed time of service required in each call or emergency;
      (3)   Compensation for loss or damage to equipment while engaged in
rendering police services outside the limits of the political subdivision
owning and furnishing the equipment; and
      (4)   Reimbursement of the political subdivision in which the Police
Department members are employed for any indemnity award or premium contribution
assessed against the employing subdivision for workers’ compensation benefits
for injuries or death of its Police Department members occurring while engaged
in rendering police services pursuant to the contract.
(R.C. § 737.04)
§ 244.16 NONRESIDENT SERVICE WITHOUT CONTRACT.
   (a)   The Police Department may provide police protection to any county,
municipal corporation, township or township police district, or joint police
district of the state, to a park district created pursuant to R.C. § 511.18 or
1545.01, to a port authority, to any multi-jurisdictional drug, gang or career
criminal task force, or to a governmental entity of an adjoining state without
a contract to provide police protection, upon the approval, by resolution, of
Council and upon authorization by an officer or employee of the Police
Department who is designated by title of office or position, pursuant to the
resolution of Council, to give the authorization.
   (b)   R.C. Chapter 2744, insofar as it applies to the operation of police
departments, shall apply to the municipality and to members of its Police
Department when the members are rendering police services pursuant to this
section outside the municipality.
   (c)   Police Department members acting, as provided in this section, outside
the municipality, shall be entitled to participate in any pension or indemnity
fund established by their employer to the same extent as while acting within
the municipality. Those members shall be entitled to all the rights and
benefits of R.C. Chapter 4123, to the same extent as while performing services
within the municipality.
(R.C. § 737.041)
§ 244.17 CREATION OF RESERVE POLICE UNIT.
   There is hereby created within the Village Police Department a reserve
police unit.
(Ord. 511, passed 6-2-1975)
§ 244.18 APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.
   The members of the reserve police unit shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the approval of the Council.
(Ord. 511, passed 6-2-1975)
§ 244.19 PERIOD OF SERVICE.
   The members of the reserve police unit shall serve at the pleasure of the
Mayor or until a resignation is submitted by such member and accepted by the
Mayor.
(Ord. 511, passed 6-2-1975)
§ 244.20 QUALIFICATIONS.
   The members of the reserve police unit shall be 21 years of age or older at
the time of their appointment, and shall immediately, upon appointment, enroll
in all police training and schooling, as required by the state for a full-time
peace officer, and shall be subject to such other requirements as provided by
rules and regulations as provided herein. The village shall reimburse, upon
proper voucher, three reserve members for the required training that has been
paid by the trainee. Said payment shall begin six months after the completion
of said training and shall be equally divided during the following six months.
This being contingent upon the member being a current part of the reserve
police unit of the village.
(Ord. 511, passed 6-2-1975; Ord. 520, passed 4-5-1976)
§ 244.21 ROLE OF CHIEF OF POLICE.
   The Chief of Police shall be the commanding office of the reserve police
unit and, subject to the approval of the Mayor, shall have the control of the
assignments, training, stationing and direction of the work of such unit and
its members. The reserve police unit shall have all police powers and as such
shall be bonded, at the cost of the village, but shall perform only such police
duties as assigned by the Chief of Police, and shall act only when in the
prescribed uniform or portion of uniform. The Chief of Police shall prescribe
the time and place such uniform or portion thereof shall be worn. The members
of the reserve police unit shall obey the chain of command of the Police
Department and shall take orders from all regularly appointed members thereof.
(Ord. 511, passed 6-2-1975)
§ 244.22 ADDITIONAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Village Council, from time to time, may prescribe additional rules and
regulations for the organization, administration, conduct and control of the
reserve police unit.
(Ord. 511, passed 6-2-1975)
§ 244.23 UNIFORMS.
   The Village Council is authorized to prescribe, by rules and regulations,
the type of uniform or part thereof which shall be worn by members of the
reserve police unit. All services rendered by members of the reserve police
unit shall be on a voluntary basis and within the village. Such members shall
be paid the sum of $1 per year for their services.
(Ord. 511, passed 6-2-1975)
CHAPTER 246: FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
246.01   Authority to establish regulations and Department; hours of duty
   
246.02   Appointments of Fire Chief, Fire Prevention Officer and firefighters;
criminal records check for firefighters
   
246.03   Schooling of officers and firefighters
   
246.04   Purchase of engines and equipment
   
246.05   Buildings for Department
   
246.06   Investigation of fires
   
246.07   Regulation of construction in fire limits
   
246.08   Maximum consecutive hours for firefighters on duty
   
246.09   Investigation of cause of fire
   
246.10   Right to examine buildings, premises and vehicles
   
246.11   Firefighting and emergency services agreements
   
246.12   Rate schedule for village fire equipment
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Arson, see §§
642.06,
642.07
   Driving over fire hose, see §
432.29
   Fire Chief to issue fireworks permits, see §
678.12
   Firefighter’s Pension and Disability Fund, see R.C. Ch. 742
   Hampering firefighters during emergencies, see §
648.06
   Open burning, see §
660.08
   Parking near fire, see §
432.28
   Removal of Fire Chief and firefighters, see §§
232.07 et seq.
   Use of force to suppress riot, see §
648.03
   Volunteer Firefighters’ Dependents Fund Board, see
Ch. 278
§ 246.01 AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH REGULATIONS AND DEPARTMENT; HOURS OF DUTY.
   The Council may establish all necessary regulations to guard against the
occurrence of fires and protect the property and lives of its citizens against
damage and accidents resulting therefrom, and for that purpose may establish
and maintain a Fire Department, provide for the establishment and organization
of fire engine and hose companies and rescue units, establish the hours of
labor of the members of its Fire Department who shall not be required to be on
duty continuously more than six days in every seven, and provide bylaws and
regulation for the government of companies and their members as is necessary
and proper.
(R.C. § 737.21)
§ 246.02 APPOINTMENTS OF FIRE CHIEF, FIRE PREVENTION OFFICER AND FIREFIGHTERS;
CRIMINAL RECORDS CHECK FOR FIREFIGHTERS.
   (a)   Each municipality establishing a Fire Department shall have a Fire
Chief as the Department’s head, appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the legislative authority, who shall continue in office until
removed from office as provided by R.C. §§ 733.35 through 733.39. Neither this
section nor any section of the Ohio Revised Code requires, or shall be
construed to require, that the Fire Chief be a resident of the municipality.
   (b)   In each municipality not having a Fire Department, the Mayor shall,
with the advice and consent of the legislative authority, appoint a Fire
Prevention Officer who shall exercise all of the duties of a Fire Chief, except
those involving the maintenance and operation of fire apparatus.
   (c)   The legislative authority may fix the compensation it considers best.
The appointee shall continue in office until removed from office as provided by
R.C. §§ 733.35 to 733.39. The provisions of § 246.03 shall extend to the Fire
Prevention Officer.
   (d)   The legislative authority may provide for the appointment of permanent
full-time paid firefighters as it considers best and fix their compensation, or
for the services of volunteer firefighters, who shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the legislative authority, and shall continue in
office until removed from office.
   (e)   No person shall be appointed as a permanent full-time paid firefighter
of the municipality unless either of the following applies:
      (1)   The person has received a certificate issued under former R.C. §
3303.07 or 4765.55 evidencing satisfactory completion of a firefighter training
program;
      (2)   The person began serving as a permanent full-time paid firefighter
with the municipality prior to July 2, 1970, and receives a fire training
certificate issued under R.C. § 4765.55.
   (f)   No person who is appointed as a volunteer firefighter of the
municipality shall remain in that position unless either of the following
applies:
      (1)   Within one year of the appointment he or she has received a
certificate issued under former R.C. § 3303.07 or 4765.55 evidencing
satisfactory completion of a firefighter training program;
      (2)   The person began serving as a permanent full-time paid firefighter
with the municipality prior to July 2, 1970, or as a volunteer firefighter with
the municipality prior to July 2, 1979, and receives a certificate issued under
R.C. § 4765.55.
   (g)   No person shall receive an appointment under this section unless the
person has, not more than 60 days prior to receiving the appointment, passed a
physical examination given by a licensed physician, a physician assistant, a
clinical nurse specialist, a certified nurse practitioner or a certified nurse-
midwife, showing that the person meets the physical requirements necessary to
perform the duties of the position to which the person is to be appointed as
established by the Council. The appointing authority shall, prior to making an
appointment, file with the Ohio Police and Fire Pension Fund or the Local
Volunteer Firefighter’s Dependents Fund Board a copy of the report or findings
of that licensed physician, physician assistant, clinical nurse specialist,
certified nurse practitioner or certified nurse-midwife. The professional fee
for the physical examination shall be paid for by the Council.
(R.C. § 737.22)
   (h)   Criminal records check for firefighters.
      (1)   The Fire Chief may request the Superintendent of the Ohio Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation (“BCII”) to conduct a criminal
records check with respect to any person who is under consideration for
appointment or employment as a permanent, full-time paid firefighter or any
person who is under consideration for appointment as a volunteer firefighter.
      (2)   A.   The Fire Chief may request that the Superintendent of BCII
obtain information from the Federal Bureau of Investigation as a part of the
criminal records check requested pursuant to division (h)(1) of this section.
         B.   The Fire Chief, authorized by division (h)(1) of this section to
request a criminal records check, shall provide to each person for whom the
Fire Chief intends to request a criminal records check a copy of the form
prescribed pursuant to R.C. § 109.578(C)(1) and a standard impression sheet to
obtain fingerprint impressions prescribed pursuant to R.C. § 109.578(C)(2),
obtain the completed form and impression sheet from the person, and forward the
completed form and impression sheet to the Superintendent of BCII at the time
the criminal records check is requested.
         C.   Any person subject to a criminal records check who receives a
copy of the form and a copy of the impression sheet pursuant to division (h)
(2)B. of this section and who is requested to complete the form and provide a
set of fingerprint impressions shall complete the form or provide all the
information necessary to complete the form and shall provide the impression
sheet with the impressions of the person’s fingerprints. If a person fails to
provide the information necessary to complete the form or fails to provide
impressions of the person’s fingerprints, the appointing authority shall not
appoint or employ the person as a permanent full-time paid firefighter or a
volunteer firefighter.
      (3)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (h)(3)B. of this
section, an appointing authority shall not appoint or employ a person as a
permanent, full-time paid firefighter or a volunteer firefighter if the Fire
Chief has requested a criminal records check pursuant to division (h)(1) of
this section and the criminal records check indicates that the person
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any of the following:
            1.   A felony;
            2.   A violation of R.C. § 2909.03;
            3.   A violation of an existing or former law of this state, any
other state or the United States that is substantially equivalent to any of the
offenses described in division (h)(3)A.1. or (h)(3)A.2. of this section.
         B.   Notwithstanding division (h)(3)A. of this section, an appointing
authority may appoint or employ a person as a permanent, full-time paid
firefighter or a volunteer firefighter if all of the following apply:
            1.   The Fire Chief has requested a criminal records check pursuant
to division (h)(1) of this section.
            2.   The criminal records check indicates that the person
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any of the offenses
described in division (h)(3)A. of this section.
            3.   The person meets rehabilitation standards established in rules
adopted under division (h)(5) of this section.
         C.   If the Fire Chief requests a criminal records check pursuant to
division (h)(1) of this section, an appointing authority may appoint or employ
a person as a permanent, full-time paid firefighter or volunteer firefighter
conditionally until the criminal records check is completed and the Fire Chief
receives the results. If the results of the criminal records check indicate
that, pursuant to division (h)(3)A. of this section, the person subject to the
criminal records check is disqualified from appointment or employment, the Fire
Chief shall release the person from appointment or employment.
      (4)   The Fire Chief shall pay to the BCII the fee prescribed pursuant to
R.C. § 109.578(C)(3) for each criminal records check conducted in accordance
with that section. The Fire Chief may charge the applicant who is subject to
the criminal records check a fee for the costs the Fire Chief incurs in
obtaining the criminal records check. A fee charged under this division shall
not exceed the amount of fees the Fire Chief pays for the criminal records
check. If a fee is charged under this division, the Fire Chief shall notify the
applicant at the time of the applicant’s initial application for appointment or
employment of the amount of the fee and that, unless the fee is paid, the
applicant will not be considered for appointment or employment.
      (5)   The appointing authority shall adopt rules in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 119 to implement this division (h). The rules shall include
rehabilitation standards a person who has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to an offense listed in division (h)(3)A. of this section must meet for the
appointing authority to appoint or employ the person as a permanent, full-time
paid firefighter or a volunteer firefighter.
      (6)   The Fire Chief requesting a criminal records check for an applicant
shall inform each applicant, at the time of the person’s initial application
for appointment or employment, that the applicant is required to provide a set
of impressions of the person’s fingerprints and that the Fire Chief requires a
criminal records check to be conducted and satisfactorily completed in
accordance with R.C. § 109.578.
      (7)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   APPOINTING AUTHORITY. Any person or body that has the authority
to hire, appoint or employ permanent, full-time paid firefighters and volunteer
firefighters under R.C. § 737.22.
         B.   CRIMINAL RECORDS CHECK. The same meaning as in R.C. § 109.578.
         C.   SUPERINTENDENT OF BCII. The same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.86.
(R.C. § 737.221)
§ 246.03 SCHOOLING OF OFFICERS AND FIREFIGHTERS.
   The Council may send any of the officers and firefighters of its Fire
Department to schools of instruction designed to promote the efficiency of
firefighters, and, if authorized in advance, may pay their necessary expenses
from the funds used for the maintenance and operation of the Fire Department.
(R.C. § 737.23)
§ 246.04 PURCHASE OF ENGINES AND EQUIPMENT.
   The Council may purchase the necessary fire engines and other equipment as
is necessary for the extinguishment of fires and the saving of lives, and may
establish lines of fire alarm telegraph within the limits of the municipality.
(R.C. § 737.24)
§ 246.05 BUILDINGS FOR DEPARTMENT.
   The Council may provide or erect necessary and suitable buildings containing
rooms for fire engines and other equipment, and provide for the meetings of the
fire and hose companies.
(R.C. § 737.25)
§ 246.06 INVESTIGATION OF FIRES.
   (a)   The Council may invest any officer of the Fire or Police Department
with the power, and impose on him or her the duty, to be present at all fires,
investigate the cause thereof, examine witnesses, compel the attendance of
witnesses and the production of books and papers, and to do and perform all
other acts necessary to the effective discharge of those duties.
   (b)   The officer may administer oaths, make arrests and enter for the
purpose of examination any building which, in his or her opinion, is in danger
from fire. The officer shall report his or her proceedings to the Council at
such times as are required.
(R.C. § 737.27)
§ 246.07 REGULATION OF CONSTRUCTION IN FIRE LIMITS.
   Council may regulate the erection of houses and business structures and
prohibit the erection of buildings within such limits as it deems proper,
unless the outer walls are constructed of noncombustible material, and, on the
petition of the owners of not less than two-thirds of the ground included in
any square or half-square, may prohibit the erection thereon of any building,
or addition to any building more than ten feet high, unless the outer walls are
made of iron, stone, brick and mortar, or of some of them, and may provide for
the removal of any building or additions erected in violation of the
prohibition.
(R.C. § 737.28)
§ 246.08 MAXIMUM CONSECUTIVE HOURS FOR FIREFIGHTERS ON DUTY.
   (a)   Whenever the municipality employs three or more full-time paid
firefighters, the Fire Chief shall divide the uniform force into not less than
two platoons, and where the uniform force is so divided into two platoons, the
Chief shall keep a platoon of the uniform force on duty 24 hours, after which
the platoon serving 24 consecutive hours shall be allowed to remain off duty
for at least 24 consecutive hours, except in cases of extraordinary emergency.
Each individual member of the platoons, in addition to receiving a minimum of
24 hours off duty in each period of 48 hours, shall receive an additional
period of 24 consecutive hours off duty in each period of eight days, so that
no individual member shall be on duty more than a total of 72 hours in any
period of eight days. The Chief shall arrange the schedule of working hours to
comply with this section. The Chief may, however, in cases of sickness, death
or on other necessary occasions, permit the exchange of working hours between
members of the Department. All employees of the Fire Department shall be given
not less than two weeks’ leave of absence annually, with full pay. This
section, insofar as it relates to off duty periods, does not apply to the
municipality if it adopts a 40-hour week, or if it has a three platoon system,
the members of which work 24 consecutive hours, immediately followed by 48
consecutive hours off duty, but the provisions relating to the two weeks’ leave
of absence do apply.
   (b)   FULL-TIME PAID FIREFIGHTERS, as used in this section, does not include
volunteer firefighters, or firefighters who work part-time.
(R.C. § 4115.02)
§ 246.09 INVESTIGATION OF CAUSE OF FIRE.
   (a)   The Fire Chief, or the Fire Prevention Officer, shall investigate the
cause, origin and circumstances of each major fire, as determined by the rules
of the State Fire Marshal, occurring in the municipality by which property has
been destroyed or damaged, and shall make an investigation to determine whether
the fire was the result of carelessness or design. The investigation shall be
commenced within two days, not including Sunday, if the fire occurred on that
day. The State Fire Marshal may superintend the investigation.
   (b)   An officer making an investigation of a fire occurring in the
municipality shall notify the State Fire Marshal, and within one week of the
occurrence of the fire shall furnish him or her a written statement of all
facts relating to its cause and origin, and other information as is required by
forms provided by the State Fire Marshal.
   (c)   In the performance of the duties imposed by this chapter, the Fire
Chief or Fire Prevention Officer, at any time of day or night, may enter upon
and examine any building or premises where a fire has occurred, and other
buildings and premises adjoining or near thereto.
(R.C. § 3737.24)
§ 246.10 RIGHT TO EXAMINE BUILDINGS, PREMISES AND VEHICLES.
   The Fire Chief, other members of the Department as may be designated by the
Chief, and the Fire Prevention Officer may at all reasonable hours enter into
all buildings and upon all premises and vehicles within their jurisdiction for
the purpose of examination.
(R.C. § 3737.14(A))
§ 246.11 FIREFIGHTING AND EMERGENCY SERVICES AGREEMENTS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE and EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE
ORGANIZATION. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4765.01.
      (2)   FIRE PROTECTION. The use of firefighting equipment by the Fire
Department of a firefighting agency or a private fire company, and includes the
provision of ambulance, emergency medical and rescue services by those
entities.
      (3)   FIREFIGHTING AGENCY. The municipality, other municipal corporation,
a township, township fire district, joint ambulance district, joint emergency
medical services district or joint fire district and the office of the State
Fire Marshal.
      (4)   MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
      (5)   PRIVATE FIRE COMPANY. A nonprofit group or organization owning and
operating firefighting equipment not controlled by a firefighting agency.
   (b)   Any firefighting agency, private fire company or emergency medical
service organization may contract with any governmental entity in this state or
another jurisdiction to provide fire protection or emergency medical services,
as appropriate, whether on a regular basis or only in times of emergency, upon
the approval of the governing boards or administrative heads of the entities
that are parties to the contract.
   (c)   The municipality may contract with any firefighting agency, private
fire company or emergency medical service organization of this state or another
jurisdiction to obtain fire protection or emergency medical services, as
appropriate, whether on a regular basis or only in times of emergency, upon the
approval of the governing boards or administrative heads of the entities that
are parties to the contract.
   (d)   (1)   Any firefighting agency other than the office of the State Fire
Marshal, private fire company or emergency medical service organization may
provide fire protection or emergency medical services, as appropriate, to any
governmental entity in this state or another jurisdiction, without a contract
to provide fire protection or emergency medical services, upon the approval of
the governing board of the agency, company or organization and upon
authorization by an officer or employee of the agency, company or organization
designated by that individual’s title, office or position pursuant to the
authorization of the governing board of the agency, company or organization.
      (2)   The office of the State Fire Marshal may provide fire protection or
emergency medical services, as appropriate, to any governmental entity,
firefighting agency, private fire company or emergency medical service
organization in this state or another jurisdiction, without a contract to
provide fire protection or emergency medical services, upon the authorization
of the State Fire Marshal.
   (e)   (1)   R.C. Chapter 2744, insofar as it is applicable to the operation
of fire departments or emergency medical service organizations, applies to a
political subdivision that is operating a fire department or emergency medical
service organization, and to the members of the Fire Department or emergency
medical service organization, when the members are rendering service pursuant
to this section outside the boundaries of the political subdivision.
      (2)   Members acting outside the boundaries of the political subdivision
that is operating the Fire Department or emergency medical service organization
may participate in any pension or indemnity fund established by the political
subdivision to the same extent as while acting within the boundaries of the
political subdivision, and are entitled to all the rights and benefits of R.C.
Chapter 4123, to the same extent as while performing service within the
boundaries of the political subdivision.
   (f)   A private fire company or private, nonprofit emergency medical service
organization providing service pursuant to this section to a governmental
entity in this state or another jurisdiction has the same immunities and
defenses in a civil action that a political subdivision has under R.C. §
2744.02. The employees of such a fire company or emergency medical service
organization have the same immunities and defenses in a civil action that
employees of a political subdivision have under R.C. § 2744.03.
   (g)   (1)   The office of the State Fire Marshal, when providing services
pursuant to this section, is liable for injury, death or loss to person or
property caused by the negligent operation of any motor vehicle by its
employees upon the public roads, highways or streets in the state when the
employees are engaged within the scope of their employment and authority,
without regard to the proximity of that operation to the office of the State
Fire Marshal. Notwithstanding R.C. § 2743.02(A)(1), the following are full
defenses to that liability:
         A.   An employee providing fire protection was operating a motor
vehicle while engaged in duty at a fire, proceeding toward a place where a fire
is in progress or is believed to be in progress, or answering any other
emergency and the operation of the vehicle did not constitute willful or wanton
misconduct; and/or
         B.   An employee providing emergency medical services was operating a
motor vehicle while responding to or completing a call for emergency medical
care or treatment, the employee was holding a valid driver’s license issued
under R.C. Chapter 4507, the operation of the vehicle did not constitute
willful or wanton misconduct, and the operation complies with the precautions
described in R.C. § 4511.03.
      (2)   An employee of the office of the State Fire Marshal, when providing
service pursuant to this section, is immune from liability for injury, death or
loss to person or property caused by the operation of any motor vehicle upon
the public roads, highways or streets in the state, without regard to the
proximity of that operation to the office of the State Fire Marshal, unless one
of the following applies.
         A.   The operation of the vehicle was manifestly outside the scope of
the employee’s employment of official responsibilities.
         B.   The operation of the vehicle constituted willful or wanton
misconduct.
(R.C. § 9.60)
§ 246.12 RATE SCHEDULE FOR VILLAGE FIRE EQUIPMENT.
   The following rate schedule shall be used as the basis for reimbursement of
said village costs to reduce or eliminate hazardous waste or hazardous spill or
spills:
(1)   SUPPORT STAFF AND PERSONNEL:     $37.50/hr
Fire and EMS personnel                    $50/hr
Incident commander                        $50/hr
Operations officer(s)                     $37.50/hr
Support staff personnel                   $37.50/hr
Volunteer firefighter
(2)   FIRE VEHICLE/APPARATUS           $150/hr
Engine                                    $200/hr
Ladder                                    $75/hr
Rescue/equipment truck                    $150/hr
Tanker (plus any applicable water charge)
(3)   SUPPORT SYSTEMS AND VEHICLES
Air/cascade systems (mobile and/or        $75/hr
stationary)                               $100/hr
Ambulance/medical vehicle                 $75/hr
EMA                                       $75/hr and tow vehicle cost
Emergency response/spill containment      $75/hr and tow vehicle cost
trailer                                   $75/hr
Entry/monitoring trailer                  $150/hr
Field command unit (primary ICS vehicle)  $25/hr
Foam unit/engine                          $75/hr
Generator (mobile units only)             $25/hr
Hazardous material unit
Light plant
(4)   DECONTAMINATION                  Actual cost and 10%/call*
Equipment
(5)   STAFF VEHICLES                   $25/hr
Chief                                     $25/hr
Other                                     $25/hr
Prevention
(6)   STATION EXPENSES                 $37.50/hr
Dispatch fees (mutual aid agencies or     for additional dispatchers as needed
departments)
(7)   OTHER                            15% of total reimbursement
Administration costs
*This will be charged as needed, but not to include replacement cost of
damaged, destroyed or disposal of any equipment.
NOTES:
1.   Damaged equipment: the cost of repair of the equipment to its condition
prior to the incident will be billed to the responsible party. Exception: when
the cost of repair exceeds 75% of the current value of the equipment, total
replacement cost will be billed to the responsible party. Destroyed or
expended equipment, clothing, supplies and the like. Current costs of
replacement will be billed to the responsible party.
2.   All fees for apparatus, vehicle and mobile equipment to include fuel
necessary to operate for duration of incident.
3.   All hourly rate fees will be charged at even hours. Any fraction or part
thereof will be charged at the next hours time (e.g., 1-1/4 hour will be
charged at 2 hours actual time).
4.   All fees on materials, apparatus and manpower are subject to change
without notice.
 
(Ord. 742, passed 12-27-2005)
CHAPTER 248: OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY
Section
   
248.01   Qualifications of officers; oaths
   
248.02   Bond required; filing and recording
   
248.03   Approval of bonds
   
248.04   Sufficiency of form of bond
   
248.05   Vacancies
   
248.06   Charges against municipal officers filed with Probate Judge;
proceedings
   
248.07   Appearance of counsel; jury
   
248.08   Challenge of jurors
   
248.09   Proceedings on the trial
   
248.10   Removal of officer if found guilty
   
248.11   Payment of costs
   
248.12   Municipal officers may attend conference or convention; expenses
   
248.13   Duties of Fire Engineer, Engineer, Superintendent of Markets;
compensation
   
248.14   Residency requirements prohibited; exceptions
   
248.15   Pay range and compensation for all hourly employees
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Charges and proceedings against delinquent officers, see §§
232.07 et seq.
   Compensation and bonds of Village officers and employees, see §
220.05
   Impersonating an officer or employee, see §§
654.14,
672.19
   Interfering with civil rights, see §
654.13
   Obstructing officers and employees, see §
654.06
   Public Employee’s Retirement System, see R.C. Ch. 145
   Soliciting improper compensation, see §
654.11
   Strikes by public employees, see R.C. Ch. 4117
   Supervision of conduct of officers by Mayor, see §
232.06
   Unlawful interest in contracts, see §
654.10
§ 248.01 QUALIFICATIONS OF OFFICERS; OATHS.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b) of this section or in
another section of the Ohio Revised Code, each officer of the municipality or
of any department or board of the municipality, whether elected or appointed as
a substitute for a regular officer, shall be an elector of the municipality
and, before entering upon official duties, shall take an oath to support the
Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the state and an oath
that the officer will faithfully, honestly and impartially discharge the duties
of the office to which elected or appointed. These provisions as to official
oaths shall extend to deputies, but they need not be electors.
   (b)   Neither this section nor any section of the Ohio Revised Code
requires, or shall be construed to require, that a Fire Chief be an elector of
the municipality.
(R.C. § 733.68)
§ 248.02 BOND REQUIRED; FILING AND RECORDING.
   Except as otherwise provided in the municipal charter or in R.C. § 3.061,
each officer required by law or ordinance to give bond shall do so before
entering upon the duties of the office. Except as otherwise provided in the
municipal charter or in R.C. § 3.061, the Council may at any time require each
officer to give a new or additional bond. Each bond, except that of the Auditor
or Clerk, upon its approval, shall be delivered to the Auditor or Clerk, who
shall immediately record it in a record provided for that purpose and file and
carefully preserve it in the Auditor’s or Clerk’s office. The bond of the
Auditor or Clerk shall be delivered to the Treasurer, who shall in like manner
record and preserve it.
(R.C. § 733.69)
§ 248.03 APPROVAL OF BONDS.
   The official bonds of all municipal officers shall be prepared by the
Solicitor or Director of Law. Except as otherwise provided in state law, the
bonds shall be in a sum as the Council prescribes by general or special
ordinance, and be subject to the approval of the Mayor, except that the Mayor’s
bond shall be approved by the Council, or, if it is not legally organized, by
the Clerk of the Court of Common Pleas of the county in which the municipality
or the larger part thereof is situated.
(R.C. § 733.70)
§ 248.04 SUFFICIENCY OF FORM OF BOND.
   In each bond mentioned in §
248.03, the condition that the person elected or appointed shall faithfully
perform the duties of the office shall be sufficient. The fact that the
instrument is without a seal, that blanks for the date or amount have been
filled subsequent to its execution but before its acceptance, without the
consent of the sureties, that all the obligees named in the instrument have not
signed it, that new duties have been imposed on the officers or that any merely
formal objection exists shall not be available in any suit on the instrument.
(R.C. § 733.71)
§ 248.05 VACANCIES.
   Unless otherwise provided by law, vacancies arising in appointive and
elective offices of the municipality shall be filled by appointment by the
Mayor for the remainder of the unexpired term, provided that:
   (a)   Vacancies in the office of the Mayor shall be filled in the manner
provided by R.C. § 733.25, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
   (b)   Vacancies in the membership of the Council shall be filled in the
manner provided by R.C. § 731.43, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance;
   (c)   Vacancies in the office of President Pro Tempore of the Council shall
be filled in the manner provided by R.C. § 731.11, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance;
   (d)   Vacancies in the office of Clerk or Treasurer may be filled in the
following manner: The Mayor may appoint a person to serve as acting officer to
perform the duties of the office until a permanent officer is appointed to fill
the vacancy.
(R.C. § 733.31(A))
§ 248.06 CHARGES AGAINST MUNICIPAL OFFICERS FILED WITH PROBATE JUDGE;
PROCEEDINGS.
   (a)   When a complaint under oath is filed with the Probate Judge of the
county in which the municipality or the larger part thereof is situated, by any
elector of the municipality, signed and approved by four other electors
thereof, the Judge shall forthwith issue a citation to any person charged in
the complaint for his or her appearance before the Judge within ten days from
the filing thereof, and shall also furnish the accused and the Solicitor or
Director of Law with a copy thereof. The complaint shall charge any of the
following:
      (1)   That a member of Council has received, directly or indirectly,
compensation for his or her services as a member thereof, as a committeeperson,
or otherwise, contrary to law;
      (2)   That a member of Council or an officer of the municipality is or
has been interested, directly or indirectly, in the profits of a contract, job,
work or service, or is or has been acting as a commissioner, architect,
superintendent or engineer in work undertaken or prosecuted by the
municipality, contrary to law; or
      (3)   That a member of Council or an officer of the municipality has been
guilty of misfeasance or malfeasance in office.
   (b)   Before acting upon the complaint, the Judge shall require the party
complaining to furnish sufficient security for costs.
(R.C. § 733.72)
§ 248.07 APPEARANCE OF COUNSEL; JURY.
   On the day fixed by the Probate Judge for the return of the citation issued
pursuant to §
248.06, the Solicitor or Director of Law shall appear on behalf of the
complainant to conduct the prosecution, and the accused may also appear by
counsel. A time shall be set for hearing the case, which shall be not more than
ten days after the return. If a jury is demanded by either party, the Probate
Judge shall direct the summoning of 12 jurors in the manner provided by R.C.
Chapter 2313. If the municipality does not have a Solicitor or Director of Law,
or if the Solicitor or Director of Law is accused of any misfeasance or
malfeasance in his or her office, the Prosecuting Attorney shall appear on
behalf of the complainant to conduct the prosecution.
(R.C. § 733.73)
§ 248.08 CHALLENGE OF JURORS.
   On the day fixed for trial under §
248.07, if a jury is impaneled, either party, in addition to the peremptory
challenges allowed by law in other cases, may object for good cause to any
juror summoned, and vacancies occurring for any cause may be filled by the
Probate Judge from the bystanders until the panel is full, unless the party
charged, or the party’s counsel, demands that additional jurors be summoned to
fill such vacancy.
(R.C. § 733.74)
§ 248.09 PROCEEDINGS ON THE TRIAL.
   On the day designated under §
248.07 for the trial, the trial shall take place, unless continued on affidavit
for good cause to another time not exceeding ten days. On the trial, the
Solicitor or Director of Law shall appear for the prosecution, examine
witnesses designated by the complainant and such others as he or she discovers,
and either party may have process from the Probate Judge to compel the
attendance of witnesses.
(R.C. § 733.75)
§ 248.10 REMOVAL OF OFFICER IF FOUND GUILTY.
   If, on the trial, the charges in the complaint mentioned in §
248.06 are sustained by the verdict of the jury, or by the decision of the
Probate Judge when there is no jury, the Judge shall enter the charges and
findings thereon upon the record of the court, make an order removing the
officer from office, and forthwith transmit a certified copy thereof to the
Presiding Officer of Council, whereupon the vacancy shall be filled as provided
by law.
(R.C. § 733.76)
§ 248.11 PAYMENT OF COSTS.
   The cost and expenses of the trial shall be charged against the party filing
the complaint under §
248.06, the accused, or the municipality, or apportioned among them, as the
Probate Judge directs, and shall be collected as in other cases. No costs or
expenses shall be charged to the accused if he or she is acquitted upon trial.
If an appeal on questions of law is instituted by the officer complained of, to
reverse or vacate the order of the Probate Court, the officer shall not
exercise the functions of his or her office until the order is finally reversed
or vacated.
(R.C. § 733.77)
§ 248.12 MUNICIPAL OFFICERS MAY ATTEND CONFERENCE OR CONVENTION; EXPENSES.
   (a)   Any elected or appointed officer, deputy, assistant or employee of the
municipality may attend, at the expense of the municipality, any conference or
convention relating to municipal affairs, if authorized by the Mayor, the
President of Council or the Village Administrator. If the fiscal officer of the
municipality certifies that funds are appropriated and available for that
purpose, the person shall be reimbursed for his or her expense so incurred.
   (b)   A request for this allowance shall be made in writing to the Mayor,
the President of Council or the Village Administrator, showing the necessity
for such attendance and an estimate of the costs thereof to the municipality.
(R.C. § 733.79)
§ 248.13 DUTIES OF FIRE ENGINEER, ENGINEER, SUPERINTENDENT OF MARKETS;
COMPENSATION.
   If the municipality has a Fire Engineer, Engineer or Superintendent of
Markets, each such officer shall perform the duties prescribed by R.C. Title
VII and such other duties, not incompatible with the nature of his or her
office, as Council by ordinance requires, and shall receive for his or her
services such compensation by fees or salary, or both, as is provided by
ordinance.
(R.C. § 733.80)
§ 248.14 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. The same meaning as in R.C. § 2743.01.
      (2)   VOLUNTEER. A person who is not paid for service or who is employed
on less than a permanent full-time basis.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c) of this section, no
political subdivision shall require any of its employees, as a condition of
employment, to reside in any specific area of the state.
   (c)   (1)   Division (b) of this section does not apply to a volunteer.
      (2)   To ensure adequate response times by certain employees of political
subdivisions to emergencies or disasters while ensuring that those employees
generally are free to reside throughout the state, the electors of any
political subdivision may file an initiative petition to submit a local law to
the electorate, or the legislative authority may adopt an ordinance or
resolution, that requires any individual employed by that political
subdivision, as a condition of employment, to reside either in the county where
the political subdivision is located or in any adjacent county in this state.
For purposes of this section, an initiative petition shall be filed and
considered as provided in R.C. §§ 731.28 and 731.31, except that the Fiscal
Officer of the political subdivision shall take the actions prescribed for the
Auditor or Clerk if the political subdivision has no Auditor or Clerk, and
except that references to a municipal corporation shall be considered to be
references to the applicable political subdivision.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c), employees of political
subdivisions of this state have the right to reside any place they desire.
(R.C. § 9.481)
§ 248.15 PAY RANGE AND COMPENSATION FOR ALL HOURLY EMPLOYEES.
   (a)   (1)   The hourly pay range and compensation plan is adopted in order
to establish wage rates for certain positions and to establish certain
administrative procedures incidental to perform to the performance of this
section:
 
Position                                Range
Fiscal Officer                          $10.50 to $20
Patrol officers                         $11 to $13
Police Chief                            $12 to $15
Sergeant                                $11.50 to $14
Streets, Parks, Building Superintendent $10 to $17
 
      (2)   The Village Fiscal Officer and Village Streets, Parks and Building
Superintendent will be paid weekly and all police officers will be paid monthly
from the General Fund and the Street Fund.
   (b)   Any future pay increases will be based upon satisfactory employee
performance review done by the Village Administrator.
   (c)   The village will pick up the employees portion of OPERS at the rate of
10%.
   (d)   Health insurance will be offered to all full-time employees at the
rate of negotiated between the village and the health insurance provider, and
the employee contribution will be $30 per pay period.
(Ord. O2020-015, passed 11-24-2020; Ord. 02022-006, passed 8-22-2022)
TITLE EIGHT – BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
      
Chap. 270.   Board of Trustees of Public Affairs
      
Chap. 272.   Records Commission
      
Chap. 274.   Planning Commission
      
Chap. 276.   Board of Zoning Appeals
      
Chap. 278.   Volunteer Firefighters’ Dependents Fund Board
      
Chap. 280.   Recreation Board
      
Chap. 282.   Board of Park Trustees
CHAPTER 270: BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS
Section
   
270.01   Appointment; election; organization
   
270.02   General powers and duties
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Abolishment and re-establishment of Board of Trustees of Public Affairs, see
§
234.02
   Care, supervision and management of public institutions by Council, see §
220.13
   Gas, water and electricity, see R.C. §§ 743.26 et seq.
   Management and control of sewerage system, see R.C. §§ 729.50 et seq.
   Merger of offices of Clerk and Clerk of Board of Trustees of Public Affairs,
see §
238.04
   Village Administrator, see
Ch. 234
   Water pollution, see R.C. § 743.25
   Water works, see R.C. §§ 743.01 et seq.
§ 270.01 APPOINTMENT; ELECTION; ORGANIZATION.
   (a)   If a water works, electric light plant, artificial or natural gas
plant or other similar public utility is situated in the municipality, or when
Council orders a water works, electric light plant, artificial or natural gas
plant or other similar public utility to be constructed, or to be leased or
purchased from any individual, company or corporation, or when Council
determines to establish a schedule of rates or charges of rents for use of the
sewerage system and sewage pumping, treatment and disposal works of the
municipality, Council shall establish a Board of Trustees of Public Affairs,
which shall consist of three members who are residents of the municipality.
   (b)   In the year 1967, one member of the Board shall be elected for a term
of two years. In the year 1967 and quadrennially thereafter, two members of the
Board shall be elected for a term of four years. In the year 1969 and
quadrennially thereafter, one member of the Board shall be elected for a term
of four years. Thereafter, all members shall have four-year terms, except that
members of Boards established after July 26, 1967 shall be elected as follows:
at the next regular election of municipal officials occurring more than 100
days after the appointment of the first members of the Board as provided in
this section, one member shall be elected for a term of two years and two
members shall be elected for terms of four years each. Thereafter, all such
members shall be elected for terms of four years.
   (c)   When Council establishes this Board, the Mayor shall appoint the
members thereof, subject to the confirmation of Council. The successors of the
appointed members shall be elected at the next regular election of municipal
officers held in the municipality which occurs more than 100 days after the
appointment.
   (d)   In case of a vacancy in the Board from death, resignation or
otherwise, it shall be filled for the unexpired term by appointment by the
Mayor, subject to confirmation by Council.
   (e)   The Board shall organize by electing one of its members President.
Unless the office of Clerk of the Board has been consolidated with the office
of Clerk of the municipality, as authorized by R.C. § 733.28, it may elect a
Clerk, who shall be known as the Clerk of the Board of Trustees of Public
Affairs.
(R.C. § 735.28)
§ 270.02 GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (a)   The Board of Trustees of Public Affairs appointed under §
270.01 shall manage, conduct and control the waterworks, electric light plants,
artificial or natural gas plants or other similar public utilities, furnish
supplies of water, electricity or gas, collect all water, electric and gas
rents or charges and appoint necessary officers, employees and agents.
   (b)   The Board may make such bylaws and rules as it determines to be
necessary for the safe, economical and efficient management and protection of
such works, plants and public utilities. These bylaws and rules, when not
repugnant to local ordinances or to the Constitution or laws of the state,
shall have the same validity as ordinances.
   (c)   For the purpose of paying the expenses of conducting and managing the
waterworks, plants and public utilities or of making necessary additions
thereto and extensions and repairs thereon, the Board may assess a water rent
or charge, or a light, power, gas or utility rent, of sufficient amount and in
such manner as it determines to be most equitable, upon all tenements and
premises supplied therewith. When the rents, except water rents and charges,
are not paid when due, the Board may certify them to the County Auditor to be
placed on the duplicate and collected as other municipal taxes, or it may
collect them by actions at law in the name of the municipality. When water
rents or charges are not paid when due, the Board may do either or both of the
following:
      (1)   Certify them, together with any penalties, to the County Auditor.
The County Auditor shall place the certified amount on the real property tax
list and duplicate against the property served by the connection if he or she
also receives from the Board additional certification that the unpaid rents or
charges have arisen pursuant to a service contract made directly with an owner
who occupies the property served. The amount placed on the tax list and
duplicate shall be a lien on the property served from the date placed on the
list and duplicate and shall be collected in the same manner as other taxes,
except that, notwithstanding R.C. § 323.15, the County Treasurer shall accept a
payment in such amount when separately tendered as payment for the full amount
of the unpaid water rents or charges and associated penalties. The lien shall
be released immediately upon payment in full of the certified amount. Any
amounts collected by the County Treasurer under this division shall be placed
for immediate distribution to the municipality, in the appropriate distinct
fund established for water rents and charges.
      (2)   Collect them by action at law in the name of the municipality from
an owner, tenant or other person who is liable to pay the rents or charges.
   (d)   The Board shall have the same powers and perform the same duties as
are provided in R.C. §§ 743.01, 743.05 to 743.07, 743.10, 743.11, 743.18,
743.24 and 735.05 to 735.09, which powers and duties relating to waterworks in
any of the sections shall extend to and include electric light, power and gas
plants, and such other duties as are prescribed by law or ordinance not
inconsistent herewith.
   (e)   If the Board assesses water rents or charges, it shall determine the
actual amount of rents due, based upon an actual reading of each customer’s
meter at least once in each three-month period, and at least quarterly the
Board shall render a bill for the actual amount shown by the meter reading to
be due, except that estimated bills may be rendered if access to a customer’s
meter was unobtainable for a timely reading. If the Board assesses water rents
or charges, it shall establish procedures providing fair and reasonable
opportunity for resolution of billing disputes.
   (f)   When property to which water service is provided is about to be sold,
any party to the sale or his or her agent may request the Board to read the
meter at that property and to render, within ten days following the date on
which the request is made, a final bill for all outstanding rents and charges
for water service. Such a request shall be made at least 14 days prior to the
transfer of the title of the property.
   (g)   At any time prior to a certification under division (c)(1) of this
section, the Board shall accept any partial payment of unpaid water rents or
charges, in the amount of $10 or more.
(R.C. § 735.29)
CHAPTER 272: RECORDS COMMISSION
Section
   
272.01   Establishment; membership; officers; employees; meetings; functions
   
272.02   Records retention schedule
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Availability of records, see R.C. §§ 149.42, 149.43
   Destruction of records, see R.C. §§ 149.11, 149.35, 149.351
   Keeping of public records for P.E.R.S., see R.C. § 145.18
   Photostat, microfilm or other recording, see R.C. § 9.01
   Records and archives defined, see R.C. § 149.40
   Recovery of stolen records, see R.C. § 149.352
   Tampering with records, see §
672.17
§ 272.01 ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP; OFFICERS; EMPLOYEES; MEETINGS; FUNCTIONS.
   (a)   There is hereby established in and for the municipality a Records
Commission, composed of the Chief Executive of the municipality, or the Chief
Executive’s appointed representative, as Chairperson, and the Chief Fiscal
Officer, the Chief Legal Officer and a citizen appointed by the Chief
Executive. The Commission shall appoint a Secretary, who may or may not be a
member of the Commission and who shall serve at the pleasure of the Commission.
The Commission may employ an archivist or records manager to serve under its
direction. The Commission shall meet at least once every six months and upon
the call of the Chairperson.
   (b)   The functions of the Commission shall be to provide rules for
retention and disposal of records of the municipality and to review
applications for one-time disposal of obsolete records and schedules of records
retention and disposition submitted by municipal offices. The Commission may
dispose of records pursuant to the procedure outlined R.C. § 149.381. The
Commission, at any time, may review any schedule it has previously approved
and, for good cause shown, may revise that schedule under the procedure
outlined in that section.
(R.C. § 149.39)
Statutory reference:
   Review of records by Ohio Historical Society, see R.C. § 149.381
§ 272.02 RECORDS RETENTION SCHEDULE.
   (a)   Administrative records. Records listed in this division (a) are
generally found in most municipal offices. This administrative records
retention schedule applies to every municipal department, board, commission or
other municipal related entities unless superseded by a specific schedule.
Record Series Title Retention Period
Record Series Title                                                            Retention Period
Accident reports/files
                                                                               6 years provided
   Bodily injury to non-employee                                            no action
                                                                               pending
                                                                               6 years provided
   Damage to municipal vehicle or property                                  no action
                                                                               pending
   Employee injury                                                          Place in
                                                                               personnel file
Activities reports (all types)                                                 2 years
Agendas                                                                        6 years
Annual department budget                                                       5 years
                                                                               Permanent (at 50
Annual department report                                                       years, appraise
                                                                               for historical
                                                                               value)
                                                                               Permanent (at 50
Annual municipal budget                                                        years, appraise
                                                                               for historical
                                                                               value)
                                                                               Permanent (at 50
Annual municipal report                                                        years, appraise
                                                                               for historical
                                                                               value)
Attendance reports/records                                                     6 years
                                                                               Until
                                                                               information is
                                                                               superseded,
Audiovisual, PR and training materials                                         obsolete or
                                                                               replaced, then
                                                                               appraise for
                                                                               historical value
                                                                               Turn in upon
Badges and IDs                                                                 termination for
                                                                               immediate
                                                                               destruction
Blank forms                                                                    Until obsolete
                                                                               or superseded
                                                                               Until updated,
                                                                               superseded or
Blueprints/vellums                                                             obsolete, then
                                                                               appraise for
                                                                               historical value
Budget preparation documents (working papers)                                  4 years
                                                                               Until no longer
Bulletins, posters and notices to employees                                    administratively
                                                                               necessary
Calibration records (all types)                                                5 years
Compliance records (all types)                                                 5 years
Continuing education certificates, and training attendance records class       Place in
seminar, contracts and agreements                                              personnel file
                                                                               15 years after
Contracts and agreements                                                       expiration or
                                                                               termination
Copies (all media)
                                                                               Use applicable
   Official copy                                                            records series
                                                                               retention period
                                                                               Until no longer
   Reading, informational, reference copy                                   administratively
                                                                               necessary
Correspondence
   Executive                                                                5 years
   General letters                                                          2 years
   Legislative branch                                                       3 years
   Routing form letters                                                     1 year
Delivery slips and packing slips                                               2 years
Disaster plans                                                                 Until updated or
                                                                               superseded
                                                                               30 days
                                                                               (provided no
Dispatcher radio/phone calls audio recordings                                  action pending),
                                                                               then erase and
                                                                               reuse
                                                                               Until no longer
Drafts (all media)                                                             administratively
                                                                               necessary
                                                                               Until updated,
                                                                               superseded or
Drawings, tracings, mylars                                                     obsolete, then
                                                                               appraise for
                                                                               historical value
Equipment inventories                                                          3 years
Equipment maintenance records                                                  Life of the
                                                                               equipment
Equipment records – personal use items (clothing, radios, tools, weapons and Until equipment
the like)                                                                      returned by
                                                                               employee
                                                                               Until
                                                                               superseded,
Executive orders                                                               obsolete or
                                                                               replaced, then
                                                                               appraise for
                                                                               historical value
Expense records                                                                3 years,
                                                                               provided audited
Facsimile (fax)
   Logs                                                                     1 year
                                                                               See
   Messages                                                                 correspondence
                                                                               retention
                                                                               periods
Flow charts – operations                                                     2 years
Fuel usage records                                                             3 years
                                                                               Until
                                                                               superseded,
General orders, directives, policies, rules, regulations or procedures         obsolete or
                                                                               replaced, retain
                                                                               1 copy until
                                                                               audited
                                                                               5 years;
                                                                               provided audited
                                                                               and disputes
Grant files/records (federal, state, local)                                    resolved
                                                                               hearings (not
                                                                               employee
                                                                               related)
   Audio and video recordings                                               2 years
   Report of proceedings                                                    Permanent
   Transcripts                                                              5 years
Job descriptions                                                               Until superseded
                                                                               or obsolete
Leases
   Equipment                                                                2 years after
                                                                               expiration
   Real estate                                                              5 years after
                                                                               expiration
Licenses, permits, certificates                                                1 year after
                                                                               expiration
Mail
   Unsolicited mail (anonymous, slanderous, groundless complaints, sales    Until no longer
material, informational brochures and the like)                                administratively
                                                                               necessary
                                                                               Until updated,
Mailing lists                                                                  superseded or
                                                                               obsolete
Management/operations reports
   Annual                                                                   5 years
   Consultant produced                                                      5 years
                                                                               Until
   Monthly, quarterly, semi-annual                                          incorporated
                                                                               into an annual
                                                                               report
                                                                               Until
                                                                               superseded,
Manuals and handbooks                                                          obsolete or
                                                                               replaced, retain
                                                                               1 copy until
                                                                               audited
                                                                               Until updated,
                                                                               superseded or
Maps and plats                                                                 obsolete, then
                                                                               appraise for
                                                                               historical value
Material safety sheets                                                         Until superseded
Mayor’s journal                                                              Permanent
Meeting notices (R.C. § 121.22)                                               2 years,
                                                                               provided audited
                                                                               See
Memoranda                                                                      correspondence
                                                                               retention
                                                                               periods
Minutes of meetings (Council, committee and the like)
   Approved hard copy                                                       Permanent
                                                                               1 year provided
                                                                               information
   Audio and video recordings                                               concerning the
                                                                               meeting is
                                                                               substantially
                                                                               transcribed
                                                                               Until hard copy
   Drafts and notes                                                         of minutes is
                                                                               approved
                                                                               Until no longer
   Floppy disk, compact disk or computer hard drive copy                    administratively
                                                                               necessary
   Unapproved copy                                                          Until approved
                                                                               Until superseded
Municipal publications                                                         or obsolete,
                                                                               retain 1 copy
Oaths of office                                                                10 years after
                                                                               leaving office
                                                                               Until
                                                                               information is
Photo file (including prints, slides, negatives, transparencies and related    no longer
photographic items)                                                            current, then
                                                                               appraise for
                                                                               historical value
Press/news releases                                                            3 years
Printing orders                                                                3 years,
                                                                               provided audited
                                                                               Life of project
                                                                               or obsolete,
Project plans/drawings/as built                                                then appraise
                                                                               for historical
                                                                               value
Project final report                                                           Permanent
Property dedications (street, parks, land and the like)                        Permanent
Property disposal records                                                      25 years
Property inventories                                                           Until superseded
                                                                               Until no longer
Purchase orders (copies)                                                       administratively
                                                                               necessary
Receipts/receipt books                                                         2 years,
                                                                               provided audited
Receiving documents                                                            3 years
Records requests                                                               2 years
Records retention documents                                                    25 years
Records retention schedule                                                     Until superseded
                                                                               Until
Reference/library materials                                                    superseded,
                                                                               obsolete or
                                                                               replaced
Reports to Council                                                             5 years
Requests for proposals                                                         2 years
Requisitions                                                                   3 years,
                                                                               provided audited
                                                                               5 years or until
Research files                                                                 no longer
                                                                               administratively
                                                                               necessary
                                                                               1 year after
Rosters/directories                                                            superseded or
                                                                               obsolete
Scrapbooks/yearbooks                                                           Appraise for
                                                                               historical value
Speeches/presentations                                                         3 years
Statistical reports
                                                                               Until
   Monthly, quarterly, semi-annual                                          incorporated
                                                                               into an annual
                                                                               report
   Annual                                                                   5 years
   Consultant produced                                                      5 years
                                                                               30 days, then
Surveillance tapes/videos                                                      reuse provided
                                                                               no action
                                                                               pending
Surveying (field notes)                                                        Permanent
Table of organization/organizational charts                                    Until superseded
                                                                               or obsolete
Telephone
   Bills, charges, call detail records                                      2 years,
                                                                               provided audited
                                                                               Until no longer
   Messages                                                                 administratively
                                                                               necessary
   Service records and documentation                                        Life of system
                                                                               Continually
   System equipment inventory                                               updated, retain
                                                                               superseded data
                                                                               1 year
Training material/lesson plans                                                 Until superseded
Uniform records                                                                3 years,
                                                                               provided audited
Vehicle maintenance records                                                    Until vehicle is
                                                                               sold
Vehicle mileage records                                                        Until vehicle is
                                                                               sold
Village Administrator’s journal                                              Permanent
Visitor’s log or sign-in sheets                                              1 year
Voice mail
                                                                               Until no longer
   Messages                                                                 administratively
                                                                               necessary
   System documentation                                                     Life of system
Warranties                                                                     2 years after
                                                                               expiration
Work orders                                                                    2 years
Work schedules                                                                 1 year after
                                                                               schedule change
 
   (B)   Building, planning and zoning records.
Record Series Title Retention Period
Record Series Title                     Retention Period
Annexation case files                   Permanent
Annexation record                       Permanent
Appeals on interpretation of code       Permanent
Area commission files                   25 years
Board of Zoning Adjustments case files  10 years
Board of Zoning Adjustments journal     Permanent
Building applications                   Until occupancy permit issued
Building cards                          Permanent
                                        Review at 5 years, retain until no
Building folders                        longer administratively necessary, then
                                        appraise for historical value
Building inspection reports             5 years
Building permit record                  Permanent
Building plans
   Commercial                        5 years
   Municipal owned                   Life of structure, then appraise for
                                        historical value
   Residential                       3 years
Building sign inspection files          Permanent
Case files (Board of Building Standards 10 years
and Appeals)
Case files (Board of Zoning Appeals)    10 years
Certificates of insurance               2 years after expiration, provided no
                                        claims pending
City Building Code                      Until superseded, retain 1 copy
                                        permanently
Community development reports           Until no longer of administrative value
Complaints                              2 years, provided no action pending
Condemnation and demolition records     Permanent
Contractor’s registration             2 years
Demolition permits                      Permanent
House number record                     Permanent
                                        Until no longer of administrative
Housing, land use, population and other value, then special studies appraise
                                        for historical value
Index to Board of Zoning Adjustments    25 years
case files
Index to variance records               25 years
Index to zoning case records            25 years
Industrial use permit reviews           Permanent
Legislative research files/drafts       Until no longer of administrative value
Loan and grant applications (copies)    3 years, provided audited
Occupancy permit records                Permanent
Performance bonds (contractors)         10 years after expiration
Permits (all types)                     3 years, provided audited
Planning briefs                         25 years
Planning Commission case files          10 years, provided no action pending
                                        5 years after completion of final
Project planning files                  project report, then appraise for
                                        historical value
Project reports                         25 years, then appraise for historical
                                        value
Quadrant files                          5 years
Rezoning applications                   Until final action taken and recorded
Rezoning case files                     5 years after final decision rendered
Street name change record               Permanent
Street and alley vacation cases files   Permanent
Subdivision files                       Permanent
Transportation research files           10 years, then appraise for historical
                                        value
Urban renewal files                     Until obsolete, then appraise for
                                        historical value
Violations                              Until corrected or adjudicated by a
                                        court, whichever is later
Zoning case log                         25 years
Zoning certificate for occupancy and    Permanent
use of land and buildings
Zoning change request                   5 years, provided no action pending
Zoning permit applications              1 year after final decision rendered
Zoning permit record                    Permanent
Zoning variance case files              5 years after final decision, provided
                                        no action pending
*   Plus any records that may apply from the administrative records section and
other sections in this records retention schedule
 
   (c)   Cemetery records. All cemetery records are maintained by the
Montgomery Township Cemetery Board. Please see Cemetery Board Clerk for records
retention schedule.
   (d)   Council records.
Records Series Title Retention Period
Records Series Title              Retention Period
Attendance record                 Term of office, provided audited
Council members’ files          Term of office, then appraise for historical
                                  value
Hearings (employee related)
   Report of proceedings       2 years after appeals exhausted
   Transcripts                 5 years after appeals exhausted
Index to Council minutes          Permanent
Index to ordinances/resolutions   Permanent
Legislative research files/drafts Until no longer needed
Liquor license requests
   Approved                    3 years
   Denied                      1 year
Minutes                           Permanent
Ordinances                        Permanent
Petitions                         5 years
Proclamations                     2 years
Reports to Council                5 years
Resolutions                       Permanent
Subject and administrative files  5 years
*   Plus any records that apply from the administrative records section
 
   (e)   Engineering records.
Records Series Title Retention Period
Records Series Title                      Retention Period
Aerial photographs                        Until superseded, then appraise for
                                          historical value
Bridge plans                              Life of bridge
Bridge inspection reports                 10 years
Change orders                             Place in project file
Contractor’s prevailing wage records    5 years
Day books                                 3 years
Federal project files                     5 years after completion of project,
                                          provided audited
House number records                      Permanent
Job orders                                3 years
Maintenance orders                        2 years
Project files (contracts, specifications,
change orders, progress reports and the   15 years after completion of project
like)
Project inspection records                Include in project files
Sanitary sewer records                    Permanent
Sewer testing records                     5 years, provided no action pending
Special assessments record                3 years after final payment, provided
                                          audited
Village properties file                   Permanent
Village zoning maps                       Permanent
*   Plus any records that apply from the administrative records section
 
   (f)   Financial records. This financial records retention schedule applies
to every municipal department, board, commission or other municipal related
entities that tangibly collect money, unless superseded by a specific schedule.
Record Series Title Retention Period
Record Series Title                     Retention Period
Acceptance of utility rate ordinance    Permanent
notices
Accounts ledger                         5 years after last entry, provided
                                        audited
Accounts payable record                 3 years, provided audited
Accounts receivable ledger, general     3 years, provided audited
Annual appropriation ordinances         5 years
(copies)
Annual certificate of estimated         7 years
resources
Annual financial report                 Permanent
Annual report to the auditor of state   5 years
Appropriation ledger                    5 years, provided audited
Assessment record                       Until paid and audited
Audit reports
   Auditor of State                  Permanent
   Federal                           Permanent
   Internal                          Permanent
Bad check or bad debt records           2 years after payment or settlement
Balance sheets                          3 years, provided audited
Bank deposit records (receipts,
reconciliation, slips, statement and    3 years, provided audited
the like)
Bid bonds
   Successful bidder                 Retain until acceptance of performance
                                        bond
   Unsuccessful bidder               Return after project awarded
Bids
   Successful                        15 years after completion of project
   Unsuccessful                      2 years after letting of contract
Block grant documentation               5 years
Bond register                           Permanent
Cancelled checks/warrants               3 years, provided audited
Capital improvement bonds               Until paid off and audited, then
                                        appraise for historical value
Cash books/cash reports                 3 years, provided audited
Cash receipts and disbursements         3 years, provided audited
Cash register tapes/records             2 years, provided internal control
                                        established
Certificate of result of election (bond Until expiration of bond issue
issues)
Chargeback reports/records              3 years
Check registers/stubs/carbons           3 years, provided audited
Checking account statement              3 years, provided audited
Checks/warrants (voided)                Until audited
Client payment files                    3 years
Computer generated financial reports
   Annual                            5 years
   Monthly, quarterly, semi-annual   Until updated version or annual report
Computer records                        Create separate schedule
Cost control records                    3 years
Damage claims                           Until settled and all appeals exhausted
Deposit refund requests                 Until deposit refunded and account
                                        audited
Encumbrance and expenditure journal     7 years, provided audited
Encumbrance documents                   3 years
Federal revenue sharing account         7 years, provided audited
Fixed assets record                     10 years
General ledger                          25 years
Indebtedness statement                  Permanent
Insurance policies                      2 years after expiration, provided all
                                        claims settled
Intergovernmental tax receipts          3 years, provided audited
Investment records                      3 years, provided audited
Invitation to bid (ITB)                 2 years, provided audited
Invoices and supporting documents       3 years, provided audited
Licenses term of license plus           1 year
Monthly statement of balances           3 years, provided audited
Mortgages                               Until paid and cancelled, provided
                                        audited
Oil and gas drilling permits            Permanent
Pay-in records                          3 years, provided audited
Performance bonds                       After project successfully completed
                                        and accepted
Permits (all types)                     3 years, provided audited
Personal or professional services
   Invoice or statement of service   3 years, provided audited
Petty cash records                      3 years, provided audited
Phone quotes/confirmations              2 years
Posting sheets and cards for paid bills 3 years, provided audited
Prevailing wage records                 3 years, provided audited
Property inventories                    3 years
Purchase orders
   Copies                            Until no longer administratively
                                        necessary
   Originals                         3 years, provided audited
Receipt and expenditure report to State 3 years
Auditor
Receiving documents                     3 years
Reconciliation sheets, bank accounts    3 years, provided audited
Record of funds received                3 years, provided audited
Refund check ledger                     5 years, provided audited
Remittance advice                       3 years
Report of cash received                 3 years, provided audited
Request for proposals                   2 years
Retirement system exemption record      Permanent
(waiver)
Retirement system payments/records      Permanent
Sales tax records                       4 years
Settlement sheet/tax distribution from  10 years
County Auditor
Special assessments                     Until paid off and audited
Surety bonds (special)                  10 years after expiration
Surety bonds of officials or employees  10 years after termination of officer
                                        or employee
Tax abatement records duration of the   1 year
abatement plus
Tax settlement reports                  3 years, provided audited
Trial balance records                   3 years
Transmittal of Ohio wage and tax        6 years, provided audited
statement
Travel expense records                  3 years, provided audited
Treasury investment board report        10 years
Unemployment compensation records       3 years, provided audited
Uniform allowance records               3 years, provided audited
Vouchers
   Copies                            Until no longer administratively
                                        necessary
   Originals                         3 years, provided audited
*   Plus any records that may apply from the administrative records section and
other sections in this records retention schedule
 
   (g)   Fire Department records.
Record Series Title Retention Period
Record Series Title                        Retention Period
Above and underground storage tank records Permanent
Alarm response report                      5 years
Annexation files                           Permanent
Arson reports                              Permanent
Burning complaint file                     7 years
Daily alarm log                            7 years
Disaster plan                              Permanent
Dispatch sheets/logs                       7 years
Emergency medical services records         7 years
EPA burning violation records              7 years
Fire and loss record                       Permanent
Fire Code                                  Permanent
Fire incident reports                      7 years
Fire investigation files and index         Permanent
Fireworks applications and permits         20 years
Gas and oil disbursement record            Permanent
Hydrant location record                    Permanent
Inspection reports/cards (all types)       Permanent
Insurance claim file                       Permanent
Master run reports                         7 years
Mutual aid agreements                      Permanent
Personnel records                          Permanent
Radio/phone calls audio recordings         5 years
Standpipe test                             Permanent
Station house daily logs                   7 years
Violation notices                          20 years
Water surveys                              Permanent
 
   (h)   Legal records.
Record Series Title Retention Period
Record Series Title                 Retention Period
Case files (civil)                  10 years, provided no action pending
Case files (criminal)               20 years, provided no action pending
Claims for damages                  2 years after case settled and all appeals
                                    exhausted
Court transcripts                   3 years after case settled
Deeds                               Permanent
Easements                           Permanent
Legal notices
   Proof of publication          5 years
   Tear sheets                   2 years
Legal opinions from municipal legal Permanent
counsel
Liability waivers                   3 years, provided no action pending
Research files                      5 years
Settlements                         3 years
Village property files              Permanent
Worker’s compensation claims      10 years after date of final payment
*   Plus any records that may apply from the administrative records section
and other sections in this records retention schedule
 
   (i)   Municipal income tax records.
Record Series Title Retention Period
Record Series Title                               Retention Period
Accounts receivable                               7 years
Annual summary of cash collected                  3 years, provided audited
Business income tax reconciliation form           7 years
Closed accounts                                   7 years
Control sheet                                     7 years
Corporate partnership fiduciary income tax return 7 years
Daily posting recapitulation                      3 years, provided audited
Declaration of estimated income tax
   Business                                    7 years
   Individual                                  7 years
Delinquent account records                        Until paid and audited
Detailed cash receipt record                      6 years
Final return for the year                         7 years
Individual’s tax return                         7 years
Quarterly notice of installment due               7 years
Quarterly payment statement                       7 years
Refund voucher                                    7 years
Uncollectible income tax accounts                 7 years
*   Plus any records that may apply from the administrative records section,
financial records section and other sections in this records retention schedule
 
   (j)   Parks and recreation records.
 
Record Series Title                    Retention Period
Contracts and agreements               15 years after expiration or termination
Fee books (shelter house and the like) 3 years, provided audited
Permits (all types)                    3 years, provided audited
Plans of park property                 Permanent
Schedules (baseball, softball,         Until no longer administratively
volleyball, events, shelter house use  necessary
and the like)
*   Plus any records that may apply from the administrative records section and
other sections in this records retention schedule
 
   (k)   Payroll records.
Record Series Title Retention Period
Record Series Title                                         Retention Period
Application for OPERS refund of waiver                      Permanent
                                                            Until employee
Court orders for payroll deduction                          terminated or order
                                                            rescinded
                                                            Continually
                                                            compiled and
Employee earning record                                     updated until
                                                            termination; info
                                                            placed in personnel
                                                            file yearly
Employee income tax withholding
                                                            3 years after
   Withholding certificate                               termination of
                                                            employment,
                                                            provided audited
    Withholding payment record                          6 years, provided
                                                            audited
                                                            Continually updated
                                                            until termination,
                                                            then place into
Employee pay records                                        personnel file or
                                                            enter date onto
                                                            employee history
                                                            card
Employee withholding requests                               Unit replaced or
                                                            revoked by employee
Employer quarterly federal tax return                       4 years, provided
                                                            audited
                                                            Until employee
Garnishment orders                                          termination or
                                                            order rescinded
Leave balances/reports
   Annual employee leave use/balance report              5 years
                                                            25 years,
                                                            continually updated
                                                            in personnel file,
   Annual leave use and balances by mini unit individual purge 2 years after
employee                                                    termination,
                                                            provided no
                                                            outstanding
                                                            balances
                                                            Until incorporated
   Bi-weekly report of leave use and balances            into annual leave
                                                            balances
                                                            Until superseded;
Notification of pay/pay increase                            copy in personnel
                                                            file
Overtime authorization                                      2 years, provided
                                                            audited
Overtime reports                                            2 years, provided
                                                            audited
Payroll journal/record
   Annual cumulative printout                            50 years
    Cumulative employee payroll data                    Place in personnel
                                                            file
    Weekly/monthly payroll journal                      3 years, provided
                                                            audited
Reports to retirement systems                               50 years
State income tax reports                                    25 years
Tax withholding reports                                     7 years, provided
                                                            audited
W-2 forms                                                   7 years, provided
                                                            audited
W-4 forms                                                   Until superseded or
                                                            employee terminated
*   Plus any records that may apply from the administrative records section and
other sections in this records retention schedule
 
   (l)   Personnel records.
Record Series Title Retention Period
Record Series Title                             Retention Period
Applications for employment or appointment
    Copies                                  Until no longer
                                                administratively necessary
    Person hired/appointed                  Place in personnel file
    Person not hired/appointed              2 years
Commendations/promotions                        Place in personnel file
Employee exposure to hazardous chemicals
   Biological hazards or infectious diseases Place in personnel file
report
Employee history record card                    Permanent (in lieu of personnel
                                                file)
Employee performance evaluation                 5 years
                                                Continually updated by fiscal
                                                office until employee
Employee sick leave and vacation balances       terminated; balances verified
                                                yearly and recorded in
                                                personnel file
Employee time cards/sheets                      3 years
Employee training records                       Place in personnel file
Grievance hearing records                       1 year after resolved
Insurance enrollment record                     1 year after employee leaves
                                                municipal employment
Job/position descriptions                       1 year after superseded
Labor union agreements                          15 years after termination
Leave requests (all types) sick, vacation,      3 years, provided balances
overtime and the like                           journalized
Letter of appointment                           Place in personnel file
Letter of reference                             2 years after hire
Letter of resignation                           Place in personnel file
Personnel actions                               Place in personnel file
                                                2 years after employee leaves
                                                municipal service; retain
                                                permanent record of service
                                                time, salary history, leave
                                                balances, taxes paid
Personnel file/records purge                    resignation letter, retirement
                                                information and waivers; in
                                                lieu of the documents, use a
                                                duly certified employment
                                                history card; retain OSHA
                                                related documents 20 years
Promotion action                                Place in personnel file
Record of disciplinary action                   4 years
Reports to Bureau of Employment Services        2 years
Reprimands/demotions                            Place in personnel file
Unemployment compensation case files            4 years after date of final
                                                payment
Worker’s compensation case files              10 years after date of final
                                                payment
*   Plus any records that may apply from the administrative records section and
other sections in this records retention schedule
 
   (m)   Police Department records.
Record Series Title Retention Period
Record Series Title                    Retention Period
Alarm response reports                 5 years
Arrest records (adult)                 Permanent
Arrest records (juvenile)              Permanent
Arrest records (traffic)               Permanent
Assignment schedules                   3 years
Background investigation files         Permanent digital record
Bicycle registration files             Permanent digital record
Blood-born pathogen manual             Until superseded or obsolete
BOLO files                             Permanent digital record
Booking records                        Permanent/see arrest records
Calibration records                    5 years
Calls for service                      Permanent digital record
Civil document files                   Returned to court upon disposition
Criminal case files
   Felony                           50 years
   Misdemeanor                      5 years
Daily shift activity sheets            Discard after 1 year
Drug enforcement fund                  Permanent digital record
Evidence inventories                   Permanent digital record
FBI/BCI investigative reports          Not public record/destroyed when no
                                       longer required
Field interrogation reports            Permanent digital record
Fingerprints                           Permanent record
Firearm records and inventories        Until removed from service and sold
Firearms training files                Maintained with personnel files
Fireworks applications/permits         2 years after exhibition
Furtherance of justice fund            Permanent - maintained by Chief
General activity statistical data      Permanent digital record
Homicide reports/evidence              Permanent record
Internal affairs                       Permanent digital record
Internal security files                Confidential; destroy if changed
Investigations homicide and evidence   Permanent
Investigations rape and evidence       Permanent
Job descriptions                       Until superseded or obsolete
Juvenile records                       Permanent
Leads agreement files                  Permanent; confidential
Leads printouts                        Immediate destruction if not needed, not
                                       public record
Leads record logs                      Permanent
Licenses - FCC                         Permanent paper record
Liquor permit records                  3 years
Master name index                      Permanent
Missing person reports                 Permanent digital record
Offense/incident reports - felony      Permanent digital record
Offense/incident reports - misdemeanor Permanent digital record
Parking citations                      3 years
Prisoner booking records               Permanent digital record
Property room logs                     Permanent
Radio/phone call audio recordings      60 days if no case pending, then destroy
Recovery property files                Permanent digital record
Search and seizure log                 10 years after close of case
Security details and contracts         Permanent digital record
Sex offender registrants               Permanent digital record
State of Ohio traffic crash reports    20 years
Stolen property records                Permanent digital record
Subpoenas, summonses, trial notices    File with criminal case file upon
                                       discharge
Traffic citation files                 Permanent digital record
Traffic study files                    Until superseded or obsolete
Towed vehicle files                    Permanent digital record
Uniform domestic violence reports      Permanent digital record
Uniform quarterly hate crime report    Permanent digital record
Vehicle maintenance records            Until vehicle is sold
Vehicle mileage records                Until vehicle is sold
*   Plus any records that may apply from the administrative records section and
other sections in this records retention schedule
 
   (n)   Sewer/water/electric plant operation records.
Record Series Title Retention Period
Record Series Title                            Retention Period
Analytical data (chemical analyses, monitoring
records, EPA reports, water quality reports,   10 years
operating logs, monthly reports; all types)
Flow charts (fluids)                           5 years
Instrumentation data
   Calibration records                      5 years
   Continuous monitoring original recordings5 years
    Maintenance records                    5 years
Laboratory testing
   Internal sampling data (not reported)    5 years
    Monthly testing summary reports        25 years
    Records                                5 years
Meter reports (complaints, testing, etc)       5 years
Plant operation and maintenance records        5 years
Rainfall statistics                            5 years
Septic tank hauler record                      5 years
Well maintenance and field logs                10 years after will is capped
Please note: These periods will be extended during the course of any
unresolved litigation, or when requested by the Regional Administrator of
the Ohio EPA
 
*   Plus any records that may apply from the administrative records section
and other sections in this records retention schedule
 
   (o)   Street Department records.
Record Series Title Retention Period
Record Series Title               Retention Period
Blueprints, maps, and plans       Life of infrastructure; then appraise for
                                  historical value
Haul tickets                      2 years, provided audited
Pesticide application records     5 years
Proposals for street improvements Until approved or proposal rejected
Sewer repair sheets               10 years
Street lighting
   Assessment records          Until paid off
   Petitions                   3 years
   Pole locations              Until updated
Street opening permits            3 years
Street repair cost summary record 3 years, provided audited
Street repair record              3 years
Traffic study files               Until superseded, then appraise for
                                  historical value
*   Plus any records that may apply from the administrative records section
and other sections in this records retention schedule
 
   (p)   Utility billing and administrative records.
Record Series Title Retention Period
Record Series Title                     Retention Period
Application for service                 Until service terminated
Application for water or sewer tap      1 year after final decision is rendered
permits
Billing adjustments books               3 years, provided audited
Billing ledger cards                    3 years after date of final entry,
                                        provided audited
Cost control data                       Until no longer administratively needed
Curb box location record                Permanent
Customer meter reader cards             2 years
Daily over and short reports            3 years, provided audited
Daily work orders                       3 years
House service cards                     Permanent
Industrial waste records                Permanent
Lift station location records           Permanent
Meter and valve location records        Permanent
Meter reading records                   4 years
Meter test records
   Repair/replace records            3 years
Monthly account register                10 years
Monthly collection report               3 years, provided audited
Project files                           Until project completed and final
                                        report issued
Project final reports                   Permanent
Property records (deeds, right-of-ways,
annexations, vacations, easements and   Permanent
the like)
Refuse information (pick-up schedules,  Through life of contract
customer information, complaints)
Security deposit records                Until refunded to depositor
Security deposit refund requests        3 years, provided audited
Sewer rent record                       3 years, provided audited
Shut off lists                          4 years
Special sewer authorizations or hookups Permanent
Suspended account record                Until account settled, provided audited
Test boring record                      Permanent
Utility billing receipt book            3 years, provided audited
Utility billing stubs                   3 years, provided audited
Utility rate ordinances                 Until superseded, provided audited
Water and sewer line location records   Permanent
Water and sewer tap record              Permanent
Water main location record              Permanent
Water usage reports                     3 years
*   Plus any records that may apply from the administrative records section and
other sections in this records retention schedule
 
(Ord. O2021-013, passed 11-23-2021)
CHAPTER 274: PLANNING COMMISSION
Section
   
274.01   Establishment; membership; compensation; general powers
   
274.02   Specific powers and duties
   
274.03   Commission shall be Platting Commission
   
274.04   Control of buildings
   
274.05   Employment of architects and engineers
   
274.06   Division of village into zones
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Advice from regional planning commission, see R.C. § 711.10
   Approval of subdivisions and plats, see R.C. § 711.09
   Care, supervision and management of public institutions by Council, see §
220.13
   Enactment and amendment of subdivision regulations, see R.C. § 711.101
   Lost or destroyed records, see R.C. §§ 711.34 et seq.
   Original plats, see R.C. §§ 711.01 et seq.
   Revision of plats, see R.C. §§ 711.28 et seq.
   Vacating plats, see R.C. §§ 711.17 et seq.
§ 274.01 ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP; COMPENSATION; GENERAL POWERS.
   (a)   Council may establish a commission of five members, consisting of the
Mayor, one member of Council to be elected by the Council for the remainder of
the individual’s term as such member of the Council, and two citizens of the
municipality, and one public member to be appointed by the Mayor for terms of
six years each, except that the term of one of the members of the first
Planning Commission shall be for four years and one for two years. All members
shall serve without compensation.
   (b)   The public member appointed under this section need not be a residents
of the municipality but shall be residents of the county in which the
municipality is located or a township that is adjacent to the county. For
purposes of this section, all members of the Planning Commission are subject to
R.C. § 2921.42.
   (c)   Whenever the Planning Commission is appointed under this section, it
shall have all the powers conferred in R.C. § 735.15.
   (d)   If and when the municipality adopts a Charter, and except as otherwise
may be provided in that Charter, a Planning Commission created in the manner
and by virtue of authority granted by the Charter shall have the powers of, and
the plans made by it shall have the effect of, a planning commission or city
plan created under R.C. §§ 713.01 through 713.15.
   (e)   Any member of a Planning Commission established under this section or
by Charter, except as otherwise provided in the Charter, may hold any other
public office and may serve as a member of a county planning commission and/or
a regional planning commission.
(R.C. § 713.01)
§ 274.02 SPECIFIC POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (a)   The Planning Commission established under §
274.01 shall make plans and maps of the whole or any portion of the
municipality, and of any land outside thereof, which, in the opinion of the
Commission, is related to the planning of the municipality, and make changes in
the plans or maps when it deems it advisable. The maps or plans shall show the
Commission’s recommendations for the general location, character and extent of
streets, alleys, ways, viaducts, bridges, waterways, waterfronts, subways,
boulevards, parkways, parks, playgrounds, aviation fields and other public
grounds, ways and open spaces; the general location of public buildings and
other public property; the general location and extent of public utilities and
terminals, whether publicly or privately owned or operated, for water, light,
sanitation, transportation, communication, power and other purposes; and the
removal, relocation, widening, narrowing, vacating, abandonment, change of use
of or extension of the public ways, grounds, open spaces, buildings, property,
utilities or terminals. With a view to the systematic planning of the
municipality, the Commission may make recommendations to public officials
concerning the general location, character and extent of any the public ways,
grounds, open spaces, buildings, property, utilities or terminals. As the work
of making the whole plan progresses, the Commission may from time to time adopt
and publish any part thereof, and the part shall cover one or more major
sections or divisions of the municipality or one or more of the functional
matters to be included in the plan. The Commission may from time to time amend,
extend or add to the plan. This section does not confer any powers on the
Commission with respect to the construction, maintenance, use or enlargement of
improvements by any public utility or railroad on its own property if the
utility is owned or operated by an individual, partnership, association or a
corporation for profit.
   (b)   The Planning Commission may accept, receive and expend funds, grants
and services from the federal government or its agencies, from departments,
agencies and instrumentalities of the state or any adjoining state or from one
or more counties of the state or any adjoining state or from any municipal
corporation or political subdivision of this or any adjoining state, including
county, regional and municipal planning commissions of this or any adjoining
state, or from civic sources, and contract with respect thereto, either
separately or jointly or cooperatively, and provide such information and
reports as may be necessary to secure the financial aid.
   (c)   The Commission may control, preserve and care for historical
landmarks; control, in the manner provided by ordinance, the design and
location of statuary and other works of art, which are the property of the
municipality; control the removal, relocation and alteration of any such works;
and control the design of harbors, bridges, viaducts, street fixtures and other
public structures and appurtenances.
   (d)   Whenever the Commission makes a plan of the municipality or any
portion thereof, no public building or structure, street, boulevard, parkway,
park, playground, public ground, canal, river front, harbor, dock, wharf,
bridge, viaduct, tunnel or other public way, ground, works or utility, whether
publicly or privately owned, or a part thereof, shall be constructed or
authorized to be constructed in the municipality or a planned portion thereof
unless the location, character and extent thereof is approved by the
Commission. In case of disapproval, the Commission shall communicate its
reasons therefor to Council and to the head of the department which has control
of the construction of the proposed improvement or utility. Council, by a vote
of not less than two-thirds of its members and of the department head, together
may overrule the disapproval. If the public way, ground, works, building,
structure or utility is one the authorization or financing of which does not,
under the law or charter provisions governing it, fall within the province of
Council or any other municipal body or official, the submission to the
Commission shall be by the state, school, county, district or township
official, board, commission or body having jurisdiction, and the Commission’s
disapproval may be overruled by the official, board, commission or body by a
vote of not less than two-thirds of its membership. The narrowing,
ornamentation, vacation or change in the use of streets and other public ways,
grounds and places shall be subject to similar approval, and disapproval may be
similarly overruled. The Commission may make recommendations to any public
authorities or to any corporations or individuals in the municipality, or the
territory contiguous thereto, concerning the location of any buildings,
structures or works to be erected or constructed by them.
(R.C. § 713.02)
§ 274.03 COMMISSION SHALL BE PLATTING COMMISSION.
   The Planning Commission of the municipality shall be the Platting Commission
thereof, and all the powers and duties provided by R.C. §§ 735.17 through
735.26 shall, upon the appointment of a Planning Commission under §
234.01, be transferred to it.
(R.C. § 713.03)
§ 274.04 CONTROL OF BUILDINGS.
   Council may authorize the Planning Commission to control the height, design
and location of buildings.
(R.C. § 713.04)
§ 274.05 EMPLOYMENT OF ARCHITECTS AND ENGINEERS.
   The Planning Commission may control, appoint or employ architects, engineers
and other professional service, and may appoint clerks, draftsmen and other
subordinates as are necessary for the performance of its functions. The
expenditures for such service and employments shall be within the amounts
appropriated for those persons by Council, and Council shall provide for the
expenses and accommodations necessary for the work of the Commission.
(R.C. § 713.05)
§ 274.06 DIVISION OF VILLAGE INTO ZONES.
   The Planning Commission may frame and adopt a plan for dividing the
municipality or any portion thereof into zones or districts, representing the
recommendations of the Commission, in the interest of the public health,
safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity or general welfare, for the limitation
and regulation of the height, bulk and location of buildings and other
structures, including percentage of lot occupancy, setback building lines, area
and dimensions of yards, courts and other open spaces, and uses, of buildings
and other structures and of premises in those zones or districts.
(R.C. § 713.06)
CHAPTER 276: BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
Section
   
276.01   Establishment; powers
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Basis of districting or zoning; classification of buildings and structures,
see R.C. § 713.10
   Division of village into zones, see §
274.06
   Notice and hearing on municipal zoning regulations, see R.C. § 713.12
   Restriction in location of buildings and structures, see R.C. § 713.07
   Restrictions on bulk and location of buildings and structures, percentage of
lot occupancy, and setback building lines, see R.C. § 713.09
   Restrictions on height of buildings and structures, see R.C. § 713.08
   Violation of zoning ordinances, see R.C. § 713.13
§ 276.01 ESTABLISHMENT; POWERS.
   (a)   Council may create an administrative board to administer the details
of the application of the regulations under R.C. §§ 713.06 through 713.12, and
may delegate to the board, in accordance with general rules to be set forth in
the districting ordinances and regulations, the power to hear and determine
appeals from refusal of building permits by building commissioners or other
officers, to permit exceptions to and variations from the district regulations
in the classes of cases or situations specified in the regulations, and to
administer the regulations as specified therein. Such administrative powers and
functions may be delegated by Council to the Planning Commission or to the
board.
   (b)   If the county administers a county zoning resolution, Council and the
Board of County Commissioners may contract with each other to have the county
administer local zoning regulations, with its powers to include hearing and
deciding zoning appeals and authorizing variances.
(R.C. § 713.11)
CHAPTER 278: VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTERS’ DEPENDENTS FUND BOARD
Section
   
278.01   Definitions
   
278.02   Establishment
   
278.03   Membership; vacancies
   
278.04   Election and term of members
   
278.05   Organization; rules and regulations; roster
   
278.06   Compensation and expenses of Board; legal advisor
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Assessments for the Fund, see R.C. §§ 146.09, 146.10
   Beneficiaries, see R.C. § 146.12
   Benefits free from attachment, see R.C. § 146.13
   Claims procedure, see R.C. §§ 146.14 et seq.
   Fire Department, see
Ch. 246
   Insurance for volunteer firefighters, see R.C. § 505.23
§ 278.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   FIRE DEPARTMENT. A volunteer fire department, a fire department of a
political subdivision or fire district of the state, or a private volunteer
company that has elected to participate in the Volunteer Firefighters’
Dependents Fund pursuant to R.C. § 146.02.
   (b)   MEMBER OF THE FUND. Includes a political subdivision or fire district
of the state that maintains, in whole or in part, a volunteer fire department
or employs volunteer firefighters, and a private volunteer fire company that
has elected to participate in the Volunteer Firefighters’ Dependents Fund.
   (c)   PRIVATE VOLUNTEER FIRE COMPANY. A company of trained volunteer
firefighters having a contract to furnish fire protection or emergency service
or both to a political subdivision or fire district of the state.
   (d)   TOTALLY AND PERMANENTLY DISABLED. A volunteer firefighter is unable to
engage in any substantial gainful employment for a period of not less than 12
months by reason of a medically determinable physical impairment that is
permanent or presumed to be permanent.
   (e)   VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER.
      (1)   VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER means both of the following, subject to
division (e)(2) of this section:
         A.   A duly appointed member of a Fire Department on either a nonpay
or part-pay basis who is ineligible to be a member of the Ohio Police and Fire
Pension Fund, or whose employment as a firefighter does not in itself qualify
any such person for membership in the Public Employees Retirement System, or
who has waived membership in the Public Employees Retirement System;
         B.   Firefighters drafted, requisitioned or appointed to serve in an
emergency.
      (2)   A.   A volunteer firefighter who is a member of the Public
Employees Retirement System shall be considered a volunteer firefighter for
purposes of this chapter and R.C. Chapter 146 and, in particular, for purposes
of R.C. § 146.12(A) and (B), until the firefighter has at least 1.5 years of
Ohio service credit for purposes of R.C. § 145.45(B);
         B.   A volunteer firefighter who is a member of the Public Employees
Retirement System shall be considered a volunteer firefighter for purposes of
this chapter and R.C. Chapter 146 and, in particular, for purposes of R.C. §
146.12(C), until the firefighter has at least five years of total service
credit for purposes of R.C. §§ 145.35 and 145.36 or 145.361.
   (f)   VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTERS’ DEPENDENTS FUND. The fund established by R.C.
§ 146.07.
(R.C. § 146.01)
                                        § 278.02 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (a)   If and when the municipality has a Fire Department employing volunteer
firefighters, it shall be a member of the Volunteer Firefighters’ Dependents
Fund and shall establish a Volunteer Firefighters’ Dependents Fund Board.
   (b)   A private volunteer fire company which has contracted to afford fire
protection to a political subdivision or fire district may become a member of
the Volunteer Firefighters’ Dependents Fund by election and shall, if it so
elects, establish a Volunteer Firefighters’ Dependents Fund Board. The company
shall notify the State Fire Marshal and the governing body of the political
subdivision or fire district with which it has its major contract of the
election to become a member of the Fund.
   (c)   A Volunteer Firefighters' Dependents Fund Board is not subject to R.C.
§§ 101.82 to 101.87.
(R.C. § 146.02)
§ 278.03 MEMBERSHIP; VACANCIES.
   (a)   A Volunteer Firefighters’ Dependents Fund Board provided for in §
278.02(a) shall consist of five members chosen as follows:
      (1)   Two members elected by Council or the legislative authority of the
fire district;
      (2)   Two members elected by the Fire Department or the volunteer
firefighters;
      (3)   One member elected by the Board members who were elected pursuant
to divisions (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section. This member shall be an elector
of the municipality or the fire district, but not a public employee, a member
of Council or a member of the Fire Department.
   (b)   A Volunteer Firefighters’ Dependents Fund Board provided for in §
278.02(b) shall consist of five members chosen as follows:
      (1)   Two members elected by Council or the legislative authority of the
fire district with which the private volunteer fire company has its major
contract;
      (2)   Two members elected by the private volunteer fire company;
      (3)   One member elected by the Board members who were elected pursuant
to divisions (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section. This member shall be an elector
of a political subdivision or fire district with which the private volunteer
fire company has contracted to afford fire protection, but not a public
employee, a member of the legislative authority or a member of the fire
company.
   (c)   Any vacancy occurring in a Volunteer Firefighters’ Dependents Fund
Board shall be filled at a special election called by the Secretary of the
Board.
(R.C. § 146.03)
§ 278.04 ELECTION AND TERM OF MEMBERS.
   (a)   The term of each member of the Volunteer Firefighters’ Dependents Fund
Board is one year and begins on the first day of January.
   (b)   Election of Board members provided for in divisions (a)(1) and (b)(1)
of §
278.03 shall be held each year no earlier than the first day of November and no
later than the second Monday in December, and the election of the Board members
provided for in divisions (a)(3) and (b)(3) of §
278.03 shall be held each year on or before the thirty-first day of December.
   (c)   The Board members provided for in divisions (a)(2) and (b)(2) of §
278.03 shall be elected on or before the second Monday in December, as follows:
      (1)   The Secretary of the Board shall give notice of the election by
posting it in a conspicuous place at the headquarters of the Fire Department or
fire company and at the house of each company composing the Fire Department.
Between 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on the day designated, each member of the
Department or company shall send in writing the name of two persons, members of
the Department or company, who are the member’s choices.
      (2)   All votes cast at the election shall be counted and recorded by the
Board which shall announce the result. The two members receiving the highest
number of votes are elected. If any two persons receive a tie vote, it shall be
decided by lot or in any other way agreed upon by the persons for whom the tie
vote was cast.
(R.C. § 146.04)
§ 278.05 ORGANIZATION; RULES AND REGULATIONS; ROSTER.
   (a)   The Volunteer Firefighters’ Dependents Fund Board shall meet promptly
after its election and organize. A Chairperson and a Secretary shall be
elected. The Secretary shall keep a complete record of the proceedings of the
Board, which record shall be maintained as a permanent file.
   (b)   The Board may adopt rules necessary for the handling and processing of
claims and shall perform such other duties as are necessary to carry out this
chapter and R.C. §§ 146.01 through 146.19.
   (c)   The Secretary of the Board shall immediately certify to the State Fire
Marshal the names and addresses of the members elected, by whom elected, and
the names of the Board Chairperson and Secretary. The Secretary shall also
forward a certificate prepared by the Fiscal Officer or the clerk of the fire
district of the current assessed valuation of the municipality or fire district
if the municipality or fire district is a member of the Fund.
   (d)   A private volunteer fire company which is a member of the Fund shall
provide the Secretary of the Board with a roster of the fire company members
and shall report any changes to the Secretary when they occur. Only persons
whose names appear on the list, and in no event more than an average number of
50 names per station operated by the volunteer fire company, are eligible for
benefits under this chapter and R.C. §§ 146.01 through 146.19.
(R.C. § 146.05)
§ 278.06 COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES OF BOARD; LEGAL ADVISOR.
   (a)   The members of the Volunteer Firefighters’ Dependents Fund Board shall
serve without compensation. The municipality or the fire district within which
the Board operates shall provide the necessary meeting place, stationery,
postage and supplies for the efficient conduct of its business.
   (b)   The legal advisor for the Board is the prosecuting attorney of the
county in which the Board is located.
(R.C. § 146.06)
CHAPTER 280: RECREATION BOARD
Section
   
280.01   Establishment; powers; membership; joint Board and District
   
280.02   Organization of Boards
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Board of Park Trustees, see
Ch. 282
   Land appropriation for parks, see R.C. §§ 715.21, 719.01
   Planned Community Law, see R.C. §§ 5312.01 et seq.
   Playgrounds, recreation centers, swimming pools, see R.C. §§ 755.12 et seq.
   Power to regular vehicle speed in parks, see R.C. § 4511.07
   Regulation of commercial recreation (billiards and pool, taverns), see R.C.
§§ 715.51, 715.53
   Regulation of entertainment and culture, see R.C. §§ 715.13, 715.45, 715.51,
715.61
   Vacation and sale of park lands, see R.C. §§ 755.41 et seq.
§ 280.01 ESTABLISHMENT; POWERS; MEMBERSHIP; JOINT BOARD AND DISTRICT.
   (a)   If Council determines that the power to equip, operate and maintain
parks, playgrounds, playfields, gymnasiums, public baths, swimming pools or
recreation centers shall be exercised by a Recreation Board, it may establish
such a Board, which shall possess all the powers and be subject to all the
responsibilities of the respective local authorities under R.C. §§ 755.12
through 755.18. The Board shall consist of five persons, two of whom shall be
members of the Board of Education of the Municipal School District or shall be
appointed by that Board of Education. The other members of the Recreation Board
shall be appointed by the Mayor or Manager, as executive of the municipality,
with the consent of Council. The members who are Board of Education members and
members appointed by the Board of Education shall be residents of the school
district making the appointment, but need not be residents of the municipality.
All other members of the Board shall be residents of the municipality. All
members of the Board shall serve for terms of five years, except that the
members first appointed shall be appointed for such terms that the term of one
member shall expire annually thereafter. Members of the Board shall serve
without pay. Vacancies on the Board, occurring otherwise than by expiration of
term, shall be for the unexpired term and shall be filled in the same manner as
original appointments.
   (b)   The legislative authorities of the municipal corporations, Boards of
Township Trustees of the townships, Boards of Township Park Commissioners,
Boards of County Commissioners of the counties and Boards of Education of the
school districts joined in the operation and maintenance of parks or recreation
facilities under R.C. § 755.16 may, by resolution, establish a Joint Recreation
Board which may possess all the powers and be subject to all the
responsibilities of the respective local authorities under R.C. §§ 755.12
through 755.18. The resolutions shall specify the number of members of the
Joint Recreation Board and the method of appointing members and filling
vacancies. Members of the Board shall serve without pay.
   (c)   If the municipality joins in the operation and maintenance of
recreation facilities under R.C. § 755.16, Council may, by resolution,
establish a Joint Recreation District, consisting of all the territory of the
subdivisions so joined. The Joint Recreation District Board of Trustees shall
be the governing body of a District and shall possess all the powers of a
legislative authority of an individual subdivision under R.C. §§ 755.12 through
755.18. Subject to R.C. § 755.141, the number of Trustees shall be fixed by the
resolutions creating the District and may be any number so long as there is
representation of all participating subdivisions.
(R.C. § 755.14)
§ 280.02 ORGANIZATION OF BOARDS.
   (a)   The members of Boards established pursuant to §
280.01 shall elect their own Chairperson and Secretary, shall select all other
necessary officers to serve for a period of one year, and may employ such other
persons as are needed. Such Boards may adopt rules for the conduct of all
business within their jurisdiction.
   (b)   A Joint Recreation District Board of Trustees formed pursuant to §
280.01(c) shall appoint one of its members or employ another as fiscal officer
of the District.
(R.C. § 755.15)
CHAPTER 282: BOARD OF PARK TRUSTEES
Section
   
282.01   Establishment for donated property
   
282.02   Membership
   
282.03   Powers
   
282.04   Compensation; oath; bond
   
282.05   Meetings; rules and regulations; Clerk
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Acquisition of forests, see R.C. § 717.01
   Care of parks by villages, see R.C. § 735.27
   Land appropriation for parks, see R.C. §§ 715.21, 719.01
   Municipal power of condemnation and eminent domain, see R.C. § 719.01
   Park development, see R.C. §§ 715.21, 717.01
   Power to regulate vehicle speed in parks, see R.C. § 4511.07
   Recreation Board, see
Ch. 280
   Vacation and sale of park lands, see R.C. §§ 755.41 et seq.
§ 282.01 ESTABLISHMENT FOR DONATED PROPERTY.
   When a deed of gift, devise or bequest of property or funds to the
municipality for park purposes requires the investment or change of investment
of the principal of the property or funds, or any part thereof, to be made upon
the approval of an advisory committee appointed by a court or judge, or an
advisory committee appointed by a civic organization of the municipality, or by
Council, then the property or funds, and any park for the improvement of which,
in whole or in part, the funds are to be used, or any property for the care or
management of which, in whole or in part, the funds are to be used, shall be
managed, controlled and administered by a Board of Park Trustees.
(R.C. § 755.20)
§ 282.02 MEMBERSHIP.
   The Board of Park Trustees mentioned in §
282.01 shall consist of four resident electors of the municipality who shall be
appointed by the Mayor and who shall serve without compensation for the term of
four years. The Park Trustees shall be appointed in the first instance to serve
for one, two, three and four years, respectively, and thereafter their
successors shall be appointed one each year to serve for the term of four
years, but not more than two shall be of the same political party. A vacancy in
the Board caused by death, resignation or otherwise shall be filled in like
manner for the remainder of the term.
(R.C. § 755.21)
§ 282.03 POWERS.
   (a)   The Board of Park Trustees shall have the entire management and
control of any property or funds acquired as provided in R.C. § 755.19, all
improvements within any such park, moneys derived from levies made for park
purposes, moneys from the General Fund appropriated by Council for those
purposes, proceeds of bonds issued or sold for park purposes, moneys or other
property donated to the municipality for park purposes, and all other park
property legally acquired. All such moneys shall be placed in a special fund
called the “Park Fund” and shall be disbursed by the Treasurer only upon a
warrant of the Clerk, drawn in accordance with the order of the Board.
   (b)   This Board shall have the control and management of parks, park
entrances, parkways, boulevards, connecting viaducts, subways, children’s
playgrounds, public baths and stations of public comfort located in the parks,
of all improvements thereon, and the acquisition, construction, repair and
maintenance thereof. The Board shall exercise exclusively all the powers and
perform all the duties in regard to the property vested in and imposed upon a
director of public service in a city under general law.
   (c)   The Board may apply, control, invest and reinvest the funds coming or
arising from a gift, devise or bequest according to the terms on which the same
are acquired.
(R.C. § 755.22)
§ 282.04 COMPENSATION; OATH; BOND.
   The members of the Board of Park Trustees shall serve without compensation.
Before entering upon the discharge of their duties, they shall each take the
oath of office prescribed by R.C. § 733.68 and give bond in the sum of $2,500,
conditioned according to R.C. § 733.71 and to the approval of the Mayor and
Council.
(R.C. § 755.23)
§ 282.05 MEETINGS: RULES AND REGULATIONS; CLERK.
   The Board of Park Trustees shall hold meetings at least once a month and
shall adopt necessary rules for the regulation of its business. It shall keep a
complete record of its proceedings, which record, or a copy thereof, certified
by the Fiscal Officer, shall be competent evidence of its transactions in the
courts of the state. The yeas and nays shall be called upon the passage of
every resolution or order. Three members of the Board shall constitute a
quorum, but no resolution or order shall be adopted unless three members vote
in its favor. The Fiscal Officer shall act as the Clerk of the Board of Park
Trustees, but shall receive no additional salary or compensation for those
services.
(R.C. § 755.24)
TITLE TEN – JUDICIARY
      
Chap. 298.   Mayor’s Court
CHAPTER 298: MAYOR’S COURT
Section
   
298.01   Jurisdiction in ordinance, O.V.I. and other traffic violations
   
298.02   Powers of Mayor and Magistrate in criminal matters
   
298.03   Powers of Mayor and Magistrate re O.V.I.
   
298.04   Establishment of Mayor’s Magistrate’s court
Editor’s note:
The ability of a Mayor to preside over a Mayor’s Court was significantly
affected by DePiero v. City of Macedonia, 180 F.3d 770 (6th Cir. 1999), cert.
denied, 120 S. Ct. 844 (2000). The DePiero case essentially put all
municipalities on notice that a defendant’s due process rights may be violated
each time the Mayor presides over the Mayor’s Court. Such notice suggests that
a Mayor presiding over Mayor’s Court after June 23, 1999 (the date of issuance
of the opinion) could be personally liable to such a defendant for compensatory
and punitive damages. As a result of this case, many municipalities now have a
Magistrate preside over their Mayor’s Court pursuant to R.C. § 1905.05. Please
consult your Village Attorney if you have any questions regarding the impact of
this case.
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Contempt of court, see R.C. §§ 1905.28, 2935.11
   Detection and arrest, see R.C. Ch. 2935
   Disposition of fines and other moneys, see §
232.12
   Driving while intoxicated or drugged, see §
434.01
   General offenses code penalties and sentencing, see
Ch. 698
   Mayors’ Courts, see R.C. Ch. 1905
   Peace and search warrants, see R.C. Ch. 2933
   Preliminary examination; bail, see R.C. Ch. 2937
   Record of traffic violations, see R.C. § 4513.37
   Traffic code penalties and sentencing, see
Ch. 408
   Trial, see R.C. Ch. 2938
§ 298.01 JURISDICTION IN ORDINANCE, O.V.I. AND OTHER TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   In all municipalities having a population of more than 200 not being
the site of a municipal court nor a place where a judge sits pursuant to R.C. §
1901.021 or by designation of the judges pursuant to R.C. § 1901.021, the Mayor
has jurisdiction, except as provided in divisions (b), (c) and (e) of this
section and subject to the limitation contained in R.C. § 1905.03 and the
limitation contained in R.C. § 1905.031, to hear and determine any prosecution
for the violation of an ordinance of the municipality, to hear and determine
any case involving a violation of a vehicle parking or standing ordinance of
the municipality unless the violation is required to be handled by a Parking
Violations Bureau or Joint Parking Violations Bureau pursuant to R.C. Chapter
4521, and to hear and determine all criminal cases involving any moving traffic
violation occurring on a state highway located within the boundaries of the
municipality, subject to the limitations of R.C. §§ 2937.08 and 2938.04.
   (b)   (1)   In all municipalities having a population of more than 200 not
being the site of a municipal court nor a place where a judge of a court sits
as required pursuant to R.C. § 1901.021 or by designation of the judges
pursuant to R.C. § 1901.021, the Mayor has jurisdiction, subject to the
limitation contained in R.C. § 1905.03, to hear and determine prosecutions
involving a violation of an ordinance of the municipality relating to operating
a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them or relating to operating a vehicle with a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or
urine, and to hear and determine criminal causes involving a violation of R.C.
§ 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance that occur on a
state highway located within the boundaries of the municipality, subject to the
limitations of R.C. §§ 2937.08 and 2938.04, only if the person charged with the
violation, within ten years of the date of the violation charged, has not been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to any of the following:
         A.   A violation of an ordinance of any municipality relating to
operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them or relating to operating a vehicle with a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or
urine;
         B.   A violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance;
         C.   A violation of any ordinance of any municipality or of any
section of the Ohio Revised Code that regulates the operation of vehicles upon
the streets, in relation to which all of the following apply:
            1.   The person, in the case in which the conviction was obtained
or the plea of guilty was entered, had been charged with a violation of an
ordinance of a type described in division (b)(1)A. of this section or with a
violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
            2.   The charge of the violation described in division (b)(1)C.1.
of this section was dismissed or reduced;
            3.   The violation of which the person was convicted or to which he
or she pleaded guilty arose out of the same facts and circumstances and the
same act as did the charge that was dismissed or reduced;
         D.   A violation of a statute of the United States or any other state
or a municipal ordinance of a municipality located in any other state that is
substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19.
      (2)   The Mayor does not have jurisdiction to hear and determine any
prosecution or criminal cause involving a violation described in division (b)
(1)A. or (b)(1)B. of this section, regardless of where the violation occurred,
if the person charged with the violation, within ten years of the violation
charged, has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation listed in
division (b)(1)A., (b)(1)B., (b)(1)C. or (b)(1)D. of this section.
      (3)   If the Mayor, in hearing a prosecution involving a violation of an
ordinance of the municipality he or she serves relating to operating a vehicle
while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them
or relating to operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol,
a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine, or in hearing a criminal cause
involving a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, determines that the person charged, within ten years of the
violation charged, has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation
listed in division (b)(1)A., (b)(1)B., (b)(1)C. or (b)(1)D. of this section,
the Mayor immediately shall transfer the case to the county court or municipal
court with jurisdiction over the violation charged, in accordance with R.C. §
1905.032.
   (c)   (1)   In all municipalities having a population of more than 200 not
being the site of a municipal court and not being a place where a judge of a
court listed in division (a) of this section sits as required pursuant to R.C.
§ 1901.021 or by designation of the judges pursuant to R.C. § 1901.021, the
Mayor, subject to R.C. §§ 1901.031, 2937.08 and 2938.04, has jurisdiction to
hear and determine prosecutions involving a violation of a municipal ordinance
that is substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4510.14(A) or § 4510.16 and to hear
and determine criminal causes that involve a moving traffic violation, that
involve a violation of R.C. § 4510.14(A) or 4510.16, and that occur on a state
highway located within the boundaries of the municipality only if all of the
following apply regarding the violation and the person charged:
         A.   Regarding a violation of R.C. § 4510.16 or a violation of a
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that division, the
person charged with the violation, within six years of the date of the
violation charged, has not been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any of the
following:
            1.   A violation of R.C. § 4510.16;
            2.   A violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to R.C. § 4510.16;
            3.   A violation of any municipal ordinance or section of the Ohio
Revised Code that regulates the operation of vehicles upon the highways or
streets, in a case in which, after a charge against the person of a violation
of a type described in division (c)(1)A.1. or (c)(1)A.2. of this section was
dismissed or reduced, the person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation that arose out of the same facts and circumstances and the same act
as did the charge that was dismissed or reduced.
         B.   Regarding a violation of R.C. § 4510.14(A) or a violation of a
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that division, the
person charged with the violation, within six years of the date of the
violation charged, has not been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any of the
following:
            1.   A violation of R.C. § 4510.14(A);
            2.   A violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to R.C. § 4510.14(A);
            3.   A violation of any municipal ordinance or section of the Ohio
Revised Code that regulates the operation of vehicles upon the highways or
streets, in a case in which, after a charge against the person of a violation
of a type described in division (c)(1)B.1. or (c)(1)B.2. of this section was
dismissed or reduced, the person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation that arose out of the same facts and circumstances and the same act
as did the charge that was dismissed or reduced.
      (2)   The Mayor does not have jurisdiction to hear and determine any
prosecution or criminal cause involving a violation described in division (c)
(1)A.1. or (c)(1)A.2. of this section if the person charged with the violation,
within six years of the violation charged, has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to any violation listed in division (c)(1)A.1. through (c)(1)A.3. of
this section and does not have jurisdiction to hear and determine any
prosecution or criminal cause involving a violation described in division (c)
(1)B.1. or (c)(1)B.2. of this section if the person charged with the violation,
within six years of the violation charged, has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to any violation listed in division (c)(1)B.1. through (c)(1)B.3. of
this section.
      (3)   If the Mayor, in hearing a prosecution involving a violation of an
ordinance of the municipality he or she serves that is substantially equivalent
to R.C. § 4510.14(A) or 4510.16 or a violation of R.C. § 4510.14(A) or 4510.16,
determines that, under division (c)(2) of this section, he or she does not have
jurisdiction of the prosecution, the Mayor immediately shall transfer the case
to the county court or municipal court with jurisdiction over the violation in
accordance with R.C. § 1905.032.
   (d)   If the Mayor has jurisdiction pursuant to division (b)(1) of this
section to hear and determine a prosecution or criminal cause involving a
violation described in division (b)(1)A. or (b)(1)B. of this section, the
authority of the Mayor to hear or determine the prosecution or cause is subject
to the limitation contained in R.C. § 1905.03(C). If the Mayor has jurisdiction
pursuant to division (a) or (c) of this section to hear and determine a
prosecution or criminal cause involving a violation other than a violation
described in division (b)(1)A. or B. of this section, the authority of the
Mayor to hear or determine the prosecution or cause is subject to the
limitation contained in R.C. § 1905.031(C).
   (e)   (1)   The Mayor of a municipal corporation does not have the
jurisdiction to hear and determine any prosecution or criminal cause involving
any of the following:
         A.   A violation of R.C. § 2919.25 or 2919.27;
         B.   A violation of R.C. § 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.211 or
2911.211 that involves a person who was a family or household member of the
defendant at the time of the violation;
         C.   A violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to an offense described in division (e)(1)A. or (e)(1)B. of this
section and that involves a person who was a family or household member of the
defendant at the time of the violation.
      (2)   The Mayor of a municipal corporation does not have the jurisdiction
to hear and determine a motion filed pursuant to R.C. § 2919.26 or filed
pursuant to a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that
section or to issue a protection order pursuant to that section or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (3)   As used in this section, FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2919.25.
   (f)   In keeping his or her docket and files, the Mayor and a Mayor’s Court
Magistrate appointed under R.C. § 1905.05 shall be governed by the laws
pertaining to county courts.
(R.C. § 1905.01)
§ 298.02 POWERS OF MAYOR AND MAGISTRATE IN CRIMINAL MATTERS.
   (a)   The Mayor has, within the corporation limits, all the powers conferred
upon sheriffs to suppress disorder the keep the peace.
   (b)   The Mayor shall award and issue all writs and process that are
necessary to enforce the administration of justice throughout the municipality.
The Mayor shall subscribe his or her name and affix his or her official seal to
all writs, process, transcripts and other official papers. A Mayor’s Court
Magistrate, in hearing and determining prosecutions and criminal causes that
are within the scope of his or her authority under R.C. § 1905.05, has the same
powers and duties as are granted to or imposed upon a Mayor under this
division.
   (c)   The Mayor shall be disqualified in any criminal case in which he or
she was the arresting officer, assisted in the arrest, or was present at the
time of arrest, and shall not hear the case.
(R.C. § 1905.20)
§ 298.03 POWERS OF MAYOR AND MAGISTRATE RE O.V.I.
   (a)   (1)   The Mayor of a municipal corporation that has a Mayor’s Court,
and a Mayor’s Court Magistrate, are entitled to suspend, and shall suspend in
accordance with R.C. §§ 4510.02, 4510.07, 4511.19, the driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege of any person who
is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), of a
municipal ordinance relating to operating a vehicle while under the influence
of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them, or of a municipal
ordinance relating to operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of
alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine that is substantially
equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A).
      (2)   The Mayor of a municipal corporation that has a Mayor’s Court, and
Mayor’s Court Magistrate, are entitled to suspend, and shall suspend, in
accordance with R.C. §§ 4510.02, 4510.07 and 4511.19, the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege of any
person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(B)
or of a municipal ordinance relating to the operating of a vehicle with a
prohibited concentration of alcohol in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath or urine that is substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(B).
   (b)   Suspension of a commercial driver’s license under this section shall
be concurrent with any period of disqualification or suspension under R.C. §
3123.58 or 4506.16. No person who is disqualified for life from holding a
commercial driver’s license under R.C. § 4506.16 shall be issued a driver’s
license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period for which the commercial
driver’s license was suspended under this section.
(R.C. § 1905.201)
§ 298.04 ESTABLISHMENT OF MAYOR’S MAGISTRATE’S COURT.
   (a)   The Village Council hereby re-establishes the Mayor’s Magistrate’s
Court in the village, effective July 1, 2008.
   (b)   All jurisdictional criminal and traffic matters that have previously
been brought before the Bowling Green Municipal Court shall be properly brought
before the Mayor’s Magistrate’s Court by and through the officers of the
Village Police Department, the Village Solicitor Prosecutor or other duly
authorized representative.
(Ord. 785, passed 5-26-2009)
PART FOUR – TRAFFIC CODE
   
TITLE TWO – Administration, Enforcement and Penalties
      
Chap. 402.   Definitions
      
Chap. 404.   Enforcement; Impounding
      
Chap. 408.   Penalties
   
TITLE FOUR – Public Ways and Traffic-control Devices
      
Chap. 412.   Obstruction and Special Uses of Public Ways
      
Chap. 414.   Traffic-control Devices
      
Chap. 416.   Pedestrians
   
TITLE SIX – Operation and Vehicles
      
Chap. 432.   Operation Generally
      
Chap. 434.   O.V.I.; Reckless Operation; Speed
      
Chap. 436.   Licensing; Accidents
      
Chap. 438.   Safety and Equipment
      
Chap. 440.   Commercial and Heavy Vehicles
      
Chap. 442.   Drivers of Commercial Vehicles
      
Chap. 444.   Bicycles and Motorcycles Generally
      
Chap. 446.   Snowmobiles, Off-highway Motorcycles and All-purpose Vehicles
      
Chap. 448.   Watercraft
   
TITLE EIGHT – Parking
      
Chap. 452.   Parking Generally
   
TITLE TEN - Traffic Schedules
      Chap. 460.   Traffic Schedules
TITLE TWO – ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
      
Chap. 402.   Definitions
      
Chap. 404.   Enforcement; Impounding
      
Chap. 408.   Penalties
CHAPTER 402: DEFINITIONS
Section
   
402.01   Meaning of words and phrases
CROSS REFERENCES
   Blind person defined, see §
416.02
   Commercial car defined, see §
442.01
   Funeral procession defined, see §
432.24
   Snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle and all-purpose vehicle defined, see §
446.01
   Street racing, stunt driving and street takeovers defined, see §
434.10
§ 402.01 MEANING OF WORDS AND PHRASES.
   Except as otherwise provided, the definitions set forth in R.C. § 4501.01
shall apply to this traffic code and the penal laws of the municipality. Except
as otherwise provided, the following words and phrases, when used in this
traffic code, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this
chapter.
   (a)   AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR. Every self-propelled vehicle designed or used
for drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery, but having no provision for
carrying loads independently of such other vehicles, and used principally for
agricultural purposes.
   (b)   ALLEY. A street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or
side of lots or buildings in urban districts, and not intended for the purpose
of through vehicular traffic, and any street or highway that has been declared
an ALLEY by the legislative authority of the municipality in which the street
or highway is located.
   (c)   ARTERIAL STREET. Any United States or state numbered route,
controlled-access highway, or other major radial or circumferential street or
highway designated by local authorities within their respective jurisdictions
as part of a major arterial system of streets or highways.
   (d)   BEACON. A highway traffic signal with one or more signal sections that
operate in a flashing mode.
   (e)   BICYCLE. Every device, other than a device that is designed solely for
use as a play vehicle by a child, that is propelled solely by human power upon
which a person may ride, and that has two or more wheels, any of which is more
than 14 inches in diameter.
   (f)   BUS. Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than nine
passengers, and used for the transportation of persons other than in a
ridesharing arrangement, and every motor vehicle, automobile for hire or
funeral car, other than a taxicab or motor vehicle used in a ridesharing
arrangement, designed and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.
   (g)   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory fronting upon a street or highway,
including the street or highway, between successive intersections within the
municipality, where 50% or more of the frontage between successive
intersections is occupied by buildings in use for business, or within or
outside the municipality where 50% or more of the frontage for a distance of
300 feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business, and the
character of the territory is indicated by official traffic-control devices.
   (h)   CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE. A motor vehicle that is designed to carry nine
or fewer passengers and is operated for hire pursuant to a prearranged contract
for the transportation of passengers on public roads and highways along a route
under the control of the person hiring the vehicle and not over a defined and
regular route. PREARRANGED CONTRACT means an agreement, made in advance of
boarding, to provide transportation from a specific location in a chauffeured
limousine. CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE does not include any vehicle that is used
exclusively in the business of funeral directing.
(R.C. § 4501.01(LL))
   (i)   CHILD DAY-CARE CENTER and TYPE A FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME. The same
meaning as set forth in R.C. § 5104.01.
   (j)   COMMERCIAL TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle having motive power designed
or used for drawing other vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry any load
thereon, or designed or used for drawing other vehicles while carrying a
portion of the other vehicles, or the load thereon, or both.
   (k)   CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY. Every street or highway in respect to which
owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right or
access to or from the same except at certain points only and in a manner as may
be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over the street or
highway.
   (l)   CROSSWALK.
      (1)   That part of a roadway at intersections ordinarily included within
the real or projected prolongation of property lines and curb lines or, in the
absence of curbs, the edges of the traversable roadway;
      (2)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere,
distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the
surface;
      (3)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this definition, there
shall not be a CROSSWALK where the legislative authority has placed signs
indicating no crossing.
   (m)   DRIVER or OPERATOR. Any person who drives or is in actual physical
control of a vehicle.
   (n)   ELECTRIC BICYCLE. A CLASS 1 ELECTRIC BICYCLE, a CLASS 2 ELECTRIC
BICYCLE, or a CLASS 3 ELECTRIC BICYCLE as defined below.
      (1)   CLASS 1 ELECTRIC BICYCLE. A bicycle that is equipped with fully
operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that provides
assistance only when the rider is pedaling and ceases to provide assistance
when the bicycle reaches the speed of 20 miles per hour.
      (2)   CLASS 2 ELECTRIC BICYCLE. A bicycle that is equipped with fully
operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that may provide
assistance regardless of whether the rider is pedaling and is not capable of
providing assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 20 miles per hour.
      (3)   CLASS 3 ELECTRIC BICYCLE. A bicycle that is equipped with fully
operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that provides
assistance only when the rider is pedaling and ceases to provide assistance
when the bicycle reaches the speed of 28 miles per hour.
   (o)   EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Emergency vehicles of municipal, township or county
departments or public utility corporations, when identified as such as required
by law, the Director of Public Safety or local authorities, and motor vehicles
when commandeered by a police officer.
   (p)   EXPLOSIVES. Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is
intended for the purpose of producing an explosion that contains any oxidizing
and combustible units or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities or
packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion or
by a detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause a sudden
generation of highly heated gases, such that the resultant gaseous pressures
are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects, or of
destroying life or limb. Manufactured articles shall not be held to be
EXPLOSIVES when the individual units contain explosives in limited quantities
of a nature or in such packing that it is impossible to procure a simultaneous
or a destructive explosion of the units, to the injury of life, limb or
property by fire, friction, concussion, percussion or by a detonator, such as
fixed ammunition for small arms, firecrackers or safety fuse matches.
   (q)   EXPRESSWAY. A divided arterial highway for through traffic with full
or partial control of access with an excess of 50% of all crossroads separated
in grade.
   (r)   FLAMMABLE LIQUID. Any liquid which has a flash point of 70°F or less,
as determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closed cup test device.
   (s)   FREEWAY. A divided multi-lane highway for through traffic with
crossroads separated in grade and with full control of access.
   (t)   FUNERAL ESCORT VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle, including a funeral hearse,
while used to facilitate the movement of a funeral procession.
   (u)   GROSS WEIGHT. The weight of a vehicle plus the weight of any load
thereon.
   (v)   HIGHWAY MAINTENANCE VEHICLE. A vehicle used in snow and ice removal or
road surface maintenance, including a snow plow, traffic line striper, road
sweeper, mowing machine, asphalt distributing vehicle or other such vehicle
designed for use in specific highway maintenance activities.
   (w)   HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SIGNAL. A power-operated traffic control device by
which traffic is warned or directed to take some specific action. The term does
not include a power-operated sign, steadily illuminated pavement marker,
warning light or steady burning electric lamp.
   (x)   HYBRID BEACON. A type of beacon that is intentionally placed in a dark
mode between periods of operation where no indications are displayed and, when
in operation, displays both steady and flashing traffic control signal
indications.
   (y)   INTERSECTION.
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of
two highways that join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or
the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways that join at
any other angle might come into conflict. The junction of an alley or driveway
with a roadway or highway does not constitute an intersection unless the
roadway or highway at the junction is controlled by a traffic control device.
      (2)   If a highway includes two roadways that are 30 feet or more apart,
then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting
highway constitutes a separate intersection. If both intersecting highways
include two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of any two
roadways of such highways constitutes a separate intersection.
      (3)   At a location controlled by a traffic control signal, regardless of
the distance between the separate intersections as described in division (2) of
this definition:
         A.   If a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk has not been designated
on the roadway within the median between the separate intersections, the two
intersections and the roadway and median constitute one intersection.
         B.   Where a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk line is designated on
the roadway on the intersection approach, the area within the crosswalk and any
area beyond the designated stop line or yield line constitute part of the
intersection.
         C.   Where a crosswalk is designated on a roadway on the departure
from the intersection, the intersection includes the area that extends to the
far side of the crosswalk.
   (z)   LANED HIGHWAY. A highway the roadway of which is divided into two or
more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
   (aa)   LOCAL AUTHORITIES. Every county, municipal and other local board or
body having authority to adopt police regulations under the Constitution and
laws of this state.
   (bb)   LOW-SPEED MICROMOBILITY DEVICE. A device weighing less than 100
pounds that has handlebars, is propelled by an electric motor or human power,
and has an attainable speed on a paved level surface of not more than 20 miles
per hour when propelled by the electric motor.
   (cc)   MEDIAN. The area between two roadways of a divided highway, measured
from edge of traveled way to edge of traveled way, but excluding turn lanes.
The width of a median may be different between intersections, between
interchanges, and at opposite approaches of the same intersection.
   (dd)   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle propelled or drawn by power other than
muscular power or power collected from overhead electric trolley wires, except
motorized bicycles, electric bicycles, road rollers, traction engines, power
shovels, power cranes and other equipment used in construction work, and not
designed for or employed in general highway transportation, hole-digging
machinery, well-drilling machinery, ditch-digging machinery, farm machinery,
and trailers designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place
of storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a
street or highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25
miles per hour or less.
   (ee)   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle, other than a tractor, having a seat
or saddle for the use of the operator and designed to travel on not more than
three wheels in contact with the ground, including but not limited to motor
vehicles known as MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE, MOTOR SCOOTER, AUTOCYCLE, CAB-ENCLOSED
MOTORCYCLE, or MOTORCYCLE without regard to weight or brake horsepower.
   (ff)   MOTORIZED BICYCLE OR MOPED. Any vehicle having either two tandem
wheels or one wheel in the front and two wheels in the rear, that may be
capable of being pedaled, and that is equipped with a helper motor of not more
than 50 cubic centimeters piston displacement that produces not more than one
brake horsepower, and is capable of propelling the vehicle at a speed of not
greater than 20 miles per hour on a level surface. The terms do not include an
electric bicycle.
   (gg)   MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR. Any self-propelled vehicle designed for, and
used by, a person with a disability and that is incapable of a speed in excess
of eight miles per hour.
   (hh)   MULTI-WHEEL AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR. A type of agricultural tractor that
has two or more wheels or tires on each side of one axle at the rear of the
tractor, is designed or used for drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery,
has no provision for carrying loads independently of the drawn vehicles or
machinery, and is used principally for agricultural purposes.
   (ii)   NATURAL RESOURCES OFFICER. An officer appointed pursuant to R.C. §
1501.24.
   (jj)   OPERATE. To cause or have caused movement of a vehicle.
   (kk)   PARKING or PARKED. The standing of a vehicle upon a street, road,
alley, highway or public ground, whether accompanied or unaccompanied by a
driver, but does not include the temporary standing of a vehicle for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or loading merchandise or
passengers.
   (ll)   PEDESTRIAN. Any natural person afoot. The term includes a personal
delivery device as defined in R.C. § 4511.513 unless the context clearly
suggests otherwise.
   (mm)   PERSON. Every natural person, firm, partnership, association or
corporation.
   (nn)   POLE TRAILER. Every trailer or semitrailer attached to the towing
vehicle by means of a reach, pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to
the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregular
shaped loads such as poles, pipes or structural members capable, generally, of
sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections.
   (oo)   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer authorized to direct or regulate
traffic, or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
   (pp)   PREDICATE MOTOR VEHICLE OR TRAFFIC OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12, 4511.132,
4511.16, 4511.20, 4511.201, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.22, 4511.23,
4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32,
4511.33, 4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40,
4511.41, 4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.451,
4511.452, 4511.46, 4511.47, 4511.48, 4511.481, 4511.49, 4511.50, 4511.511,
4511.53, 4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.56, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59, 4511.60,
4511.61, 4511.64, 4511.66, 4511.661, 4511.68, 4511.70, 4511.701, 4511.71,
4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, 4511.73, 4511.763, 4511.771, 4511.78 or
4511.84;
      (2)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.17(A)(2), 4511.51(A) through (D) or
4511.74(A);
      (3)   A violation of any provision of R.C. §§ 4511.01 through 4511.76 for
which no penalty otherwise is provided in the section that contains the
provision violated;
      (4)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.214;
      (5)   A violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any section or provision set forth or described in division (1),
(2), (3), or (4) of this definition.
   (qq)   PRIVATE ROAD OPEN TO PUBLIC TRAVEL. A private toll road or road,
including any adjacent sidewalks that generally run parallel to the road,
within a shopping center, airport, sports arena, or other similar business or
recreation facility that is privately owned but where the public is allowed to
travel without access restrictions. The term includes a gated toll road but
does not include a road within a private gated property where access is
restricted at all times, a parking area, a driving aisle within a parking area,
or a private grade crossing.
   (rr)   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY. Every way or place in private ownership
used for vehicular travel by the owner, and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
   (ss)   PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Any of the following:
      (1)   Ambulances, including private ambulance companies under contract to
a municipality, township or county, and private ambulances and nontransport
vehicles bearing license plates issued under R.C. § 4503.49;
      (2)   Motor vehicles used by public law enforcement officers or other
persons sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state;
      (3)   Any motor vehicle when properly identified as required by the
Director of Public Safety, when used in response to fire emergency calls or to
provide emergency medical service to ill or injured persons, and when operated
by a duly qualified person who is a member of a volunteer rescue service or a
volunteer fire department, and who is on duty pursuant to the rules or
directives of that service. The State Fire Marshal shall be designated by the
Director of Public Safety as the certifying agency for all public safety
vehicles described herein;
      (4)   Vehicles used by fire departments, including motor vehicles when
used by volunteer firefighters responding to emergency calls in the fire
department service when identified as required by the Director of Public
Safety;
      (5)   Any vehicle used to transport or provide emergency medical service
to an ill or injured person, when certified as a “public safety vehicle”, shall
be considered such a vehicle when transporting an ill or injured person to a
hospital, regardless of whether the vehicle has already passed a hospital;
      (6)   Vehicles used by the Motor Carrier Enforcement Unit for the
enforcement of orders and rules of the Public Utilities Commission as specified
in R.C. § 5503.34.
   (tt)   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property operating upon rails
placed principally on a private right-of-way.
   (uu)   RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL. Any sign, signal or device erected by
authority of a public body or official or by a railroad, and intended to give
notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train.
   (vv)   RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine or an electric or other motor, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated by a railroad.
   (ww)   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory, not comprising a business
district, fronting on a street or highway, including the street or highway,
where, for a distance of 300 feet or more, the frontage is improved with
residences or residences and buildings in use for business.
   (xx)   RIDESHARING ARRANGEMENT. Includes the transportation of persons in a
motor vehicle where the transportation is incidental to another purpose of a
volunteer driver, and includes RIDESHARING ARRANGEMENTS known as carpools,
vanpools and buspools.
   (yy)   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Either of the following, as the context requires:
      (1)   The right of a vehicle or pedestrian to proceed uninterruptedly in
a lawful manner in the direction in which it, he or she is moving, in
preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching from a different
direction into its, his or her path;
      (2)   A general term denoting land, property or the interest therein,
usually in the configuration of a strip, acquired for or devoted to
transportation purposes. When used in this context, RIGHT-OF-WAY includes the
roadway, shoulders or berm, ditch and slopes extending to the right-of- way
limits under the control of the state or local authority.
   (zz)   ROAD SERVICE VEHICLE. Wreckers, utility repair vehicles and state,
county and municipal service vehicles equipped with visual signals by means of
flashing, rotating or oscillating lights.
   (aaa)   ROADWAY. That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, except the berm or shoulder. If a highway includes
two or more separate roadways, the term ROADWAY means any roadway separately,
but not all the roadways collectively.
   (bbb)   RURAL MAIL DELIVERY VEHICLE. Every vehicle used to deliver United
States mail on a rural mail delivery route.
   (ccc)   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway
for the exclusive use of pedestrians, and protected or marked or indicated by
adequate signs so as to be plainly visible at all times.
   (ddd)   SCHOOL BUS. Every bus designed for carrying more than nine
passengers which is owned by a public, private or governmental agency or
institution of learning, and operated for the transportation of children to or
from a school session or a school function, or owned by a private person and
operated for compensation for the transportation of children to or from a
school session or a school function; provided, SCHOOL BUS does not include a
bus operated by a municipally owned transportation system, a mass transit
company operating exclusively within the territorial limits of a municipality,
or within those limits and the territorial limits of municipalities immediately
contiguous to the municipality, nor a common passenger carrier certified by the
Public Utilities Commission unless the bus is devoted exclusively to the
transportation of children to and from a school session or a school function,
and “school bus” does not include a van or bus used by a licensed child care
center or type A family child care home to transport children from the child
care center or type A family child care home to a school if the van or bus does
not have more than 15 children in the van or bus at any time.
   (eee)   SEMITRAILER. Every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or
property with another and separate motor vehicle so that in operation a part of
its own weight or that of its load, or both, rests upon and is carried by
another vehicle.
   (fff)   SHARED-USE PATH. A bikeway outside the traveled way and physically
separated from motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and
either within the highway right-of-way or within an independent alignment. A
shared-use path also may be used by pedestrians, including skaters, joggers,
users of manual and motorized wheelchairs, and other authorized motorized and
non-motorized users. A shared-use path does not include any trail that is
intended to be used primarily for mountain biking, hiking, equestrian use, or
other similar uses, or any other single track or natural surface trial that has
historically been reserved for non-motorized use.
   (ggg)   SIDEWALK. That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the
lateral line of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the
use of pedestrians.
   (hhh)   STATE HIGHWAY. A highway under the jurisdiction of the Department of
Transportation, outside the limits of municipalities, provided that the
authority conferred upon the Director of Transportation in R.C. § 5511.01 to
erect state highway route markers and signs directing traffic shall not be
modified by R.C. §§ 4511.01 through 4511.79 and 4511.99.
   (iii)   STATE ROUTE. Every highway which is designated with an official
state route number and so marked.
   (jjj)   STOP. When required, means a complete cessation of movement.
   (kkk)   STOP INTERSECTION. Any intersection at one or more entrances of
which stop signs are erected.
   (lll)   STOPPING or STANDING. When prohibited, means any halting of a
vehicle, even momentarily, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-
control device.
   (mmm)   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way open to the use of the public as a thoroughfare for purposes of
vehicular travel.
   (nnn)   THROUGH HIGHWAY. Every street or highway as provided in R.C. §
4511.65, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (ooo)   THRUWAY. A through highway whose entire roadway is reserved for
through traffic and on which roadway parking is prohibited.
   (ppp)   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles,
streetcars, and other devices, either singly or together, while using for
purposes of travel any highway or private road open to public travel.
   (qqq)   TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE. A flagger, sign, signal, marking, or other
device used to regulate, warn, or guide traffic, placed on, over, or adjacent
to a street, highway, private road open to public travel, pedestrian facility,
or shared-use path by authority of a public agency or official having
jurisdiction, or, in the case of a private road open to public travel, by
authority of the private owner or private official having jurisdiction.
   (rrr)   TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL. Any highway traffic signal by which traffic
is alternately directed to stop and permitted to proceed.
   (sss)   TRAILER. Every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or
property wholly on its own structure, and for being drawn by a motor vehicle,
including any vehicle when formed by or operated as a combination of a
semitrailer and a vehicle of the dolly type, such as that commonly known as a
trailer dolly, a vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural
production materials between a local place of storage or supply and the farm
when drawn or towed on a street or highway at a speed greater than 25 miles per
hour and a vehicle designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a
place of storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed
on a street or highway for a distance of more than ten miles or at a speed of
more than 25 miles per hour.
   (ttt)   TRUCK. Every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers,
designed and used to carry property.
   (uuu)   TYPE A FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME.” Has the same meaning as set forth in
R.C. § 5104.01.
   (vvv)   URBAN DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including any street
or highway which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry or
dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of
one-quarter of a mile or more, and the character of the territory is indicated
by official traffic-control devices.
   (www)   VEHICLE. Every device, including a motorized bicycle and an electric
bicycle, in, upon or by which any person or property may be transported or
drawn upon a highway, except that VEHICLE does not include any motorized
wheelchair, any electric personal assistive mobility device, any low-speed
micromobility device, any personal delivery device as defined in R.C. §
4511.513, any device that is moved by power collected from overhead electric
trolley wires or that is used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks or
any device, other than a bicycle, that is moved by human power.
   (xxx)   WASTE COLLECTION VEHICLE. A vehicle used in the collection of
garbage, refuse, trash, or recyclable materials.
   (yyy)   WILDLIFE OFFICER. An officer designated pursuant to R.C. § 1531.13.
(R.C. § 4511.01)
CHAPTER 404: ENFORCEMENT; IMPOUNDING
Section
   
404.01   Police may remove ignition key
   
404.02   Resisting an enforcing official
   
404.03   Road workers, motor vehicles and equipment excepted
   
404.04   Emergency, public safety and coroners’ vehicles excepted
   
404.05   Application to persons riding, driving animals upon roadway
   
404.06   Application to drivers of government vehicles
   
404.07   Furnishing false information incident to traffic citation
   
404.08   Maintenance of state highways
   
404.99   Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Arrest without warrant for misdemeanor, see R.C. § 2935.03
   Authority of arresting officer when radar, electrical or mechanical timing
device used, see R.C. § 4511.091
   Burden of proof, see R.C. § 2901.05
   Dereliction of duty, see §
654.12
   Discharge for delay in trial, see R.C. § 2945.73
   Disposition of property held by Police Department, see §
654.16
   Disposition of unclaimed vehicles, see R.C. §§ 737.32, 4513.61 et seq.
   Distinctive uniform required for traffic officers, see R.C. § 4549.15
   Exceptions for emergency or public safety vehicles, see §§
432.19,
434.08
   Extension of time for hearing or trial, see R.C. § 2945.72
   Failure to aid a law enforcement officer, see §
654.05
   Limitation on criminal prosecutions, see §
606.06
   Marking motor vehicles used by traffic officers, see R.C. § 4549.13
   Obstructing justice, see §
654.07
   Obstructing official business, see §
654.06
   Parking violations waiver, see §
452.14
   Power of trial court of record to suspend license for certain violations,
see R.C. §§ 4510.05, 4510.15
   Resisting arrest, see §
654.08
   Right of trial by jury, see R.C. § 2945.17
   Soliciting or receiving improper compensation, see §
654.11
   Suspension of riding privileges; impounding of bicycles, see §
444.10
   Time within which hearing or trial must be held, see R.C. § 2945.71
   Uniform application of Ohio Traffic Law, see R.C. § 4511.06
   Use of private property for vehicular travel, see R.C. § 4511.08
§ 404.01 POLICE MAY REMOVE IGNITION KEY.
   A law enforcement officer may remove the ignition key left in the ignition
switch of an unlocked and unattended motor vehicle parked on a street or
highway. The officer removing the key shall place notification upon the vehicle
detailing his or her name and badge number, the place where the key may be
reclaimed, and the procedure for reclaiming the key. The key shall be returned
to the owner of the motor vehicle upon presentation of proof of ownership.
(R.C. § 4549.05)
§ 404.02 RESISTING AN ENFORCING OFFICIAL.
   (a)   No person shall resist, hinder, obstruct or abuse any sheriff,
constable or other official while that official is attempting to arrest
offenders under any provision of this traffic code. No person shall interfere
with any person charged under any provision of this traffic code with the
enforcement of the law relative to public highways.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.36)
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the hindrance,
obstruction, resistance or interference alleged consisted of constitutionally
protected speech only.
§ 404.03 ROAD WORKERS, MOTOR VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT EXCEPTED.
   (a)   The provisions of this traffic code, except for §
434.01, do not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles, and other equipment
while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a highway within an area
designated by traffic-control devices, but apply to those persons and vehicles
when traveling to or from that work.
   (b)   The driver of a highway maintenance vehicle owned by this state or any
political subdivision of this state, while the driver is engaged in the
performance of official duties upon a street or highway, provided the highway
maintenance vehicle is equipped with flashing lights and any other markings as
are required by law and the lights are in operation when the driver and vehicle
are so engaged, shall be exempt from criminal prosecution for violations of
R.C. §§ 4511.22, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.33,
4511.35, 4511.66, 4513.02 and 5577.01 to 5577.09, and any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (c)   (1)   This section does not exempt a driver of a highway maintenance
vehicle from civil liability arising from a violation of R.C. § 4511.22,
4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.66
or 4513.02 or 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
      (2)   This section does not exempt a driver of a vehicle who is not a
state employee and who is engaged in the transport of highway maintenance
equipment from criminal liability for a violation of R.C. §§ 5577.01 through
5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (d)   As used in this section, ENGAGED IN THE PERFORMANCE OF OFFICIAL DUTIES
includes driving a highway maintenance vehicle to and from the manufacturer or
vehicle maintenance provider and transporting a highway maintenance vehicle,
equipment, or materials to and from a work location.
(R.C. § 4511.04)
§ 404.04 EMERGENCY, PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORONERS’ VEHICLES EXCEPTED.
   (a)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 4511.12, 4511.13, 4511.131, 4511.132,
4511.14, 4511.202, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25, 4511.26,
4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.34,
4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41, 4511.42,
4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59,
4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.62, 4511.66, 4511.68, 4511.681 and 4511.69, and any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, do not apply to the driver of an
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle if the emergency vehicle or public
safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and
displaying at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the
vehicle and if the driver of the vehicles is giving an audible signal by siren,
exhaust whistle or bell. This section does not relieve the driver of an
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
(R.C. § 4511.041)
   (b)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29,
4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38 and
4511.66, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, do not apply to
a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator operating a motor vehicle
in accordance with R.C. § 4513.171 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance. This division does not relieve a coroner, deputy coroner or
coroner’s investigator operating a motor vehicle from the duty to drive with
due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
(R.C. § 4511.042)
§ 404.05 APPLICATION TO PERSONS RIDING, DRIVING ANIMALS UPON ROADWAY.
   Every person riding, driving or leading an animal upon a roadway is subject
to the provisions of this traffic code, applicable to the driver of a vehicle,
except those provisions of this traffic code which by their nature are
inapplicable.
(R.C. § 4511.05)
§ 404.06 APPLICATION TO DRIVERS OF GOVERNMENT VEHICLES.
   The provisions of this traffic code applicable to the drivers of vehicles
shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United
States, any state or any political subdivision thereof, including this
municipality, except as may be otherwise provided by law and subject to such
specific exceptions as are set forth with reference to authorized emergency and
public safety vehicles.
§ 404.07 FURNISHING FALSE INFORMATION INCIDENT TO TRAFFIC CITATION.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly present, display or orally communicate a
false name, Social Security number or date of birth to a law enforcement
officer who is in the process of issuing to the person a traffic ticket or
complaint.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4513.361)
§ 404.08 MAINTENANCE OF STATE HIGHWAYS.
   It is hereby declared to be in the public interest that the consent of said
village shall be, and said consent hereby is, given to the State Department of
Highways for said Department to maintain the traveled portion of the State
Highways hereinbefore set out.
(Ord. 413, passed 11-10-1955)
§ 404.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§ 408.01 and 408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific
penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 408: PENALTIES
Section
   
408.01   Penalties for misdemeanor
   
408.02   General code penalty
   
408.03   Suspension of driver’s license
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Criteria for probation; conditions for probation, see R.C. § 2951.02
   Definition of “dangerous offender”, see §
698.01
   Definition of “imprisoned”, see R.C. § 1.05
   Definition of “repeat offender”, see §
698.01
   Imposing sentence for misdemeanor, see §
698.03
   Multiple sentences, see §
698.05
   Organizational penalties, see §
698.04
   Satisfaction of fine; credit for time served, see R.C. § 2947.14
§ 408.01 PENALTIES FOR MISDEMEANOR.
   Whoever is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor shall be sentenced in accordance with §
698.02.
§ 408.02 GENERAL CODE PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates any provision of this traffic code for which no
penalty otherwise is provided in the section violated is guilty of one of the
following:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this
section, a minor misdemeanor;
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
      (3)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more predicate motor vehicle or
traffic offenses, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.99)
   (b)   Violations committed while distracted.
      (1)   As used in this section and each section referenced in division (b)
(2) of this section, all of the following apply:
         A.   DISTRACTED means doing either of the following while operating a
vehicle:
            1.   Using an electronic wireless communications device, as defined
in R.C. § 4511.204, in violation of that section.
            2.   Engaging in any activity that is not necessary to the
operation of a vehicle and impairs, or reasonably would be expected to impair,
the ability of the operator to drive the vehicle safely.
         B.   DISTRACTED does not include operating a motor vehicle while
wearing an earphone or earplug over or in both ears at the same time. A person
who so wears earphones or earplugs may be charged with a violation of R.C. §
4511.84, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
         C.   DISTRACTED does not include conducting any activity while
operating a utility service vehicle or a vehicle for or on behalf of a utility,
provided that the driver of the vehicle is acting in response to an emergency,
power outage, or a circumstance affecting the health or safety of individuals.
As used in this division (b)(1)C.:
            1.   UTILITY means an entity specified in R.C. § 4905.03(A), (C),
(D), (E), or (G).
            2.   UTILITY SERVICE VEHICLE means a vehicle owned or operated by a
utility.
      (2)   If an offender violates R.C. § 4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12,
4511.121, 4511.132, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25,
4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33,
4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41,
4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.451, 4511.46, 4511.47,
4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59, 4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.64,
4511.71, 4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, or 4511.73, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
violation, the offender is subject to the applicable penalty for the violation
and, notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28, is subject to an additional fine of not
more than $100 as follows:
         A.   1.   Subject to Traffic Rule 13, if a law enforcement officer
issues an offender a ticket, citation, or summons for a violation of any of the
aforementioned sections of the Ohio Revised Code, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that indicates that the offender was distracted
while committing the violation and that the distracting activity was a
contributing factor to the commission of the violation, the offender may enter
a written plea of guilty and waive the offender’s right to contest the ticket,
citation, or summons in a trial provided that the offender pays the total
amount of the fine established for the violation and pays the additional fine
of $100.
            2.   In lieu of payment of the additional fine of $100, the
offender instead may elect to attend a distracted driving safety course, the
duration and contents of which shall be established by the Ohio Director of
Public Safety. If the offender attends and successfully completes the course,
the offender shall be issued written evidence that the offender successfully
completed the course. The offender shall be required to pay the total amount of
the fine established for the violation, but shall not be required to pay the
additional fine of $100, so long as the offender submits to the court both the
offender’s payment in full and such written evidence within 90 days of the
underlying violation that resulted in the imposition of the additional fine
under division (b) of this section.
         B.   1.   If the offender appears in person to contest the ticket,
citation, or summons in a trial and the offender pleads guilty to or is
convicted of the violation, the court, in addition to all other penalties
provided by law, may impose the applicable penalty for the violation and may
impose the additional fine of not more than $100.
            2.   If the court imposes upon the offender the applicable penalty
for the violation and an additional fine of not more than $100, the court shall
inform the offender that, in lieu of payment of the additional fine of not more
than $100, the offender instead may elect to attend the distracted driving
safety course described in division (b)(2)A. of this section. If the offender
elects the course option and attends and successfully completes the course, the
offender shall be issued written evidence that the offender successfully
completed the course. The offender shall be required to pay the total amount of
the fine established for the violation, but shall not be required to pay the
additional fine of not more than $100, so long as the offender submits to the
court the offender’s payment and such written evidence within 90 days of the
underlying violation that resulted in the imposition of the additional fine
under division (b) of this section.
      (3)   If a law enforcement officer issues an offender a ticket, citation,
or summons for a violation of any of the sections of the Revised Code listed in
division (b)(2) of this section that indicates that the offender was distracted
while committing the violation and that the distracting activity was a
contributing factor to the commission of the violation, the officer shall do
both of the following:
         A.   Report the issuance of the ticket, citation, or summons to the
officer’s law enforcement agency;
         B.   Ensure that such report indicates the offender’s race.
(R.C. § 4511.991)
§ 408.03 SUSPENSION OF DRIVER’S LICENSE.
   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4510.07 or in any other provision of
the Revised Code, whenever an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of any provision of this traffic code that is substantially
equivalent to a provision of the Revised Code, and a court is permitted or
required to suspend a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit for a violation of that provision, a court, in addition to any other
penalties authorized by law, may suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege for the period of
time the court determines appropriate, but the period of suspension imposed for
the violation of the provision of this traffic code shall not exceed the period
of suspension that is permitted or required to be imposed for the violation of
the provision of the Revised Code to which the provision of this traffic code
is substantially equivalent.
(R.C. § 4510.05)
TITLE FOUR – PUBLIC WAYS AND TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
      
Chap. 412.   Obstruction and Special Uses of Public Ways
      
Chap. 414.   Traffic-control Devices
      
Chap. 416.   Pedestrians
CHAPTER 412: OBSTRUCTION AND SPECIAL USES OF PUBLIC WAYS
Section
   
412.01   Placing injurious material or obstruction in street
   
412.02   Zones of quiet
   
412.03   Play streets
   
412.04   Toy vehicles on roadway
   
412.05   Freeway use prohibited by pedestrians, bicycles and animals
   
412.06   Plowing of snow and use of abrasive for ice control
   
412.99   Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Loads dropping or leaking; tracking mud; removal required, see §
440.06
   Parking in alleys or narrow streets; exceptions, see §
452.12
   Power to regulate processions or assemblages, see R.C. § 4511.07
   Selling, washing or repairing vehicle upon roadway, see §
452.09
   Sidewalk obstructions; damage or injury, see §
660.10
§ 412.01 PLACING INJURIOUS MATERIAL OR OBSTRUCTION IN STREET.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a
highway, lane, road, street or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails or
other articles which may damage or injure any person, vehicle or animal
traveling along or upon the highway, except such substances that may be placed
upon the roadway by proper authority for the repair or construction thereof.
      (2)   Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any
highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the
same.
      (3)   Any person authorized to remove a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a
highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the
highway from the vehicle.
      (4)   No person shall place any obstruction in or upon a highway without
proper authority.
   (b)   No person, with intent to cause physical harm to a person or a
vehicle, shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a highway, lane, road,
street or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails or other articles which
may damage or injure any person, vehicle or animal traveling along or upon the
highway, except substances that may be placed upon the roadway by proper
authority for the repair or construction thereof.
   (c)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
division (a) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4511.74)
§ 412.02 ZONES OF QUIET.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a zone of quiet, no person
operating a vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other warning
device of the vehicle except in an emergency.
§ 412.03 PLAY STREETS.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that any street or part
thereof is a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street
or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose
residences are within the closed area and then the drivers shall exercise the
greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.
§ 412.04 TOY VEHICLES ON ROADWAY.
   No person riding upon any coaster, roller skates, sled, toy vehicle or other
similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a
crosswalk, and when so crossing the person shall be granted all of the rights
and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This
section shall not apply to any street set aside as a play street.
§ 412.05 FREEWAY USE PROHIBITED BY PEDESTRIANS, BICYCLES AND ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, shall:
      (1)   As a pedestrian, occupy any space within the limits of the right-
of-way of a freeway, except: in a rest area; on a facility that is separated
from the roadway and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately
marked for pedestrian use; in the performance of public works or official
duties; as a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of a
motor vehicle; or to obtain assistance.
      (2)   Occupy any space within the limits of the right-of-way of a
freeway, with: an animal-drawn vehicle; a ridden or led animal; herded animals;
a pushcart; a bicycle, except on a facility that is separated from the roadway
and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately marked for
bicycle use; an electric bicycle; a bicycle with motor attached; a motor-driven
cycle with a motor which produces not to exceed five brake horsepower; an
agricultural tractor; farm machinery; except in the performance of public works
or official duties.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.051)
§ 412.06 PLOWING OF SNOW AND USE OF ABRASIVE FOR ICE CONTROL.
   It is declared to be in the public interest that the consent of said village
shall be, and such consent is hereby given, that said plowing of snow and
placing of abrasives for ice control may be done under the supervision of the
Director of Highways, and in accordance with the standard practices of the
State Department of Highways.
(Ord. 382, passed 12-1-1947)
§ 412.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 414: TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
Section
   
414.01   Obedience to traffic-control devices
   
414.02   Through streets; stop and yield right-of-way signs
   
414.03   Traffic-control signal terms and lights
   
414.04   Signal to control lane direction of travel
   
414.05   Pedestrian control signals
   
414.06   Unauthorized signs and signals, hiding from view, advertising
   
414.07   Alteration, injury, removal of traffic-control devices
   
414.08   Unauthorized possession or sale of devices
   
414.09   Signal preemption devices; prohibitions
   
414.99   Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Criminal mischief (tampering), see §
642.09
   Designation of through streets or stop intersections, see R.C. §§ 4511.07,
4511.65
   Intersections at which traffic-control signals fail or malfunction, see §
432.16
   Placing and maintaining local traffic-control devices, see R.C. §§ 4511.10,
4511.11
   Traffic-control devices defined, see §
402.01
   Traffic law photo-monitoring devices, state regulations, see R.C. §§
4511.092 et seq.
   Uniform system of traffic-control devices, see R.C. §§ 4511.09, 4511.11
§ 414.01 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (a)   (1)   No pedestrian or driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
instructions of any traffic-control device placed in accordance with the
provisions of this traffic code, unless at the time otherwise directed by a
police officer.
      (2)   No provision of this traffic code for which signs are required
shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the
alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular
section of this traffic code does not state that signs are required, that
section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place.
(R.C. § 4511.12(A))
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (c) of this section, any operator
of a commercial motor vehicle, upon approaching a scale location established
for the purpose of determining the weight of the vehicle and its load, shall
comply with any traffic-control device or the order of a peace officer
directing the vehicle to proceed to be weighed or otherwise inspected.
      (2)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle, upon bypassing a scale
location in accordance with division (c) of this section, shall comply with an
order of a peace officer to stop the vehicle to verify the use and operation of
an electronic clearance device.
   (c)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle that is equipped with an
electronic clearance device authorized by the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol under R.C. § 4549.081 may bypass a scale location, regardless of
the instruction of a traffic-control device to enter the scale facility, if
either of the following apply:
      (1)   The in-cab transponder displays a green light or other affirmative
visual signal and also sounds an affirmative audible signal;
      (2)   Any other criterion established by the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol is met.
   (d)   Any peace officer may order the operator of a commercial motor vehicle
that bypasses a scale location to stop the vehicle to verify the use and
operation of an electronic clearance device.
   (e)   As used in this section, COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE means any
combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating or an actual gross
vehicle weight of more than 10,000 pounds if the vehicle is used in interstate
or intrastate commerce to transport property and also means any vehicle that is
transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is required pursuant to
49 C.F.R. Parts 100 to 180.
(R.C. § 4511.121(A) - (C), (E))
   (f)   No person shall use an electronic clearance device if the device or
its use is not in compliance with rules of the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol.
(R.C. § 4549.081(B))
   (g)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. If
the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting activity
is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the offender is
subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.12(B))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (b) of this
section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (b)
of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender commits the offense while
distracted and the distracting activity is a contributing factor to the
commission of the offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine
established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.121(D))
      (3)   Whoever violates division (f) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
third degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4549.081(C))
§ 414.02 THROUGH STREETS; STOP AND YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY SIGNS.
   (a)   All state routes are hereby designated as through highways, provided
that stop signs, yield signs or traffic-control signals shall be erected at all
intersections with such through highways by the Department of Transportation as
to highways under its jurisdiction and by local authorities as to highways
under their jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section. Where
two or more state routes that are through highways intersect, and no traffic-
control signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall be erected at
one or more entrances thereto by the Department or by local authorities having
jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section. Whenever the
Director of Transportation determines on the basis of an engineering and
traffic investigation that stop signs are necessary to stop traffic on a
through highway for safe and efficient operation, nothing in this section shall
be construed to prevent the installations. When circumstances warrant, the
Director also may omit stop signs on roadways intersecting through highways
under his or her jurisdiction. Before the Director either installs or removes a
stop sign under this division, he or she shall give notice, in writing, of that
proposed action to the affected local authority at least 30 days before
installing or removing the stop sign.
   (b)   Other streets or highways, or portions thereof, are hereby designated
as through highways if they are within the municipality, if they have a
continuous length of more than one mile between the limits of the street or
highway or portion thereof, and if they have stop or yield signs or traffic-
control signals at the entrances of the majority of intersecting streets or
highways. For purposes of this section, the limits of the street or highway, or
portion thereof, shall be the municipal corporation line, the physical terminus
of the street or highway, or any point on the streets or highway at which
vehicular traffic thereon is required by regulatory signs to stop or yield to
traffic on the intersecting street, provided, that in residence districts, the
municipality may by ordinance designate the street or highway, or portion
thereof, not to be a through highway and thereafter the affected residence
district shall be indicated by official traffic-control devices. Where two or
more through highways designated under this division intersect and no traffic-
control signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall be erected at
one or more entrances thereto by the Department or by local authorities having
jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section.
   (c)   The Department or local authorities having jurisdiction need not erect
stop signs at intersections they find to be so constructed as to permit traffic
to safely enter a through highway without coming to a stop. Signs shall be
erected at such intersections indicating that the operator of a vehicle shall
yield the right-of-way to or merge with all traffic proceeding on the through
highway.
   (d)   Local authorities, with reference to highways under their
jurisdiction, may designate additional through highways, and shall erect stop
signs, yield signs or traffic-control signals at all streets and highways
intersecting the through highways, or may designate any intersection as a stop
or yield intersection, and shall erect like signs at one or more entrances to
the intersection.
(R.C. § 4511.65)
§ 414.03 TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL TERMS AND LIGHTS.
   Highway traffic signal indications for vehicles and pedestrians shall have
the following meanings:
   (a)   Steady Green Signal Indication.
      (1)   A.   Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal indication
are permitted to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a u-
turn movement except as such movement is modified by a lane-use sign, turn
prohibition sign, lane marking, roadway design, separate turn signal
indication, or other traffic control device. Such vehicular traffic, including
vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn movement, shall yield the
right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         B.   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn
movement to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching
from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard
during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the
intersection.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal indication, displayed
alone or in combination with another signal indication, are permitted to
cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such
arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications displayed at
the same time. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left
or making a u-turn movement, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the
following:
         A.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
         B.   Other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      (3)   A.   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication,
as provided in R.C. § 4511.14, pedestrians facing a circular green signal
indication are permitted to proceed across the roadway within any marked or
unmarked associated crosswalk. The pedestrian shall yield the right-of- way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection or so close as to create an immediate
hazard at the time that the green signal indication is first displayed.
         B.   Pedestrians facing a green arrow signal indication, unless
otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or other traffic control
device, shall not cross the roadway.
   (b)   Steady Yellow Signal Indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow signal indication
are thereby warned that the related green movement or the related flashing
arrow movement is being terminated or that a steady red signal indication will
be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the
intersection. The provisions governing vehicular operation under the movement
being terminated shall continue to apply while the steady circular yellow
signal indication is displayed.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow arrow signal indication is
thereby warned that the related green arrow movement or the related flashing
arrow movement is being terminated. The provisions governing vehicular
operation under the movement being terminated shall continue to apply while the
steady yellow arrow signal indication is displayed.
      (3)   Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal
indication, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as
provided in R.C. § 4511.14 or other traffic control device, shall not start to
cross the roadway.
   (c)   Steady Red Signal Indication.
      (1)   A.   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal
indication, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted
by another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if
there is no stop line, traffic shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before
entering the intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication
to proceed is displayed except as provided in divisions (c)(1), (c)(2), and (c)
(3) of this section.
         B.   Except when a traffic control device is in place prohibiting a
turn on red or a steady red arrow signal indication is displayed, vehicular
traffic facing a steady circular red signal indication is permitted, after
stopping, to enter the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-
way street into a one-way street. The right to proceed with the turn shall be
subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a stop
sign.
      (2)   A.   Vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow signal indication
shall not enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by the arrow
and, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted by
another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if
there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before entering the
intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication or other
traffic control device permitting the movement indicated by such red arrow is
displayed.
         B.   When a traffic control device is in place permitting a turn on a
steady red arrow signal indication, vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow
indication is permitted, after stopping, to enter the intersection to turn
right, or to turn left from a one-way street into a one-way street. The right
to proceed with the turn shall be limited to the direction indicated by the
arrow and shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a
stop at a stop sign.
      (3)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as
provided in R.C. § 4511.14 or other traffic control device, pedestrians facing
a steady circular red or steady red arrow signal indication shall not enter the
roadway.
      (4)   Local authorities by ordinance, or the Director of Transportation
on state highways, may prohibit a right or a left turn against a steady red
signal at any intersection, which shall be effective when signs giving notice
thereof are posted at the intersection.
   (d)   Flashing Green Signal Indication. A flashing green signal indication
has no meaning and shall not be used.
   (e)   Flashing Yellow Signal Indication.
      (1)   A.   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing circular yellow signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter
the intersection to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a u-
turn movement except as such movement is modified by lane-use signs, turn
prohibition signs, lane markings, roadway design, separate turn signal
indications, or other traffic control devices. Such vehicular traffic,
including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn movement, shall
yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         B.   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn to
the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the
opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the
time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
      (2)   A.   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing yellow arrow signal indication, displayed alone or in combination with
another signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter the intersection
only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or other such movement as is
permitted by other signal indications displayed at the same time. Such
vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn,
shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         B.   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn to
the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the
opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the
time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
      (3)   Pedestrians facing any flashing yellow signal indication at an
intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the
right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing yellow signal indication is first displayed.
      (4)   When a flashing circular yellow signal indication is displayed as a
beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road users are notified
that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained
thereon or that the regulatory or warning requirements of the other traffic
control device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently
applicable.
   (f)   Flashing Red Signal Indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing circular red signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near
side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. The right to proceed
shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a
stop sign.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing any flashing red signal indication at an
intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the
right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing red signal indication is first displayed.
      (3)   When a flashing circular red signal indication is displayed as a
beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road users are notified
that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained
thereon or that the regulatory requirements of the other traffic control
device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently applicable.
Use of this signal indication shall be limited to supplementing stop, do not
enter, or wrong way signs, and to applications where compliance with the
supplemented traffic control device requires a stop at a designated point.
   (g)   In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature
can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking
on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of
any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.
   (h)   This section does not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of
drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by
R.C. §§ 4511.61 and 4511.62.
(R.C. § 4511.13)
§ 414.04 SIGNAL TO CONTROL LANE DIRECTION OF TRAVEL.
   The meanings of lane-use control signal indications are as follows:
   (a)   A Steady Downward Green Arrow. A road user is permitted to drive in
the lane over which the arrow signal indication is located.
   (b)   A Steady Yellow “X”. A road user is to prepare to vacate the lane over
which the signal indication is located because a lane control change is being
made to a steady red “X” signal indication.
   (c)   A Steady White Two-Way Left-Turn Arrow. A road user is permitted to
use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a left turn, but not
for through travel, with the understanding that common use of the lane by
oncoming road users for left turns also is permitted.
   (d)   A Steady White One-Way Left-Turn Arrow. A road user is permitted to
use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a left turn, without
opposing turns in the same lane, but not for through travel.
   (e)   A Steady Red “X”. A road user is not permitted to use the lane over
which the signal indication is located and that this signal indication shall
modify accordingly the meaning of other traffic controls present.
(R.C. § 4511.131)
§ 414.05 PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words “walk” or
“don’t walk”, or the symbol of a walking person or an upraised palm are in
place, these signals shall indicate the following instructions:
   (a)   A steady walking person signal indication, which symbolizes “walk”,
means that a pedestrian facing the signal indication is permitted to start to
cross the roadway in the direction of the signal indication, possibly in
conflict with turning vehicles. The pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the walking person
signal indication is first shown.
   (b)   A flashing upraised hand signal indication, which symbolizes “don’t
walk”, means that a pedestrian shall not start to cross the roadway in the
direction of the signal indication, but that any pedestrian who has already
started to cross on a steady walking person signal indication shall proceed to
the far side of the traveled way of the street or highway, unless otherwise
directed by a traffic control device to proceed only to the median of a divided
highway or only to some other island or pedestrian refuge area.
   (c)   A steady upraised hand signal indication means that a pedestrian shall
not enter the roadway in the direction of the signal indication.
   (d)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the continued
use of pedestrian control signals utilizing the word “wait” if those signals
were installed prior to March 28, 1985.
   (e)   A flashing walking person signal indication has no meaning and shall
not be used.
(R.C. § 4511.14)
§ 414.06 UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS AND SIGNALS, HIDING FROM VIEW, ADVERTISING.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of
any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to
be, is an imitation of or resembles a traffic-control device or railroad sign
or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or hides from
view or interferes with the effectiveness of any traffic-control device or any
railroad sign or signal; and no person shall place or maintain, nor shall any
public authority permit, upon any highway, any traffic sign or signal bearing
thereon any commercial advertising. This section does not prohibit either the
erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful
directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for traffic-
control devices, or the erection upon private property of traffic-control
devices by the owner of real property in accordance with R.C. §§ 4511.211 and
4511.432.
      (2)   Every prohibited sign, signal, marking or device is a public
nuisance, and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway may remove the
same or cause it to be removed.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.16)
§ 414.07 ALTERATION, INJURY, REMOVAL OF TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (a)   No person, without lawful authority, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy or otherwise improperly
tamper with any traffic- control device, any railroad sign or signal, or any
inscription, shield or insignia on the device, sign or signal, or any part of
the device, sign or signal;
      (2)   Knowingly drive upon or over any freshly applied pavement marking
material on the surface of a roadway while the marking material is in an
undried condition, and is marked by flags, markers, signs or other devices
intended to protect it;
      (3)   Knowingly move, damage, destroy or otherwise improperly tamper with
a manhole cover.
   (b)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a)(1) or (a)(3) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
third degree. If a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(3) of this section
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(3) of
this section causes serious physical harm to property that is owned, leased, or
controlled by a state or local authority, the offender is guilty of a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.17)
§ 414.08 UNAUTHORIZED POSSESSION OR SALE OF DEVICES.
   (a)   As used in this section, TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE means any sign,
traffic-control signal or other device conforming to and placed or erected in
accordance with the manual adopted under R.C. § 4511.09 by authority of a
public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic, including signs denoting the names of streets and
highways, but does not mean any pavement marking.
   (b)   No individual shall buy or otherwise possess, or sell, a traffic-
control device, except when one of the following applies:
      (1)   In the course of the individual’s employment by the state or a
local authority for the express or implied purpose of manufacturing, providing,
erecting, moving or removing such a traffic-control device;
      (2)   In the course of the individual’s employment by any manufacturer of
traffic-control devices other than a state or local authority;
      (3)   For the purpose of demonstrating the design and function of a
traffic-control device to state or local officials;
      (4)   When the traffic-control device has been purchased from the state
or a local authority at a sale of property that is no longer needed or is unfit
for use; or
      (5)   When the traffic-control device has been properly purchased from a
manufacturer for use on private property and the person possessing the device
has a sales receipt for the device or other acknowledgment of sale issued by
the manufacturer.
   (c)   This section does not preclude, and shall not be construed as
precluding, prosecution for theft in violation of R.C. § 2913.02, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or for receiving stolen property
in violation of R.C. § 2913.51, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 4511.18)
§ 414.09 SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICES; PROHIBITIONS.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall possess a portable signal preemption device.
      (2)   No person shall use a portable signal preemption device to affect
the operation of a traffic-control device.
   (b)   Division (a)(1) of this section does not apply to any of the following
persons and division (a)(2) of this section does not apply to any of the
following persons when responding to an emergency call:
      (1)   A peace officer, as defined in R.C. § 109.71(A)(1), (A)(12), (A)
(14) or (A)(19);
      (2)   A State Highway Patrol officer;
      (3)   A person while occupying a public safety vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 4511.01(E)(1), (E)(3) or (E)(4).
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Whoever violates division (a)(2) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   As used in this section, PORTABLE SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICE means a
device that, if activated by a person, is capable of changing a traffic-control
signal to green out of sequence.
(R.C. § 4511.031)
§ 414.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 416: PEDESTRIANS
Section
   
416.01   Duties of pedestrians and drivers at crosswalks
   
416.02   Right-of-way of blind person
   
416.03   Right-of-way yielded by pedestrian; crossing roadways
   
416.04   Moving in crosswalks
   
416.05   Walking on sidewalks and streets
   
416.06   Soliciting rides or business; riding on outside of vehicle or in cargo
storage area
   
416.07   Passing through bridge signals or railroad barriers
   
416.08   Right-of-way of public safety vehicles
   
416.09   Right-of-way on sidewalks
   
416.10   Intoxication
   
416.11   Motorized wheelchair operators
   
416.12   Operation of electric personal assistive mobility devices
   
416.13   Operation of personal delivery device on sidewalks and crosswalks
   
416.14   Low-speed micromobility devices
   
416.99   Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
   Obedience to traffic-control devices, see §
414.01
   Opening doors on side available to traffic, see §
452.08
   Pedestrian control signals, see §
414.05
   Pedestrians prohibited on freeways, see §
412.05
§ 416.01 DUTIES OF PEDESTRIANS AND DRIVERS AT CROSSWALKS.
   (a)   When traffic-control signals are not in place, not in operation or are
not clearly assigning the right-of-way, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the
right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, or if required
by R.C. § 4511.132, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, to a
pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon
the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the
pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as
to be in danger.
   (b)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and
walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close as to constitute an
immediate hazard.
   (c)   Division (a) of this section does not apply under the conditions
stated in R.C. § 4511.48(B), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (d)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (f)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.46)
§ 416.02 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF BLIND PERSON.
   (a)   (1)   As used in this section BLIND PERSON or BLIND PEDESTRIAN means a
person having not more than 20/200 visual acuity in the better eye with
correcting lenses, or visual acuity greater than 20/200, but with a limitation
in the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field
subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees.
      (2)   The driver of every vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to every
blind pedestrian guided by a guide dog, or carrying a cane which is
predominantly white or metallic in color, with or without a red tip.
   (b)   No person, other than a blind person, while on any public highway,
street, alley or other public thoroughfare, shall carry a white or metallic
cane, with or without a red tip.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.47)
§ 416.03 RIGHT-OF-WAY YIELDED BY PEDESTRIAN; CROSSING ROADWAYS.
   (a)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (b)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way
to all traffic upon the roadway.
   (c)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked
crosswalk.
   (d)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless
authorized by official traffic- control devices; and when authorized to cross
diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official
traffic-control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.
   (e)   This section does not relieve the operator of a vehicle from
exercising due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway.
   (f)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.48)
§ 416.04 MOVING IN CROSSWALKS.
   (a)   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.49)
§ 416.05 WALKING ON SIDEWALKS AND STREETS.
   (a)   Where a sidewalk is provided and its use is practicable, it shall be
unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (b)   Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder, as far as practicable from the
edge of the roadway.
   (c)   Where neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any pedestrian
walking along and upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable to an
outside edge of the roadway, and, if on a two-way roadway, shall walk only on
the left side of the roadway.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. §§ 4511.13 and 4511.46, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, any pedestrian upon a roadway
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.50)
§ 416.06 SOLICITING RIDES OR BUSINESS; RIDING ON OUTSIDE OF VEHICLE OR IN CARGO
STORAGE AREA.
   (a)   No person while on a roadway outside a safety zone shall solicit a
ride from the driver of any vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(2) of this section, no person
shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting employment, business or
contributions from the occupant of any vehicle.
      (2)   The Council, by ordinance, may authorize the issuance of a permit
to a charitable organization to allow a person acting on behalf of the
organization to solicit charitable contributions from the occupant of a vehicle
by standing on a highway, other than a freeway as provided in R.C. § 4511.051
(A), that is under the jurisdiction of the municipality. The permit shall be
valid for only one period of time, which shall be specified in the permit, in
any calendar year. The Council also may specify the locations where
contributions may be solicited and may impose any other restrictions on or
requirements regarding the manner in which the solicitations are to be
conducted that the Council considers advisable.
      (3)   As used in division (b)(2) of this section, “charitable
organization” means an organization that has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a currently valid ruling or determination letter recognizing the tax-
exempt status of the organization pursuant to I.R.C. § 501(c)(3).
   (c)   No person shall hang onto or ride on the outside of any motor vehicle
while it is moving upon a roadway, except mechanics or test engineers making
repairs or adjustments, or workers performing specialized highway or street
maintenance or construction under authority of a public agency.
   (d)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person to hang onto or ride on
the outside of any motor vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway, except
mechanics or test engineers making repairs or adjustments, or workers
performing specialized highway or street maintenance or construction under
authority of a public agency.
   (e)   No driver of a truck, trailer or semitrailer shall knowingly permit
any person who has not attained the age of 16 years to ride in the unenclosed
or unroofed cargo storage area of the driver’s vehicle if the vehicle is
traveling faster than 25 miles per hour, unless either of the following
applies:
      (1)   The cargo storage area of the vehicle is equipped with a properly
secured seat to which is attached a seat safety belt that is in compliance with
federal standards for an occupant restraining device as defined in R.C. §
4513.263(A)(2), the seat and seat safety belt were installed at the time the
vehicle was originally assembled, and the person riding in the cargo storage
area is in the seat and is wearing the seat safety belt; or
      (2)   An emergency exists that threatens the life of the driver or the
person being transported in the cargo storage area of the truck, trailer or
semitrailer.
   (f)   No driver of a truck, trailer or semitrailer shall permit any person,
except for those workers performing specialized highway or street maintenance
or construction under authority of a public agency, to ride in the cargo
storage area or on a tailgate of the driver’s vehicle while the tailgate is
unlatched.
   (g)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
any provision of divisions (a) to (d) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates any provision of divisions (a) to (d) of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates any provision of divisions
(a) to (d) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (e) or (f) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.51)
§ 416.07 PASSING THROUGH BRIDGE SIGNALS OR RAILROAD BARRIERS.
   (a)   No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or approach
thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate or barrier after a bridge operation
signal indication has been given.
   (b)   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing
gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while the gate or
barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.511)
§ 416.08 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLES.
   (a)   Upon the immediate approach of a public safety vehicle, as stated in
R.C. § 4511.45 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, every
pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to the public safety vehicle.
   (b)   This section shall not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle
from the duty to exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.452)
§ 416.09 RIGHT-OF-WAY ON SIDEWALKS.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian
on a sidewalk.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.441)
§ 416.10 INTOXICATION.
   (a)   A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol, any drug of abuse,
or any combination of them, to a degree that renders the pedestrian a hazard
shall not walk or be upon a highway.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.481)
§ 416.11 MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR OPERATORS.
   Every person operating a motorized wheelchair shall have all of the rights
and duties applicable to a pedestrian that are contained in this chapter,
except those provisions which by their nature can have no application.
(R.C. § 4511.491)
§ 416.12 OPERATION OF ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES.
   (a)   (1)   Electric personal assistive mobility devices may be operated on
the public streets, highways, sidewalks and paths and portions of roadways set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in accordance with this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, those sections of
this traffic code that by their nature are applicable to an electric personal
assistive mobility device apply to the device and the person operating it
whenever it is operated upon any public street, highway, sidewalk or path or
upon any portion of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
      (3)   The municipality may regulate or prohibit the operation of electric
personal assistive mobility devices on public streets, highways, sidewalks and
paths, or portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles,
under its jurisdiction.
   (b)   No operator of an electric personal assistive mobility device shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians and human-powered
vehicles at all times;
      (2)   Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a
pedestrian;
      (3)   Operate the device at night unless the device or its operator is
equipped with or wearing both of the following:
         A.   A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white light visible
from a distance of not less than 500 feet;
         B.   A red reflector facing the rear that is visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet when directly in front of lawful lower
beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle;
      (4)   Operate the device on any portion of a street or highway that has
an established speed limit of 55 miles per hour or more;
      (5)   Operate the device upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of
pedestrians or other specialized use when an appropriate sign giving notice of
the specialized use is posted on the path;
      (6)   If under 18 years of age, operate the device unless wearing a
protective helmet on the person’s head with the chin strap properly fastened;
      (7)   If under 16 years of age, operate the device unless, during the
operation, the person is under the direct visual and audible supervision of
another person who is 18 years of age or older and is responsible for the
immediate care of the person under 16 years of age.
   (c)   No person who is under 14 years of age shall operate an electric
personal assistive mobility device.
   (d)   No person shall distribute or sell an electric personal assistive
mobility device unless the device is accompanied by a written statement that is
substantially equivalent to the following: “WARNING: TO REDUCE THE RISK OF
SERIOUS INJURY, USE ONLY WHILE WEARING FULL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT – HELMET,
WRIST GUARDS, ELBOW PADS AND KNEE PADS.”
   (e)   Nothing in this section affects or shall be construed to affect any
rule of the Director of Natural Resources or a Board of Park District
Commissioners governing the operation of vehicles on lands under the control of
the Director or Board, as applicable.
   (f)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (b) or (c) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor and shall be punished as follows:
         A.   The offender shall be fined $10;
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (b) or (c) of this section, or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, the court, in
addition to imposing the fine required under division (f)(1)A. of this section,
shall do one of the following:
            1.   Order the impoundment for not less than one day but no more
than 30 days of the electric personal assistive mobility device that was
involved in the current violation of that division. The court shall order the
device to be impounded at a safe indoor location designated by the court and
may assess storage fees of not more than $5 per day; provided the total
storage, processing and release fees assessed against the offender or the
device in connection with the device’s impoundment or subsequent release shall
not exceed $50.
            2.   If the court does not issue an impoundment order pursuant to
division (f)(1)B.1. of this section, issue an order prohibiting the offender
from operating any electric personal assistive mobility device on the public
streets, highways, sidewalks and paths and portions of roadways set aside for
the exclusive use of bicycles for not less than one day but not more than 30
days.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.512)
   (g)   As used in this code, ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE
means a self-balancing two non-tandem wheeled device that is designed to
transport only one person, has an electric propulsion system of an average of
750 watts, and when ridden on a paved level surface by an operator who weighs
170 pounds has a maximum speed of less than 20 miles per hour.
(R.C. § 4501.01(TT))
§ 416.13 OPERATION OF PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE ON SIDEWALKS AND CROSSWALKS.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   ELIGIBLE ENTITY. Means a corporation, partnership, association,
firm, sole proprietorship, or other entity engaged in business.
      (2)   PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE. Means an electrically powered device to
which all of the following apply:
         A.   The device is intended primarily to transport property and cargo
on sidewalks and crosswalks.
         B.   The device weighs less than 250 pounds excluding any property or
cargo being carried in the device.
         C.   The device has a maximum speed of ten miles per hour.
         D.   The device is equipped with technology that enables the operation
of the device with active control or monitoring by a person, without active
control or monitoring by a person, or both with or without active control or
monitoring by a person.
      (3)   PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE OPERATOR. Means an agent of an eligible
entity who exercises direct physical control over, or monitoring of, the
navigation and operation of a personal delivery device. The phrase does not
include, with respect to a delivery or other service rendered by a personal
delivery device, the person who requests the delivery or service. The phrase
also does not include a person who only arranges for and dispatches a personal
delivery device for a delivery or other service.
   (b)   An eligible entity may operate a personal delivery device on sidewalks
and crosswalks so long as all of the following requirements are met:
      (1)   The personal delivery device is operated in accordance with all
regulations, if any, established by each local authority within which the
personal delivery device is operated.
      (2)   A personal delivery device operator is actively controlling or
monitoring the navigation and operation of the personal delivery device.
      (3)   The eligible entity maintains an insurance policy that includes
general liability coverage of not less than $100,000 for damages arising from
the operation of the personal delivery device by the eligible entity and any
agent of the eligible entity.
      (4)   The device is equipped with all of the following:
         A.   A marker that clearly identifies the name and contact information
of the eligible entity operating the personal delivery device and a unique
identification number;
         B.   A braking system that enables the personal delivery device to
come to a controlled stop;
         C.   If the personal delivery device is being operated between sunset
and sunrise, a light on both the front and rear of the personal delivery device
that is visible in clear weather from a distance of at least 500 feet to the
front and rear of the personal delivery device when directly in front of low
beams of headlights on a motor vehicle.
   (c)   No personal delivery device operator shall allow a personal delivery
device to do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to comply with traffic or pedestrian control devices and
signals;
      (2)   Unreasonably interfere with pedestrians or traffic;
      (3)   Transport any hazardous material that would require a permit issued
by the Public Utilities Commission;
      (4)   Operate on a street or highway, except when crossing the street or
highway within a crosswalk.
   (d)   A personal delivery device has all of the rights and obligations
applicable to a pedestrian under the same circumstances, except that a personal
delivery device shall yield the right-of-way to human pedestrians on sidewalks
and crosswalks.
   (e)   (1)   No person shall operate a personal delivery device unless the
person is authorized to do so under this section and complies with the
requirements of this section.
      (2)   An eligible entity is responsible for both of the following:
         A.   Any violation of this section that is committed by a personal
delivery device operator; and
         B.   Any other circumstance, including a technological malfunction, in
which a personal delivery device operates in a manner prohibited by divisions
(c)(1) to (c)(4) of this section.
(R.C. § 4511.513)
§ 416.14 LOW-SPEED MICROMOBILITY DEVICES.
   (a)   (1)   A low-speed micromobility device may be operated on the public
streets, highways, sidewalks, and shared-use paths, and may be operated on any
portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in accordance
with this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, those sections of
this title that by their nature could apply to a low-speed micromobility device
do apply to the device and the person operating it whenever it is operated upon
any public street, highway, sidewalk, or shared-use path, or upon any portion
of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
   (b)   No operator of a low-speed micromobility device shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians at all times;
      (2)   Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a
pedestrian;
      (3)   Operate the device at night unless the device or its operator is
equipped with or wearing both of the following:
         A.   A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white light visible
from a distance of not less than 500 feet;
         B.   A red reflector facing the rear that is visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet when directly in front of lawful lower
beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle.
   (c)   (1)   No person who is under 16 years of age shall rent a low-speed
micromobility device.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly rent a low-speed micromobility device to
a person who is under 16 years of age.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly rent a low-speed micromobility device on
behalf of a person who is under 16 years of age.
   (d)   No person shall operate a low-speed micromobility device at a speed
greater than 20 miles per hour.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Unless a mens rea is otherwise specified in this section, an
offense established under this section is a strict liability offense and R.C. §
2901.20 does not apply. The designation of that offense as a strict liability
offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for which there
is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense.
   (f)   Notwithstanding division (a)(1) of this section, the municipality,
county, township, metropolitan park district, township park district,
recreation district, or any division of the Ohio Department of Natural
Resources if the division has the approval of the Ohio Director of Natural
Resources may do any of the following:
      (1)   Regulate or prohibit the operation of low-speed micromobility
devices on public streets, highways, sidewalks, and shared-use paths, and
portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, under its
jurisdiction;
      (2)   Include low-speed micromobility devices that are adapted to expand
access for people with various physical limitations into a shared bicycle,
shared electric bicycle, or similar vehicle sharing program, under its
jurisdiction;
      (3)   Require the owner or operator of a low-speed micromobility device
rental service or low- speed micromobility device sharing program to maintain
commercial general liability insurance related to the operation of the devices,
with limits of up to $1,000,000 per occurrence and $2,000,000 per aggregate.
(R.C. § 4511.514)
§ 416.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
TITLE SIX – OPERATION AND VEHICLES
      
Chap. 432.   Operation Generally
      
Chap. 434.   O.V.I.; Reckless Operation; Speed
      
Chap. 436.   Licensing; Accidents
      
Chap. 438.   Safety and Equipment
      
Chap. 440.   Commercial and Heavy Vehicles
      
Chap. 442.   Drivers of Commercial Vehicles
      
Chap. 444.   Bicycles and Motorcycles Generally
      
Chap. 446.   Snowmobiles, Off-highway Motorcycles and All-purpose Vehicles
      
Chap. 448.   Watercraft
CHAPTER 432: OPERATION GENERALLY
Section
   
432.01   Driving upon right side of roadway; exceptions
   
432.02   Passing to right when proceeding in opposite directions
   
432.03   Overtaking, passing to left; driver’s duties
   
432.04   Overtaking, passing to right of vehicle
   
432.05   Overtaking, passing to left of centerline
   
432.06   Driving upon left side of roadway
   
432.07   Hazardous or no passing zones
   
432.08   Driving within lanes or continuous lines of traffic
   
432.09   Following too closely
   
432.10   Turning at intersections
   
432.11   “U” turns restricted
   
432.12   Starting and backing vehicles
   
432.13   Signals before changing course, turning or stopping
   
432.14   Hand and arm signals
   
432.15   Right-of-way at intersections
   
432.16   Intersections at which traffic-control signals fail or malfunction
   
432.17   Right-of-way when turning left
   
432.18   Operation of vehicle at stop and yield signs
   
432.19   Emergency or public safety vehicles at stop signals or signs
   
432.20   Right-of-way of public safety or coroner’s vehicle
   
432.21   Driving while approaching stationary public safety vehicle and certain
other vehicles with caution
   
432.22   Right-of-way at private driveway, alley or building
   
432.23   Stop signs on private roads and driveways
   
432.24   Right-of-way of funeral procession
   
432.25   Driving upon sidewalks, tree lawns or curbs
   
432.26   Driver’s view and control to be unobstructed by load or persons
   
432.27   Driving upon street posted as closed for repair
   
432.28   Following and parking near emergency or safety vehicles
   
432.29   Driving over fire hose
   
432.30   Driving through safety zone
   
432.31   One-way streets and rotary traffic islands
   
432.32   Driving upon divided roadways
   
432.33   Stopping for school bus; actuating visual signals; discharging
children
   
432.34   Driving across grade crossings
   
432.35   Stopping at grade crossings
   
432.36   Slow-moving vehicles or equipment at grade crossings
   
432.37   Obstructing intersections, crosswalks or grade crossings
   
432.38   “Peeling”; cracking exhaust noises
   
432.39   Shortcutting across private property
   
432.40   Entering and exiting controlled-access highway
   
432.41   Weaving; full time and attention
   
432.42   Operation on paths set aside for bicycles
   
432.43   Littering from motor vehicles
   
432.44   Use of earphones while driving
   
432.45   Texting while driving prohibited
   
432.46   Use of electronic wireless communication devices by minors or
probationary drivers while driving prohibited
   
432.47   Excessive automobile noise and squealing of tires
   
432.99   Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
   Obedience to traffic-control devices, see §
414.01
   Operation of bicycles and motorcycles generally, see §§
444.01 et seq.
   Operation of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles and all-purpose vehicles,
see §§
446.03,
446.04
   Yielding right-of-way to pedestrians on sidewalks, see §
416.09
§ 432.01 DRIVING UPON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon
the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction, or when making a left turn under the rules governing those
movements;
      (2)   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left
of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the
unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an
immediate hazard;
      (3)   When driving upon a roadway divided into three or more marked lanes
for traffic under the rules applicable thereon;
      (4)   When driving upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for
one-way traffic;
      (5)   When otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic-control
device.
   (b)   (1)   Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the
prevailing and lawful speed of traffic at the time and place and under the
conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane then available
for traffic, and far enough to the right to allow passing by faster vehicles if
the passing is safe and reasonable, except under any of the following
circumstances:
         A.   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction;
         B.   When preparing for a left turn;
         C.   When the driver must necessarily drive in a lane other than the
right-hand lane to continue on the driver’s intended route.
      (2)   Nothing in division (b)(1) of this section requires a driver of a
slower vehicle to compromise the driver’s safety to allow overtaking by a
faster vehicle.
   (c)   Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic and
providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the
left of the centerline of the roadway, except when authorized by official
traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left of the center of
the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use the lanes, or
except as permitted under division (a)(2) of this section. This division shall
not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the centerline in making a left
turn into or from an alley, private road or driveway.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (e)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.25)
§ 432.02 PASSING TO RIGHT WHEN PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.
   (a)   Operators of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass
each other to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one
line of traffic in each direction, each operator shall give to the other one-
half of the main traveled portion of the roadway or as nearly one-half as is
reasonably possible.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.26)
§ 432.03 OVERTAKING, PASSING TO LEFT; DRIVER’S DUTIES.
   (a)   The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction:
      (1)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction shall, except as provided in division (a)(3) of this
section, signal to the vehicle to be overtaken, shall pass to the left thereof
at a safe distance, and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway
until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. When a motor vehicle overtakes and
passes a bicycle or electric bicycle, three feet or greater is considered a
safe passing distance.
      (2)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
operator of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle at the latter’s audible signal, and the operator shall not
increase the speed of the operator’s vehicle until completely passed by the
overtaking vehicle.
      (3)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking and passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction on a divided highway as defined in R.C. §
4511.35, a limited access highway as defined in R.C. § 5511.02, or a highway
with four or more traffic lanes is not required to signal audibly to the
vehicle being overtaken and passed.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.27)
§ 432.04 OVERTAKING, PASSING TO RIGHT OF VEHICLE.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass on the right of another
vehicle only under the following conditions:
      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
or
      (2)   Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for
two or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction being traveled
by the overtaking vehicle.
   (b)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle only
under conditions permitting the movement in safety. The movement shall not be
made by driving off the roadway.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.28)
§ 432.05 OVERTAKING, PASSING TO LEFT OF CENTERLINE.
   (a)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left of the center of the roadway in
overtaking and passing traffic proceeding in the same direction, unless the
left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient
distance ahead to permit the overtaking and passing to be completely made
without interfering with the safe operation of any traffic approaching from the
opposite direction or any traffic overtaken. In every event, the overtaking
vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as soon as practicable, and
in the event the passing movement involves the use of a lane authorized for the
traffic approaching from the opposite direction, before coming within 200 feet
of any approaching vehicle.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.29)
§ 432.06 DRIVING UPON LEFT SIDE OF ROADWAY.
   (a)   No vehicle shall be driven upon the left side of the roadway under the
following conditions:
      (1)   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the
highway, where the operator’s view is obstructed within such a distance as to
create a hazard in the event traffic might approach from the opposite
direction;
      (2)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any
bridge, viaduct or tunnel; or
      (3)   When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection
or railroad grade crossing.
   (b)   This section does not apply to vehicles upon a one-way roadway, upon a
roadway where traffic is lawfully directed to be driven to the left side, or
under the conditions described in R.C. § 4511.25(A)(2) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.30)
§ 432.07 HAZARDOUS OR NO PASSING ZONES.
   (a)   The Department of Transportation may determine those portions of any
state highway where overtaking and passing other traffic or driving to the left
of the center or centerline of the roadway would be especially hazardous, and
may, by appropriate signs or markings on the highway, indicate the beginning
and end of the zones. When signs or markings are in place and clearly visible,
every operator of a vehicle shall obey the directions of the signs or markings,
notwithstanding the distances set out in R.C. § 4511.30.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply when all of the following
apply:
      (1)   The slower vehicle is proceeding at less than half the speed of the
speed limit applicable to that location.
      (2)   The faster vehicle is capable of overtaking and passing the slower
vehicle without exceeding the speed limit.
      (3)   There is sufficient clear sight distance to the left of the center
or centerline of the roadway to meet the overtaking and passing provisions of
R.C. § 4511.29, considering the speed of the slower vehicle.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.31)
§ 432.08 DRIVING WITHIN LANES OR CONTINUOUS LINES OF TRAFFIC.
   (a)   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for traffic, or wherever within the municipality traffic is lawfully
moving in two or more substantially continuous lines in the same direction, the
following rules apply:
      (1)   A vehicle shall be driven, as nearly as is practicable, entirely
within a single lane or line of traffic and shall not be moved from the lane or
line until the driver has first ascertained that the movement can be made with
safety.
      (2)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and provides for
the two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center
lane, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is
clearly visible and the center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance,
or when preparing for a left turn, or where the center lane is at the time
allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is
proceeding, and is posted with signs to give notice of that allocation.
      (3)   Official signs may be erected directing specified traffic to use a
designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction, regardless of the center of the roadway, or restricting
the use of a particular lane to only buses during certain hours or during all
hours, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of the signs.
      (4)   Official traffic-control devices may be installed prohibiting the
changing of lanes on sections of roadway, and drivers of vehicles shall obey
the directions of every such device.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.33)
§ 432.09 FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.
   (a)   (1)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle
more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of
the vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway.
      (2)   The driver of any truck, or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle,
when traveling upon a roadway outside a business or residence district, shall
maintain a sufficient space, whenever conditions permit, between the vehicle
and another vehicle ahead so an overtaking motor vehicle may enter and occupy
the space without danger. This division (a) does not prevent overtaking and
passing nor does it apply to any lane specially designated for use by trucks.
      (3)   Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business
or residence district in a caravan or motorcade shall maintain a sufficient
space between the vehicles so an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy the
space without danger. This division shall not apply to funeral processions.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.34)
§ 432.10 TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall be
governed by the following rules:
      (1)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
      (2)   At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both
directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left
turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the
centerline thereof and by passing to the right of the centerline where it
enters the intersection, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn
shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the centerline of
the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made in
that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection.
      (3)   At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on
one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at
any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand
lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of the
vehicle, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so
as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left hand lane
of the roadway being entered lawfully available to traffic moving in that lane.
   (b)   The Department of Transportation and local authorities may cause
markers, buttons or signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections, and
thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in this
section be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection, and when markers,
buttons or signs are so placed, no operator of a vehicle shall turn the vehicle
at an intersection other than as directed and required by the markers, buttons
or signs.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.36)
§ 432.11 “U” TURNS RESTRICTED.
   (a)   Except as provided in R.C. § 4511.13 and division (b) of this section,
no vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any
curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, if the vehicle
cannot be seen within 500 feet by the driver of any other vehicle approaching
from either direction.
   (b)   The driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, may turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction. This division applies only when the emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and
displaying at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the
vehicle, and when the driver of the vehicle is giving an audible signal by
siren, exhaust whistle or bell. This division does not relieve the driver of an
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.37)
§ 432.12 STARTING AND BACKING VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or
parked until the movement can be made with reasonable safety.
      (2)   Before backing, operators of vehicles shall give ample warning, and
while backing they shall exercise vigilance not to injure person or property on
the street or highway.
      (3)   No person shall back a motor vehicle on a freeway, except:
         A.   In a rest area;
         B.   In the performance of public works or official duties;
         C.   As a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of
a motor vehicle.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.38)
§ 432.13 SIGNALS BEFORE CHANGING COURSE, TURNING OR STOPPING.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall turn a vehicle or move right or left upon a
highway unless and until the person has exercised due care to ascertain that
the movement can be made with reasonable safety, nor without giving an
appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided.
      (2)   When required, a signal of intention to turn or move right or left
shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by
the vehicle before turning, except that in the case of a person operating a
bicycle or electric bicycle, the signal shall be made not less than one time
but is not required to be continuous. A bicycle or electric bicycle operator is
not required to make a signal if the bicycle is in a designated turn lane, and
a signal shall not be given when the operator’s hands are needed for the safe
operation of the bicycle or electric bicycle.
      (3)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear, when there is opportunity to
give a signal.
      (4)   Any stop or turn signal required by this section shall be given
either by means of the hand and arm, or by signal lights that clearly indicate
to both approaching and following traffic the intention to turn or move right
or left, except that any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped
with, and the required signal shall be given by, signal lights when the
distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside
limit of the body, cab or load of the motor vehicle exceeds 24 inches, or when
the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit
of the body or load thereof exceeds 14 feet, whether a single vehicle or a
combination of vehicles.
      (5)   The signal lights required by this section shall not be flashed on
one side only on a disabled vehicle, flashed as a courtesy or “do pass” signal
to operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear, nor be flashed on one
side only of a parked vehicle except as may be necessary for compliance with
this section.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.39)
§ 432.14 HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, all signals
required by the provisions of this traffic code, when given by hand and arm,
shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner, and
the signals shall indicate as follows:
      (1)   Left turn, hand and arm extended horizontally;
      (2)   Right turn, hand and arm extended upward;
      (3)   Stop or decrease speed, hand and arm extended downward.
   (b)   As an alternative to division (a)(2) of this section, a person
operating a bicycle or electric bicycle may give a right turn signal by
extending the right hand and arm horizontally and to the right side of the
bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.40)
§ 432.15 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (a)   When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different
streets or highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle
on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
   (b)   The right-of-way rule declared in division (a) of this section is
modified at through highways and otherwise as stated in this traffic code or
R.C. Chapter 4511.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.41)
§ 432.16 INTERSECTIONS AT WHICH TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS FAIL OR MALFUNCTION.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle who approaches an intersection where traffic
is controlled by traffic control signals shall do all of the following if the
signal facing the driver exhibits no colored lights or colored lighted arrows,
exhibits a combination of such lights or arrows that fails to clearly indicate
the assignment of right-of-way, or, if the vehicle is a bicycle or an electric
bicycle, the signals are otherwise malfunctioning due to the failure of a
vehicle detector to detect the presence of the bicycle or electric bicycle:
      (1)   Stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, stop before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, stop
before entering the intersection;
      (2)   Yield the right-of-way to all vehicles in the intersection or
approaching on an intersecting road, if the vehicles will constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways;
      (3)   Exercise ordinary care while proceeding through the intersection.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.132)
§ 432.17 RIGHT-OF-WAY WHEN TURNING LEFT.
   (a)   The operator of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an
intersection or into an alley, private road or driveway shall yield the right-
of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within
the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.42)
§ 432.18 OPERATION OF VEHICLE AT STOP AND YIELD SIGNS.
   (a)   Except when directed to proceed by a law enforcement officer, every
driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering it. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-
way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so
closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is
moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways.
   (b)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow down to a
speed reasonable for the existing conditions, and if required for safety to
stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then at the
point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it. After
slowing, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways. Whenever a driver is involved in a
collision with a vehicle in the intersection or junction of roadways, after
driving past a yield sign without stopping, the collision shall be prima facie
evidence of the driver’s failure to yield the right-of- way.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.43)
§ 432.19 EMERGENCY OR PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLES AT STOP SIGNALS OR SIGNS.
   (a)   The driver of any emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, upon approaching a red or stop signal or any
stop sign, shall slow down as necessary for safety to traffic, but may proceed
cautiously past the red or stop sign or signal with due regard for the safety
of all persons using the street or highway.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.03)
§ 432.20 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF PUBLIC SAFETY OR CORONER’S VEHICLE.
   (a)   Upon the approach of a public safety vehicle or coroner’s vehicle,
equipped with at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating light visible
under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of
the vehicle, and the driver is giving an audible signal by siren, exhaust
whistle or bell, no driver of any other vehicle shall fail to yield the right-
of-way, immediately drive, if practical, to a position parallel to, and as
close as possible to, the right edge or curb of the highway clear of any
intersection, and stop and remain in that position until the public safety
vehicle or coroner’s vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a
police officer.
   (b)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle or
coroner’s vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons and property upon the highway.
   (c)   This section applies to a coroner’s vehicle only when the vehicle is
operated in accordance with R.C. § 4513.171, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance. As used in this section, CORONER’S VEHICLE means a vehicle
used by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator that is equipped
with a flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and a siren, exhaust
whistle or bell capable of giving an audible signal.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division or division (e), whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a
first offense. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 4511.45)
   (e)   (1)   When the failure of a motor vehicle operator to yield the right-
of-way to a public safety vehicle as required by division (a) of this section
impedes the ability of the public safety vehicle to respond to an emergency,
any emergency personnel in the public safety vehicle may report the license
plate number and a general description of the vehicle and the operator of the
vehicle to the law enforcement agency exercising jurisdiction over the area
where the alleged violation occurred.
      (2)   A.   Upon receipt of a report under division (e)(1) of this
section, the law enforcement agency may conduct an investigation to attempt to
determine or confirm the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation.
         B.   If the identity of the operator at the time of an alleged
violation of division (a) of this section is established, the law enforcement
agency has probable cause to issue either a written warning or a citation for
that violation, and the agency shall issue a written warning or a citation to
the operator.
         C.   If the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of the
alleged violation cannot be established, the law enforcement agency may issue a
written warning to the person who owned the vehicle at the time of the alleged
violation. However, in the case of a leased or rented vehicle, the law
enforcement agency shall issue the written warning to the person who leased or
rented the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation.
      (3)   A.   Whoever violates division (a) of this section based on a
report filed under division (e)(1) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined $150.
         B.   If a person who is issued a citation for a violation of division
(a) of this section based on a report filed under division (e)(1) of this
section does not enter a written plea of guilty and does not waive the person’s
right to contest the citation but instead appears in person in the proper court
to answer the charge, the trier of fact cannot find beyond a reasonable doubt
that the person committed that violation unless the emergency personnel who
filed the report appears in person in the court and testifies.
      (4)   As used in this division (e):
         A.   LICENSE PLATE. Includes any temporary motor vehicle license
registration issued under R.C. § 4503.182 or similar law of another
jurisdiction.
         B.   PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Does not include an unmarked public safety
vehicle or a vehicle used by a public law enforcement officer or other person
sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state or a vehicle used
by the motor carrier enforcement unit for the enforcement of orders and rules
of the public utilities commission.
(R.C. § 4511.454)
§ 432.21 DRIVING WHILE APPROACHING STATIONARY PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE AND CERTAIN
OTHER VEHICLES WITH CAUTION.
   (a)   The driver of a motor vehicle, upon approaching a stationary public
safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, waste collection
vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor
vehicle inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a
highway maintenance vehicle that is displaying the appropriate visual signals
by means of flashing, oscillating, or rotating lights, as prescribed in R.C. §
4513.17, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   If the driver of the motor vehicle is traveling on a highway that
consists of at least two lanes that carry traffic in the same direction of
travel as that of the driver’s motor vehicle, the driver shall proceed with due
caution and, if possible and with due regard to the road, weather and traffic
conditions, shall change lanes into a lane this is not adjacent to that of the
stationary public safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle,
waste collection vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to
conduct motor vehicle inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and
4923.06, or a highway maintenance vehicle.
      (2)   If the driver is not traveling on a highway of a type described in
division (a)(1) of this section, or if the driver is traveling on a highway of
that type but it is not possible to change lanes or if to do so would be
unsafe, the driver shall proceed with due caution, reduce the speed of the
motor vehicle, and maintain a safe speed for the road, weather and traffic
conditions.
   (b)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle,
emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, waste collection vehicle, vehicle used
by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor vehicle inspections in
accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a highway maintenance vehicle
from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and
property upon the highway.
   (c)   No person shall fail to drive a motor vehicle in compliance with
divisions (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section when so required by division (a) of
this section.
   (d)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Notwithstanding § 698.02 or R.C. § 2929.28, upon a finding that a
person operated a motor vehicle in violation of division (c) of this section,
the court, in addition to all other penalties provided by law, shall impose a
fine of two times the usual amount imposed for the violation.
      (3)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
   (e)   The offense established under this section is a strict liability
offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this offense as a
strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.
(R.C. § 4511.213)
§ 432.22 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT PRIVATE DRIVEWAY, ALLEY OR BUILDING.
   (a)   (1)   The operator of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from
any place other than another roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all
traffic approaching on the roadway to be entered or crossed.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.44)
   (b)   (1)   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building,
private road or driveway within a business or residence district shall stop the
vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area
extending across the alley, building entrance, road or driveway, or in the
event there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the point nearest the street to
be entered where the driver has a view of approaching traffic thereon.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (b) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (b) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
division (b) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.431)
   (c)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn into a private road or
driveway, alley or building from a public street or highway shall be governed
by the following rules:
      (1)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right- hand curb or edge of the roadway.
      (2)   Upon a roadway where traffic is proceeding in opposite directions,
approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made from that portion of the
right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof.
      (3)   Upon a roadway where traffic is restricted to one direction,
approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made as close as practicable
to the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   (d)   It shall be the duty of the driver of any vehicle entering a private
road or driveway, alley or building to yield the right-of-way to pedestrians
lawfully using the sidewalk or sidewalk area extending across the private road
or driveway, alley or building.
§ 432.23 STOP SIGNS ON PRIVATE ROADS AND DRIVEWAYS.
   (a)   The owner of a private road or driveway located in a private
residential area containing 20 or more dwelling units may erect stop signs at
places where the road or driveway intersects with another private road or
driveway in the residential area, in compliance with all of the following
requirements:
      (1)   The stop sign is sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily
observant person and meets the specifications of and is placed in accordance
with the Manual adopted by the Department of Transportation pursuant to R.C. §
4511.09.
      (2)   The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the private road or
driveway that is in plain view and clearly informs persons entering the road or
driveway that they are entering private property, stop signs have been posted
and must be obeyed, and the signs are enforceable by law enforcement officers
under state law. The sign required by this division, where appropriate, may be
incorporated with the sign required by R.C. § 4511.211(A)(2), or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (b)   R.C. §§ 4511.43(A) and 4511.46, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, shall be deemed to apply to the driver of a vehicle on a
private road or driveway where a stop sign is placed in accordance with
division (a) of this section and to a pedestrian crossing such a road or
driveway at an intersection where a stop sign is in place.
   (c)   When a stop sign is placed in accordance with division (a) of this
section, any law enforcement officer may apprehend a person found violating the
stop sign and may stop and charge the person with violating the stop sign.
   (d)   As used in this section, and for the purpose of applying R.C. §§
4511.43(A) and 4511.46, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, to
conduct under this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   INTERSECTION.
         A.   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two private roads or driveways which join one another at, or
approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling
upon different private roads or driveways joining at any other angle may come
in conflict.
         B.   Where a private road or driveway includes two roadways 30 feet or
more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of the private roads or
driveways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
      (2)   OWNER and PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL AREA CONTAINING 20 OR MORE DWELLING
UNITS. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4511.211.
      (3)   ROADWAY. That portion of a private road or driveway improved,
designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, except the berm or shoulder.
If a private road or driveway includes two or more separate roadways, the term
ROADWAY means any such roadway separately but not all such roadways
collectively.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.432)
§ 432.24 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF FUNERAL PROCESSION.
   (a)   As used in this section, FUNERAL PROCESSION means two or more vehicles
accompanying the cremated remains or the body of a deceased person in the
daytime when each of the vehicles has its headlights lighted and is displaying
a purple and white or an orange and white pennant attached to each vehicle in
such a manner as to be clearly visible to traffic approaching from any
direction.
   (b)   Excepting public safety vehicles proceeding in accordance with R.C. §
4511.45 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or when directed
otherwise by a police officer, pedestrians and the operators of all vehicles
shall yield the right-of-way to each vehicle that is a part of a funeral
procession. Whenever the lead vehicle in a funeral procession lawfully enters
an intersection, the remainder of the vehicles in the procession may continue
to follow the lead vehicle through the intersection, notwithstanding any
traffic-control devices or right-of-way provisions of the Revised Code,
provided that the operator of each vehicle exercises due care to avoid
colliding with any other vehicle or pedestrian.
   (c)   No person shall operate any vehicle as a part of a funeral procession
without having the headlights of the vehicle lighted and without displaying a
purple and white or an orange and white pennant in such a manner as to be
clearly visible to traffic approaching from any direction.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (e)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.451)
§ 432.25 DRIVING UPON SIDEWALKS, TREE LAWNS OR CURBS.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall drive any vehicle, other than a bicycle or an
electric bicycle if the motor is not engaged, upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area,
except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway.
      (2)   This prohibition does not apply to a law enforcement officer, or
other person sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state, using
an electric bicycle with the motor engaged while in the performance of the
officer’s duties.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting local
authorities from regulating the operation of bicycles or electric bicycles,
except that no local authority may require that bicycles or electric bicycles
be operated on sidewalks.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.711)
   (d)   No person shall drive a vehicle on a tree lawn area or the curb of a
street, except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway or when
otherwise lawfully authorized.
§ 432.26 DRIVER’S VIEW AND CONTROL TO BE UNOBSTRUCTED BY LOAD OR PERSONS.
   (a)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there
are in the front seat such number of persons, as to obstruct the view of the
driver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or to interfere with the driver’s
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (b)   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in a position as to interfere
with the driver’s view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with the driver’s
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (c)   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic; nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.70)
§ 432.27 DRIVING UPON STREET POSTED AS CLOSED FOR REPAIR.
   (a)   No person shall drive upon, along or across a street or highway, or
any part of a street or highway that has been closed in the process of its
construction, reconstruction or repair, and posted with appropriate signs by
the authority having jurisdiction to close the highway.
(R.C. § 4511.71(A))
   (b)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle on or onto a public street or
highway that is temporarily covered by a rise in water level, including
groundwater or an overflow of water, and that is clearly marked by a sign that
specifies that the road is closed due to the rise in water level and that any
person who uses the closed portion of the road may be fined up to $2,000.
      (2)   A person who is issued a citation for a violation of division (b)
(1) of this section is not permitted to enter a written plea of guilty and
waive the person’s right to contest the citation in court, but instead must
appear in person in the proper court to answer the charge.
(R.C. § 4511.714(A), (B))
   (c)   (1)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever
violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
         B.   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under § 408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.71(B))
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
         B.   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required
under R.C. § 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or required under
any provision of law, the court imposing the sentence upon an offender who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (b) of this section
shall order the offender to reimburse one or more rescuers for the cost any
such rescuer incurred in rescuing the person, excluding any cost of
transporting the rescued person to a hospital or other facility for treatment
of injuries, up to a cumulative maximum of $2,000. If more than one rescuer was
involved in the emergency response, the court shall allocate the reimbursement
proportionately, according to the cost each rescuer incurred. A financial
sanction imposed under this section is a judgment in favor of the rescuer and,
subject to a determination of indigency under R.C. § 2929.28(B), a rescuer may
collect the financial sanction in the same manner as provided in R.C. §
2929.28.
(R.C. § 4511.714(C))
   (d)   As used in this section:
      (1)   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE ORGANIZATION. Has the same meanings as in
R.C. § 9.60.
      (2)   FIREFIGHTING AGENCY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 9.60.
      (3)   PRIVATE FIRE COMPANY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 9.60.
      (4)   RESCUER. Means a state agency, political subdivision, firefighting
agency, private fire company, or emergency medical service organization.
(R.C. § 4511.714(D))
§ 432.28 FOLLOWING AND PARKING NEAR EMERGENCY OR SAFETY VEHICLES.
   (a)   The driver of any vehicle, other than an emergency vehicle or public
safety vehicle on official business, shall not follow any emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle traveling in response to an alarm closer than 500 feet,
or drive into or park the vehicle within the block where the fire apparatus has
stopped in answer to a fire alarm, unless directed to do so by a police officer
or a firefighter.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.72)
§ 432.29 DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.
   (a)   No vehicle shall, without the consent of the Fire Department official
in command, be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department that is
laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of
fire.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.73)
§ 432.30 DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE.
   (a)   No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety
zone.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.60)
§ 432.31 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.
   (a)   (1)   Upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for one-way
traffic, a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.
      (2)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven
only to the right of the rotary traffic island.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.32)
§ 432.32 DRIVING UPON DIVIDED ROADWAYS.
   (a)   Whenever any highway has been divided into two roadways by an
intervening space, or by a physical barrier, or a clearly indicated dividing
section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be
driven only upon the right-hand roadway, and no vehicle shall be driven over,
across or within any dividing space, barrier or section, except through an
opening, crossover or intersection established by public authority. This
section does not prohibit the occupancy of the dividing space, barrier or
section for the purpose of an emergency stop, or in compliance with an order of
a police officer.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.35)
§ 432.33 STOPPING FOR SCHOOL BUS; ACTUATING VISUAL SIGNALS; DISCHARGING
CHILDREN.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle, upon meeting or overtaking from either
direction any school bus stopped for the purpose of receiving or discharging
any school child, person attending programs offered by community boards of
mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child
attending a program offered by a head start agency, shall stop at least ten
feet from the front or rear of the school bus and shall not proceed until the
school bus resumes motion, or until signaled by the school bus driver to
proceed. It is no defense to a charge under this division that the school bus
involved failed to display or be equipped with an automatically extended stop
warning sign as required by division (b) of this section.
   (b)   Every school bus shall be equipped with amber and red visual signals
meeting the requirements of R.C. § 4511.771 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and an automatically extended stop warning sign of a type
approved by the Ohio Department of Education and Workforce, which shall be
actuated by the driver of the bus whenever but only whenever the bus is stopped
or stopping on the roadway for the purpose of receiving or discharging school
children, persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental
health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or children attending
programs offered by head start agencies. A school bus driver shall not actuate
the visual signals or the stop warning sign in designated school bus loading
areas where the bus is entirely off the roadway or at school buildings when
children or persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental
health and county boards of developmental disabilities are loading or unloading
at curbside or at buildings when children attending programs offered by head
start agencies are loading or unloading at curbside. The visual signals and
stop warning sign shall be synchronized or otherwise operated as required by
the Ohio Administrative Code.
   (c)   Where a highway has been divided into four or more traffic lanes, a
driver of a vehicle need not stop for a school bus approaching from the
opposite direction which has stopped for the purpose of receiving or
discharging any school child, persons attending programs offered by community
boards of mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or
children attending programs offered by head start agencies. The driver of any
vehicle overtaking the school bus shall comply with division (a) above.
   (d)   School buses operating on divided highways or on highways with four or
more traffic lanes shall receive and discharge all school children, persons
attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and county
boards of developmental disabilities, and children attending programs offered
by head start agencies on their residence side of the highway.
   (e)   No school bus driver shall start the driver’s bus until after any
child, person attending programs offered by community boards of mental health
and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child attending a program
offered by a head start agency who may have alighted therefrom has reached a
place of safety on the child’s or person’s residence side of the road.
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section may be fined an
amount not to exceed $500. A person who is issued a citation for a violation of
division (a) of this section is not permitted to enter a written plea of guilty
and waive the person’s right to contest the citation in a trial but instead
must appear in person in the proper court to answer the charge.
      (2)   In addition to and independent of any other penalty provided by
law, the court or Mayor may impose upon an offender who violates this section a
class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7). When a
license is suspended under this section, the court or Mayor shall cause the
offender to deliver the license to the court, and the court or Clerk of the
Court immediately shall forward the license to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles,
together with notice of the court’s action.
   (g)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   HEAD START AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3301.32.
      (2)   SCHOOL BUS. As used in relation to children who attend a program
offered by a head start agency, means a bus that is owned and operated by a
head start agency, is equipped with an automatically extended stop warning sign
of a type approved by the Ohio Department of Education and Workforce, is
painted the color and displays the markings described in R.C. § 4511.77, and is
equipped with amber and red visual signals meeting the requirements of R.C. §
4511.77, irrespective of whether or not the bus has 15 or more children aboard
at any time. The term does not include a van owned and operated by a head start
agency, irrespective of its color, lights or markings.
(R.C. § 4511.75)
§ 432.34 DRIVING ACROSS GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (a)   (1)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad
grade crossing, the person shall stop within 50 feet, but not less than 15 feet
from the nearest rail of the railroad if any of the following circumstances
exist at the crossing:
         A.   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a train or other on-track equipment.
         B.   A crossing gate is lowered.
         C.   A flagperson gives or continues to give a signal of the approach
or passage of a train or other on-track equipment.
         D.   There is insufficient space on the other side of the railroad
grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle the person is operating without
obstructing the passage of other vehicles, pedestrians, or railroad trains,
notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed.
         E.   An approaching train is emitting an audible signal or is plainly
visible and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing.
         F.   There is insufficient undercarriage clearance to safely negotiate
the crossing.
         G.   There is insufficient space on the other side of the railroad
grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle the person is operating without
obstructing the passage of other on-track equipment.
         H.   Approaching on-track equipment is emitting an audible signal or
is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing.
      (2)   A.   A person who is driving a vehicle and who approaches a
railroad grade crossing shall not proceed as long as any of the circumstances
described in divisions (a)(1)A. to (a)(1)F. of this section exist at the
crossing.
         B.   A person who is driving a vehicle and who approaches a railroad
grade crossing shall not recklessly proceed as long as any of the circumstances
described in division (a)(1)G. or (a)(1)H. of this section exist at the
crossing.
   (b)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while the gate or barrier is
closed or is being opened or closed unless the person is signaled by a law
enforcement officer or flagperson that it is permissible to do so.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
      (2)   In lieu of a fine or jail term for a violation of this section, a
court may instead order the offender to attend and successfully complete a
remedial safety training or presentation regarding rail safety that is offered
by an authorized and qualified organization that is selected by the court. The
offender shall complete the presentation within a time frame determined by the
court, not to exceed 180 days after the court issues the order. The offender
shall notify the court of the successful completion of the presentation. When
the offender notifies the court of the successful completion of the
presentation, the court shall waive any fine or jail term that it otherwise
would have imposed for a violation of this section.
(R.C. § 4511.62)
§ 432.35 STOPPING AT GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2) of this section, the
operator of any bus, any school vehicle, or any vehicle transporting a material
or materials required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R. Parts 100 through 185,
before crossing at grade any track of a railroad, shall stop the vehicle and,
while so stopped, shall listen through an open door or open window and look in
both directions along the track for any approaching train or other on-track
equipment, and for signals indicating the approach of a train or other on-track
equipment, and shall proceed only upon exercising due care after stopping,
looking, and listening as required by this section. Upon proceeding, the
operator of such a vehicle shall cross only in a gear that will ensure there
will be no necessity for changing gears while traversing the crossing and shall
not shift gears while crossing the tracks.
      (2)   Division (a) of this section does not apply at grade crossings when
any local authority has filed an application with the Public Utilities
Commission requesting the approval of an exempt crossing, and the Public
Utilities Commission has authorized and approved an exempt crossing as provided
in R.C. § 4511.63(B).
      (3)   As used in division (a) of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         A.   BUS. Any vehicle originally designed by its manufacturer to
transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver, or carries 16 or more
passengers, including the driver.
         B.   EXEMPT CROSSING. A highway rail grade crossing authorized and
approved by the Public Utilities Commission under R.C. § 4511.63(B) at which
vehicles may cross without making the stop otherwise required by this section.
         C.   SCHOOL VEHICLE. Any vehicle used for the transportation of pupils
to and from a school or school-related function if the vehicle is owned or
operated by, or operated under contract with, a public or nonpublic school.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of
division (a) of this section or R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762,
4511.764, 4511.77 or 4511.79, or a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any of those sections, whoever violates division (a) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.63)
   (b)   (1)   As used in this section, ACTIVE GRADE CROSSING WARNING DEVICE
means signs, signals, gates, or other protective devices erected or installed
at a public highway-railway crossing at common grade and activated by an
electrical circuit.
      (2)   The Department of Transportation and local authorities, with the
approval of the Department, may designate dangerous highway crossings over
railroad tracks and erect stop signs thereat.
      (3)   A.   The Department and local authorities shall erect stop signs at
a railroad highway grade crossing in either of the following circumstances:
            1.   New warning devices that are not active grade crossing warning
devices are being installed at the grade crossing, and railroad crossbucks were
the only warning devices at the grade crossing prior to the installation of the
new warning devices.
            2.   The grade crossing is constructed after July 1, 2013, and only
warning devices that are not active grade crossing warning devices are
installed at the grade crossing.
         B.   Division (b)(3)A. of this section does not apply to a railroad
highway grade crossing that the Director of Transportation has exempted from
that division because of traffic flow or other considerations or factors.
      (4)   When stop signs are erected pursuant to division (b)(2) or (b)(3)
of this section, the operator of any vehicle shall stop within 50, but not less
than 15, feet from the nearest rail of the railroad tracks and shall exercise
due care before proceeding across such grade crossing.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (b)(4) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (6)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.61)
§ 432.36 SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES OR EQUIPMENT AT GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (a)   No person shall operate or move any crawler-type tractor, steam
shovel, derrick, roller or any equipment or structure having a normal operating
speed of six or less miles per hour or a vertical body or load clearance of
less than nine inches above the level surface of a roadway, upon or across any
tracks at a railroad grade crossing without first complying with divisions (a)
(1) and (a)(2) of this section.
      (1)   Before making any such crossing, the person operating or moving any
such vehicle or equipment shall first stop the same, and while stopped the
person shall listen and look in both directions along such track for any
approaching train or other on-track equipment and for signals indicating the
approach of a train or other on-track equipment, and shall proceed only upon
exercising due care.
      (2)   No such crossing shall be made when warning is given by automatic
signal or crossing gates or a flagperson or otherwise of the immediate approach
of a railroad train or car or other on-track equipment.
   (b)   If the normal sustained speed of the vehicle, equipment or structure
is not more than three miles per hour, the person owning, operating or moving
the same shall also give notice of the intended crossing to a station agent or
superintendent of the railroad, and a reasonable time shall be given to the
railroad to provide proper protection for the crossing. Where the vehicles or
equipment are being used in constructing or repairing a section of highway
lying on both sides of a railroad grade crossing, and in this construction or
repair it is necessary to repeatedly move the vehicles or equipment over the
crossing, one daily notice specifying when the work will start and stating the
hours during which it will be prosecuted is sufficient.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.64)
§ 432.37 OBSTRUCTING INTERSECTIONS, CROSSWALKS OR GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (a)   No driver shall enter an intersection or marked crosswalk, or drive
onto any railroad grade crossing, unless there is sufficient space on the other
side of the intersection, crosswalk or grade crossing to accommodate the
vehicle the driver is operating without obstructing the passage of other
vehicles, pedestrians or railroad trains, notwithstanding any traffic-control
signal indication to proceed.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.712)
§ 432.38 “PEELING”; CRACKING EXHAUST NOISES.
   No person shall operate any motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe
operation, or in compliance with law, in such a manner that the vehicle is so
rapidly accelerated or started from a stopped position, or in the shifting of
gears while in motion, that the exhaust system emits a loud, cracking or
chattering noise unusual to its normal operation, or that the rubber tires of
the vehicle squeal or leave tire marks on the roadway, commonly known as
“peeling”.
§ 432.39 SHORTCUTTING ACROSS PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No operator of a motor vehicle shall enter upon private property for the
sole purpose of driving across that property, between abutting streets or other
public ways thereof. The failure to stop on the property in connection with or
in furtherance of the enterprise or activities being conducted on the property
shall constitute prima facie evidence of the violation.
§ 432.40 ENTERING AND EXITING CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY.
   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access highway
except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority.
§ 432.41 WEAVING; FULL TIME AND ATTENTION.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle upon any street
or highway in a weaving or zigzag course unless the irregular course is
necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law.
   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle without giving
his or her full time and attention to the operation of the vehicle.
§ 432.42 OPERATION ON PATHS SET ASIDE FOR BICYCLES.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, snowmobile or all-
purpose vehicle upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, when
an appropriate sign giving notice of that use is posted on the path.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect any rule of
the Director of Natural Resources governing the operation of motor vehicles,
snowmobiles, all-purpose vehicles and bicycles on lands under the Director’s
jurisdiction.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.713)
§ 432.43 LITTERING FROM MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (a)   No operator or occupant of a motor vehicle shall, regardless of
intent, throw, drop, discard or deposit litter from any motor vehicle in
operation upon any street, road or highway, except into a litter receptacle in
a manner that prevents its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (b)   No operator of a motor vehicle in operation upon any street, road or
highway shall allow litter to be thrown, dropped, discarded or deposited from
the motor vehicle, except into a litter receptacle in a manner that prevents
its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (c)   As used in this section, “litter” means garbage, trash, waste,
rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts,
furniture, glass or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.82)
§ 432.44 USE OF EARPHONES WHILE DRIVING.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   EARPHONES. Any device that covers all or a portion of both ears and
that does either of the following:
         A.   Through either a physical connection to another device or a
wireless connection, provides the listener with radio programs, music, or other
information;
         B.   Provides hearing protection.
         EARPHONES does not include speakers or other listening devices that
are built into protective headgear.
      (2)   EARPLUGS. Any device that can be inserted into one or both ears and
that does either of the following:
         A.   Through either a physical connection to another device or a
wireless connection, provides the listener with radio programs, music, or other
information;
         B.   Provides hearing protection.
   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle while wearing earphones over,
or earplugs in, both ears.
   (c)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   Any person wearing a hearing aid;
      (2)   Law enforcement personnel while on duty;
      (3)   Fire Department personnel and emergency medical service personnel
while on duty;
      (4)   Any person engaged in the operation of equipment for use in the
maintenance or repair of any highway;
      (5)   Any person engaged in the operation of refuse collection equipment;
      (6)   Any person wearing earphones or earplugs for hearing protection
while operating a motorcycle.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.84)
§ 432.45 TEXTING WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any street, highway, or
property open to the public for vehicular traffic while using, holding, or
physically supporting with any part of the person’s body an electronic wireless
communications device.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device to make
contact, for emergency purposes, with a law enforcement agency, hospital or
health care provider, fire department, or other similar emergency agency or
entity;
      (2)   A person driving a public safety vehicle while using an electronic
wireless communications device in the course of the person’s duties;
      (3)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device when
the person’s motor vehicle is in a stationary position and is outside a lane of
travel, at a traffic control signal that is currently directing traffic to
stop, or parked on a road or highway due to an emergency or road closure;
      (4)   A person using and holding an electronic wireless communications
device directly near the person’s ear for the purpose of making, receiving, or
conducting a telephone call, provided that the person does not manually enter
letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
      (5)   A person receiving wireless messages on an electronic wireless
communications device regarding the operation or navigation of a motor vehicle;
safety-related information, including emergency, traffic, or weather alerts; or
data used primarily by the motor vehicle, provided that the person does not
hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (6)   A person using the speaker phone function of the electronic
wireless communications device, provided that the person does not hold or
support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (7)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device for
navigation purposes, provided that the person does not do either of the
following during the use:
         A.   Manually enter letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
         B.   Hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (8)   A person using a feature or function of the electronic wireless
communications device with a single touch or single swipe, provided that the
person does not do either of the following during the use:
         A.   Manually enter letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
         B.   Hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (9)   A person operating a commercial truck while using a mobile data
terminal that transmits and receives data;
      (10)   A person operating a utility service vehicle or a vehicle for or
on behalf of a utility, if the person is acting in response to an emergency,
power outage, or circumstance that affects the health or safety of individuals;
      (11)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device in
conjunction with a voice- operated or hands-free feature or function of the
vehicle or of the device without the use of either hand except to activate,
deactivate, or initiate the feature or function with a single touch or swipe,
provided the person does not hold or support the device with any part of the
person’s body;
      (12)   A person using technology that physically or electronically
integrates the device into the motor vehicle, provided that the person does not
do either of the following during the use:
         A.   Manually enter letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
         B.   Hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body.
      (13)   A person storing an electronic wireless communications device in a
holster, harness, or article of clothing on the person’s body.
   (c)   If a law enforcement officer issues an offender a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of division (a) of this section, the officer shall do
both of the following:
      (1)   Report the issuance of the ticket, citation, or summons to the
officer’s law enforcement agency;
      (2)   Ensure that such report indicates the offender’s race.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of operating a
motor vehicle while using an electronic wireless communication device, an
unclassified misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided in divisions (d)(1)
to (d)(5) of this section.
      (1)   The offender shall be fined, and is subject to a suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege, as follows:
         A.   Except as provided in divisions (d)(1)B., (d)(1)C., (d)(1)D., and
(d)(2) of this section, the court shall impose upon the offender a fine of not
more than $150.
         B.   If, within two years of the violation, the offender has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one prior violation of this section, R.C. §
4511.204, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court shall
impose upon the offender a fine of not more than $250.
         C.   If, within two years of the violation, the offender has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more prior violations of this section,
R.C. § 4511.204, or a substantially equivalent or municipal ordinance, the
court shall impose upon the offender a fine of not more than $500. The court
also may impose a suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or
nonresident operating privilege for 90 days.
         D.   Notwithstanding divisions (d)(1)A. to (d)(1)C. of this section,
if the offender was operating the motor vehicle at the time of the violation in
a construction zone where a sign was posted in accordance with R.C. § 4511.98,
the court, in addition to all other penalties provided by law, shall impose
upon the offender a fine of two times the amount imposed for the violation
under division (d)(1)A., (d)(1)B., or (d)(1)C. of this section, as applicable.
      (2)   If the offender is in the category of offenders to whom division
(d)(1)A. of this section applies, in lieu of payment of the fine of $150 under
division (d)(1)A. of this section and the assessment of points under division
(d)(4) of this section, the offender instead may elect to attend the distracted
driving safety course, as described in R.C. § 4511.991. If the offender attends
and successfully completes the course, the offender shall be issued written
evidence that the offender successfully completed the course. The offender
shall not be required to pay the fine and shall not have the points assessed
against that offender’s driver’s license if the offender submits the written
evidence to the court within 90 days of the violation of division (a) of this
section. However, successful completion of the course does not result in a
dismissal of the charges for the violation, and the violation is a prior
offense under divisions (d)(1)B. and (d)(1)C. of this section if the offender
commits a subsequent violation or violations of division (a) of this section
within two years of the offense for which the course was completed. This
division does not apply with respect to any offender in the category of
offenders to whom division (d)(1)B., (d)(1)C., or (d)(1)D. of this section
applies.
      (3)   The court may impose any other penalty authorized under R.C. §§
2929.21 to 2929.28. However, the court shall not impose a fine or a suspension
not otherwise specified in division (d)(1) of this section. The court also
shall not impose a jail term or community residential sanction.
      (4)   Except as provided in division (d)(2) of this section, points shall
be assessed for a violation of division (a) of this section in accordance with
R.C. § 4510.036.
      (5)   The offense established under this section is a strict liability
offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this offense as a
strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.
   (e)   A prosecution for an offense in violation of this section does not
preclude a prosecution for an offense in violation of R.C. § 4511.204 based on
the same conduct. However, the two offenses are allied offenses of similar
import under R.C. § 2941.25.
   (f)   (1)   A law enforcement officer does not have probable cause and shall
not stop the operator of a motor vehicle for purposes of enforcing this section
unless the officer visually observes the operator using, holding, or physically
supporting with any part of the person’s body the electronic wireless
communications device.
      (2)   A law enforcement officer who stops the operator of a motor vehicle
for a violation of division (a) of this section shall inform the operator that
the operator may decline a search of the operator’s electronic wireless
communications device. The officer shall not do any of the following:
         A.   Access the device without a warrant, unless the operator
voluntarily and unequivocally gives consent for the officer to access the
device;
         B.   Confiscate the device while awaiting the issuance of a warrant to
access the device;
         C.   Obtain consent from the operator to access the device through
coercion or any other improper means. Any consent by the operator to access the
device shall be voluntary and unequivocal before the officer may access the
device without a warrant.
   (g)   As used in this section:
      (1)   ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE.
         A.   Includes any of the following:
            1.   A wireless telephone;
            2.   A text-messaging device;
            3.   A personal digital assistant;
            4.   A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet;
            5.   Any device capable of displaying a video, movie, broadcast
television image, or visual image;
            6.   Any other substantially similar wireless device that is
designed or used to communicate text, initiate or receive communication, or
exchange information or data.
         B.   An ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE does not include a
two-way radio transmitter or receiver used by a person who is licensed by the
federal communications commission to participate in the amateur radio service.
      (2)   UTILITY. An entity specified in R.C. § 4905.03(A), (C), (D), (E),
or (G).
      (3)   UTILITY SERVICE VEHICLE. A vehicle owned or operated by a utility.
      (4)   VOICE-OPERATED OR HANDS-FREE FEATURE OR FUNCTION. A feature or
function that allows a person to use an electronic wireless communications
device without the use of either hand, except to activate, deactivate, or
initiate the feature or function with a single touch or single swipe.
(R.C. § 4511.204)
Statutory reference:
   No preemption for local regulations imposing greater penalties, see R.C. §
4511.204(E)
§ 432.46 USE OF ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATION DEVICES BY MINORS OR
PROBATIONARY DRIVERS WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit who has not attained the
age of 18 years and no holder of a probationary driver’s license shall drive a
motor vehicle on any street, highway, or property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic or parking while using in any manner an
electronic wireless communications device.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to either of the
following:
      (1)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device for
emergency purposes, including an emergency contact with a law enforcement
agency, hospital or health care provider, fire department, or other similar
emergency agency or entity;
      (2)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device whose
motor vehicle is in a stationary position and the motor vehicle is outside a
lane of travel;
      (3)   A person using a navigation device in a voice-operated or hands-
free manner who does not manipulate the device while driving.
   (c)   (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(2) of this section, whoever
violates division (a) of this section shall be fined $150. In addition, the
court shall impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license
or permit for a definite period of 60 days.
      (2)   If the person previously has been adjudicated a delinquent child or
a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of this section, whoever violates
this section shall be fined $300. In addition, the court shall impose a class
seven suspension of the person’s driver’s license or permit for a definite
period of one year.
   (d)   The filing of a sworn complaint against a person for a violation of
this section does not preclude the filing of a sworn complaint for a violation
of R.C. § 4511.205 for the same conduct. However, if a person is adjudicated a
delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of this section
and is also adjudicated a delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a
violation of R.C. § 4511.205 for the same conduct, the two offenses are allied
offenses of similar import under R.C. § 2941.25.
   (e)   As used in this section, ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE
includes any of the following:
      (1)   A wireless telephone;
      (2)   A personal digital assistant;
      (3)   A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet;
      (4)   A text-messaging device;
      (5)   Any other substantially similar electronic wireless device that is
designed or used to communicate via voice, image or written word.
(R.C. § 4511.205)
§ 432.47 EXCESSIVE AUTOMOBILE NOISE AND SQUEALING OF TIRES.
   No person shall operate any motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe
operation or in compliance with law, in such manner that the vehicle is so
rapidly accelerated or started from a stopped position that the exhaust system
emits a loud, cracking or chattering noise unusual to its normal preparation,
or the rubber tires of such vehicle squeal or leave tire marks on the roadway,
commonly called PEELING.
(Ord. 449, passed 8-2-1965)
§ 432.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates §
432.47 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined for a first
offense not more than $50; and for a second offense within one year thereafter,
not less than $10 nor more than $100 or imprisoned not more than ten days or
both; and for a third or subsequent offense within one year after the first
offense shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $200 or imprisoned not
more than 30 days or both.
(Ord. 449, passed 8-2-1965)
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 434: O.V.I.; RECKLESS OPERATION; SPEED
Section
   
434.01   Driving or physical control of vehicle while under the influence of
alcohol or drugs
   
434.02   Immobilizing or disabling device violation
   
434.03   Reckless operation on streets, public or private property
   
434.04   Maximum speed limits; assured clear distance ahead
   
434.05   Speed limits on private roads and driveways
   
434.06   Slow speed; posted minimum speeds
   
434.07   Speed limitations over bridges
   
434.08   Speed exceptions for emergency or safety vehicles
   
434.09   Reasonable control
   
434.10   Street racing, stunt driving and street takeovers prohibited
   
434.11   Vehicular homicide; vehicular manslaughter; vehicular assault
   
434.12   Operation restricted for mini-trucks and low-speed, under-speed or
utility vehicles
   
434.99   Penalty
CROSS REFERENCE
   See section histories for similar state law
   Alcohol defined, see R.C. § 4301.01
   Alteration of prima facie speed limits, see R.C. §§ 4511.21, 4511.22,
4511.23
   Criminal offenses by drivers of commercial vehicles, see §§
442.05,
442.08
   Driving upon sidewalks, tree lawns or curbs, see §
432.25
   Drug of abuse defined, see R.C. § 3719.011
   Intoxicated pedestrians, see §
416.10
   “Peeling”, see §
432.38
   Liquor consumption in motor vehicle, see §
612.04
   Weaving; full time and attention, see §
432.41
§ 434.01 DRIVING OR PHYSICAL CONTROL OF VEHICLE WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF
ALCOHOL OR DRUGS.
   (a)   Driving under the influence.
      (1)   No person shall operate any vehicle within this municipality, if,
at the time of the operation, any of the following apply:
         A.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
a combination of them.
         B.   The person has a concentration of 0.08% or more but less than
0.17% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.
         C.   The person has a concentration of 0.096% or more but less than
0.204% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or
plasma.
         D.   The person has a concentration of 0.08 grams or more but less
than 0.17 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath.
         E.   The person has a concentration of 0.11 grams or more but less
than 0.238 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s
urine.
         F.   The person has a concentration of 0.17% or more by weight per
unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.
         G.   The person has a concentration of 0.204% or more by weight per
unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or plasma.
         H.   The person has a concentration of 0.17 grams or more by weight of
alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath.
         I.   The person has a concentration of 0.238 grams or more by weight
of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine.
         J.   Except as provided in division (k) of this section, the person
has a concentration of any of the following controlled substances or
metabolites of a controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum
or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds any of the following:
            1.   The person has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s
urine of at least 500 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter
of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            2.   The person has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s
urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s urine
or has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma of at least 50 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.
            3.   The person has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine metabolite per milliliter
of the person’s urine or has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of
cocaine metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.
            4.   The person has a concentration of heroin in the person’s urine
of at least 2,000 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s urine or
has a concentration of heroin in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma of at least 50 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.
            5.   The person has a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-
monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s urine of at least ten nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s urine or has
a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s whole blood
or blood serum or plasma.
            6.   The person has a concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s urine
of at least 25 nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s urine or a
concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of
at least ten nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma.
            7.   The person has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s
urine of at least ten nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma of at least two nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            8.   Either of the following applies:
               a.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or a combination of them, and the person has a concentration of
marihuana metabolite in the person’s urine of at least 15 nanograms of
marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a
concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma of at least five nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
               b.   The person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in
the person’s urine of at least 35 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite
in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms
of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma.
            9.   The person has a concentration of methamphetamine in the
person’s urine of at least 500 nanograms of methamphetamine per milliliter of
the person’s urine or has a concentration of methamphetamine in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of
methamphetamine per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.
            10.   The person has a concentration of phencyclidine in the
person’s urine of at least 25 nanograms of phencyclidine per milliliter of the
person’s urine or has a concentration of phencyclidine in the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of phencyclidine per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            11.   The State Board of Pharmacy has adopted a rule pursuant to
R.C. § 4729.041 that specifies the amount of salvia divinorum and the amount of
salvinorin A that constitute concentrations of salvia divinorum and salvinorin
A in a person’s urine, in a person’s whole blood, or in a person’s blood serum
or plasma at or above which the person is impaired for purposes of operating
any vehicle within this state, the rule is in effect, and the person has a
concentration of salvia divinorum or salvinorin A of at least that amount so
specified by rule in the person’s urine, in the person’s whole blood, or in the
person’s blood serum or plasma.
      (2)   No person who, within 20 years of the conduct described in division
(a)(2)A. of this section, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
a violation of this division or a substantially equivalent State law or
municipal ordinance, division (a)(1) of this section or a substantially
equivalent State law or municipal ordinance, or shall do both of the following:
         A.   Operate any vehicle within this municipality while under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them;
         B.   Subsequent to being arrested for operating the vehicle as
described in division (a)(2)A. of this section, being asked by a law
enforcement officer to submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and being advised by the
officer in accordance with R.C. § 4511.192 or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance of the consequences of the person’s refusal or submission
to the test or tests, refuse to submit to the test or tests.
   (b)   Underage alcohol consumption. No person under 21 years of age shall
operate any vehicle within this municipality if, at the time of the operation,
any of the following apply:
      (1)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02% but less than
0.08% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood;
      (2)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.03% but less than
0.096% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or
plasma;
      (3)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02 grams but less than
0.08 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath;
      (4)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.028 grams but less
than 0.11 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine.
   (c)   Prosecution; limitation on convictions. In any proceeding arising out
of one incident, a person may be charged with a violation of division (a)(1)A.
or (a)(2) and a violation of division (b)(1), (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section,
but the person may not be convicted of more than one violation of these
divisions.
   (d)   Evidence; tests.
      (1)   A.   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (a)(1)A. of this section or for an equivalent offense
that is vehicle-related, the result of any test of any blood, oral fluid, or
urine withdrawn and analyzed at any health care provider, as defined in R.C. §
2317.02, may be admitted with expert testimony to be considered with any other
relevant and competent evidence in determining the guilt or innocence of the
defendant.
         B.   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of division (a) or
(b) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, the
court may admit evidence on the presence and concentration of alcohol, drugs of
abuse, controlled substances, metabolites of a controlled substance, or a
combination of them in the defendant's whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, urine, oral fluid, or other bodily substance at the time of the alleged
violation as shown by chemical analysis of the substance withdrawn within three
hours of the time of the alleged violation. The three-hour time limit specified
in this division regarding the admission of evidence does not extend or affect
the two-hour time limit specified in R.C. § 4511.192(A) as the maximum period
of time during which a person may consent to a chemical test or tests as
described in that section. The court may admit evidence on the presence and
concentration of alcohol, drugs of abuse, or a combination of them as described
in this division when a person submits to a blood, breath, urine, oral fluid,
or other bodily substance test at the request of a law enforcement officer
under R.C. § 4511.191 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a
blood or urine sample is obtained pursuant to a search warrant. Only a
physician, a registered nurse, an emergency medical technician-intermediate, an
emergency medical technician-paramedic, or a qualified technician, chemist, or
phlebotomist shall withdraw a blood sample for the purpose of determining the
alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination content of the whole blood, blood serum, or blood plasma. This
limitation does not apply to the taking of breath, oral fluid, or urine
specimens. A person authorized to withdraw blood under this division may refuse
to withdraw blood under this division, if in that person's opinion, the
physical welfare of the person would be endangered by the withdrawing of blood.
The bodily substance withdrawn under this division (d)(1)B. shall be analyzed
in accordance with methods approved by the Director of Health by an individual
possessing a valid permit issued by the Director pursuant to R.C. § 3701.143.
         C.   As used in division (d)(1)B. of this section, EMERGENCY MEDICAL
TECHNICIAN-INTERMEDIATE and EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-PARAMEDIC have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 4765.01.
      (2)   In a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (a) of this
section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, if there was at
the time the bodily substance was withdrawn a concentration of less than the
applicable concentration of alcohol specified in divisions (a)(1)B., (a)(1)C.,
(a)(1)D. and (a)(1)E. of this section or less than the applicable concentration
of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled
substance specified for a violation of division (a)(1)J. of this section, that
fact may be considered with other competent evidence in determining the guilt
or innocence of the defendant. This division does not limit or affect a
criminal prosecution for a violation of division (b) of this section.
      (3)   Upon the request of the person who was tested, the results of the
chemical test shall be made available to the person or the person’s attorney,
immediately upon the completion of the chemical test analysis. If the chemical
test was obtained pursuant to division (d)(1)B. of this section, the person
tested may have a physician, a registered nurse or a qualified technician,
chemist or phlebotomist of the person’s own choosing administer a chemical test
or tests, at the person’s expense, in addition to any administered at the
request of a law enforcement officer. If the person was under arrest as
described in R.C. § 4511.191(A)(5), the arresting officer shall advise the
person at the time of the arrest that the person may have an independent
chemical test taken at the person’s own expense. If the person was under arrest
other than described in R.C. § 4511.191(A)(5), the form to be read to the
person to be tested, as required under division (g) of this section, shall
state that the person may have an independent test performed at the person’s
expense. The failure or inability to obtain an additional chemical test by a
person shall not preclude the admission of evidence relating to the chemical
test or tests taken at the request of a law enforcement officer.
      (4)   A.   As used in division (d)(4)B. and (d)(4)C. of this section,
“National Highway Traffic Safety Administration” means the National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration established as an administration of the United
States Department of Transportation under 96 Stat. 2415 (1983), 49 U.S.C. 105.
         B.   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (a) or (b) of this section, of a municipal ordinance
relating to operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or alcohol and a drug of abuse, or of a municipal ordinance relating to
operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine, if a law enforcement officer has
administered a field sobriety test to the operator of the vehicle involved in
the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the
officer administered the test in substantial compliance with the testing
standards for any reliable, credible, and generally accepted field sobriety
tests that were in effect at the time the tests were administered, including
but not limited to any testing standards then in effect that were set by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, all of the following apply:
            1.   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered.
            2.   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field
sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding.
            3.   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
division (d)(4)B.1. or (d)(4)B.2. of this section and if the testimony or
evidence is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the
testimony or evidence and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the
trier of fact considers to be appropriate.
         C.   Division (d)(4)B. of this section does not limit or preclude a
court, in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by
probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division,
from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by
division (d)(4)B. of this section.
   (e)   Laboratory report.
      (1)   Subject to division (e)(3) of this section, in any criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of division (a)(1)B.,
(a)(1)C., (a)(1)D., (a)(1)E., (a)(1)F., (a)(1)G., (a)(1)H., (a)(1)I. or (a)
(1)J. or (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3) or (b)(4) of this section or for an equivalent
offense that is substantially equivalent to any of those divisions, a
laboratory report from any laboratory personnel issued a permit by the
Department of Health authorizing an analysis as described in this division that
contains an analysis of the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine
or other bodily substance tested and that contains all of the information
specified in this division shall be admitted as prima facie evidence of the
information and statements that the report contains. The laboratory report
shall contain all of the following:
         A.   The signature, under oath, of any person who performed the
analysis;
         B.   Any findings as to the identity and quantity of alcohol, a drug
of abuse, a controlled substance, a metabolite of a controlled substance, or a
combination of them that was found;
         C.   A copy of a notarized statement by the laboratory director or a
designee of the director that contains the name of each certified analyst or
test performer involved with the report, the analyst’s or test performer’s
employment relationship with the laboratory that issued the report, and a
notation that performing an analysis of the type involved is part of the
analyst’s or test performer’s regular duties;
         D.   An outline of the analyst’s or test performer’s education,
training and experience in performing the type of analysis involved and a
certification that the laboratory satisfies appropriate quality control
standards in general and, in this particular analysis, under rules of the
Department of Health.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding the admission
of evidence, a report of the type described in division (e)(1) of this section
is not admissible against the defendant to whom it pertains in any proceeding,
other than a preliminary hearing or a grand jury proceeding, unless the
prosecutor has served a copy of the report on the defendant’s attorney or, if
the defendant has no attorney, on the defendant.
      (3)   A report of the type described in division (e)(1) of this section
shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents, identity or amount of any
substance if, within seven days after the defendant to whom the report pertains
or the defendant’s attorney receives a copy of the report, the defendant or the
defendant’s attorney demands the testimony of the person who signed the report.
The judge in the case may extend the seven-day time limit in the interest of
justice.
   (f)   Limitation of liability.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, any physician,
registered nurse, emergency medical technician-intermediate, emergency medical
technician-paramedic, or qualified technician, chemist or phlebotomist who
withdraws blood from a person pursuant to this section or R.C. § 4511.19,
4511.191 or 4511.192, and any hospital, first-aid station or clinic at which
blood is withdrawn from a person pursuant to this section or R.C. § 4511.19,
4511.191 or 4511.192, is immune from criminal liability and civil liability
based upon a claim of assault and battery or any other claim that is not a
claim of malpractice, for any act performed in withdrawing blood from the
person. The immunity provided in this division also extends to an emergency
medical service organization that employs an emergency medical technician-
intermediate or emergency medical technician-paramedic who withdraws blood
under this section. The immunity provided in this division is not available to
a person who withdraws blood if the person engages in willful or wanton
misconduct.
      (2)   As used in division (f)(1), EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-
INTERMEDIATE and EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-PARAMEDIC have the same meanings
as in R.C. § 4765.01.
(R.C. § 4511.19(A) - (F))
   (g)   Implied consent.
      (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this division (g), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         A.   ALCOHOL MONITORING DEVICE. Any device that provides for
continuous alcohol monitoring, any ignition interlock device, any immobilizing
or disabling device other than an ignition interlock device that is constantly
available to monitor the concentration of alcohol in a person’s system, or any
other device that provides for the automatic testing and periodic reporting of
alcohol consumption by a person and that a court orders a person to use as a
sanction imposed as a result of the person’s conviction of or plea of guilty to
an offense.
         B.   COMMUNITY ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 5119.01.
         C.   PHYSICAL CONTROL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.194.
      (2)   Implied consent to chemical tests. Any person who operates a
vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for
vehicular travel or parking within this municipality or who is in physical
control of a vehicle shall be deemed to have given consent to a chemical test
or tests of the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, oral
fluid, or urine to determine the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance,
metabolite of a controlled substance, or combination content of the person's
whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine if arrested
for a violation of division (a), (b) or (o) of this section, R.C. § 4511.19(A)
or (B), 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or any other
municipal O.V.I. ordinance.
      (3)   Tests at request of law enforcement agent. The chemical test or
tests under division (g)(2) of this section shall be administered at the
request of a law enforcement officer having reasonable grounds to believe the
person was operating or in physical control of a vehicle in violation of a
division, section or ordinance identified in division (g)(2) of this section.
The law enforcement agency by which the officer is employed shall designate
which of the tests shall be administered.
      (4)   Effect of death or unconsciousness. Any person who is dead or
unconscious, or who otherwise is in a condition rendering the person incapable
of refusal, shall be deemed to have consented as provided in division (g)(2) of
this section and the test or tests may be administered, subject to R.C. §§
313.12 to 313.16.
      (5)   Chemical tests.
         A.   If a law enforcement officer arrests a person for a violation of
R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, or a municipal O.V.I. ordinance and if the person if convicted would
be required to be sentenced under R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(c), (G)(1)(d) or (G)(1)
(e), the law enforcement officer shall request the person to submit, and the
person shall submit, to a chemical test or tests of the person's whole blood,
blood serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine for the purpose of
determining the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a
controlled substance, or combination content of the person's whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine. A law enforcement officer who
makes a request pursuant to this division that a person submit to a chemical
test or tests is not required to advise the person of the consequences of
submitting to, or refusing to submit to, the test or tests and is not required
to give the person the form described in division (g)(7) of this section, but
the officer shall advise the person at the time of the arrest that if the
person refuses to take a chemical test the officer may employ whatever
reasonable means are necessary to ensure that the person submits to a chemical
test of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. The officer shall
also advise the person at the time of the arrest that the person may have an
independent chemical test taken at the person's own expense. Divisions (g)(3)
and (g)(4) of this section apply to the administration of a chemical test or
tests pursuant to this division.
         B.   If a person refuses to submit to a chemical test upon a request
made pursuant to division (g)(5)A. of this section, the law enforcement officer
who made the request may employ whatever reasonable means are necessary to
ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the person’s whole blood
or blood serum or plasma. A law enforcement officer who acts pursuant to this
division to ensure that a person submits to a chemical test of the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma is immune from criminal and civil
liability based upon a claim for assault and battery or any other claim for the
acts, unless the officer so acted with malicious purpose, in bad faith, or in a
wanton or reckless manner.
(R.C. § 4511.191(A))
      (6)   Advice required. Except as provided in division (g)(5) of this
section, the arresting law enforcement officer shall give advice in accordance
with this division to any person under arrest for a violation of division (a),
(b) or (o) of this section, R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), 4511.194 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or any other municipal O.V.I.
ordinance. The officer shall give that advice in a written form that contains
the information described in division (g)(7) of this section and shall read the
advice to the person. The form shall contain a statement that the form was
shown to the person under arrest and read to the person by the arresting
officer. One or more persons shall witness the arresting officer’s reading of
the form, and the witnesses shall certify to this fact by signing the form. The
person must submit to the chemical test or tests, subsequent to the request of
the arresting officer, within two hours of the time of the alleged violation
and, if the person does not submit to the test or tests within that two-hour
time limit, the failure to submit automatically constitutes a refusal to submit
to the test or tests.
      (7)   Certification of arrest. Except as provided in division (g)(5) of
this section, if a person is under arrest as described in division (g)(6) of
this section, before the person may be requested to submit to a chemical test
or tests to determine the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance,
metabolite of a controlled substance or combination content of the person's
whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine, the arresting
officer shall read the following form to the person:
“You now are under arrest for (specifically state the offense under state law
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for which the person was
arrested – operating a vehicle under the influence of alcohol, a drug, or a
combination of them; operating a vehicle while under the influence of a listed
controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance;
operating a vehicle after underage alcohol consumption; or having physical
control of a vehicle while under the influence).
“If you refuse to take any chemical test required by law, your Ohio driving
privileges will be suspended immediately, and you will have to pay a fee to
have the privileges reinstated. If you have a prior conviction of O.V.I. or
operating a vehicle while under the influence of a listed controlled substance
or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance under state or municipal law
within the preceding 20 years, you are now under arrest for state O.V.I., and,
if you refuse to take a chemical test, you will face increased penalties if you
subsequently are convicted of the state O.V.I.
(Read this part unless the person is under arrest for solely having physical
control of a vehicle while under the influence.) “If you take any chemical test
required by law and are found to be at or over the prohibited amount of
alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
your whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as set by law, your
Ohio driving privileges will be suspended immediately, and you will have to pay
a fee to have the privileges reinstated.
“If you take a chemical test, you may have an independent chemical test taken
at your own expense.”
      (8)   Actions required by arresting officer. If the arresting law
enforcement officer does not ask a person under arrest as described in division
(g)(5) of this section or division (g)(6) of this section to submit to a
chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191 or this section, the arresting
officer shall seize the Ohio or out-of-state driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit of the person and immediately forward it to the court in
which the arrested person is to appear on the charge. If the arrested person is
not in possession of the person’s license or permit or it is not in the
person’s vehicle, the officer shall order the person to surrender it to the law
enforcement agency that employs the officer within 24 hours after the arrest,
and, upon the surrender, the agency immediately shall forward the license or
permit to the court in which the person is to appear on the charge. Upon
receipt of the license or permit, the court shall retain it pending the
arrested person’s initial appearance and any action taken under R.C. §
4511.196.
      (9)   Duties of officer.
         A.   If a law enforcement officer asks a person under arrest as
described in division (g)(5) of this section to submit to a chemical test or
tests under that division and the test results indicate a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, or urine at the time of the alleged offense, or if a law enforcement
officer asks a person under arrest as described in division (g)(6) of this
section to submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191 or this
section, if the officer advises the person in accordance with this section of
the consequences of the person’s refusal or submission, and if either the
person refuses to submit to the test or tests or, unless the arrest was for a
violation of division (o) of this section, R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the person submits to the test or tests and the
test results indicate a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine at the time of the alleged
offense, the arresting officer shall do all of the following:
            1.   On behalf of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, notify the
person that, independent of any penalties or sanctions imposed upon the person,
the person’s Ohio driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege is suspended immediately, that the suspension
will last at least until the person’s initial appearance on the charge, which
will be held within five days after the date of the person’s arrest or the
issuance of a citation to the person, and that the person may appeal the
suspension at the initial appearance or during the period of time ending 30
days after that initial appearance;
            2.   Seize the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit of
the person and immediately forward it to the Registrar. If the arrested person
is not in possession of the person’s license or permit or it is not in the
person’s vehicle, the officer shall order the person to surrender it to the law
enforcement agency that employs the officer within 24 hours after the person is
given notice of the suspension, and, upon the surrender, the officer’s
employing agency immediately shall forward the license or permit to the
Registrar;
            3.   Verify the person’s current residence and, if it differs from
that on the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit, notify
the Registrar of the change;
            4.   Send to the Registrar, within 48 hours after the arrest of the
person, a sworn report that includes all of the following statements:
               a.   That the officer had reasonable grounds to believe that, at
the time of the arrest, the arrested person was operating a vehicle in
violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B) or a municipal O.V.I. ordinance or for
being in physical control of a stationary vehicle in violation of R.C. §
4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
               b.   That the person was arrested and charged with a violation
of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, or a municipal O.V.I. ordinance;
               c.   Unless division (g)(9)A.4.e. of this section applies, that
the officer asked the person to take the designated chemical test or tests,
advised the person in accordance with this section of the consequences of
submitting to, or refusing to take, the test or tests, and gave the person the
form described in division (g)(7) of this section;
               d.   Unless division (g)(9)A.4.e. of this section applies, that
either the person refused to submit to the chemical test or tests or, unless
the arrest was for a violation of R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the person submitted to the chemical test or tests and the
test results indicate a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine at the time of the alleged
offense;
               e.   If the person was under arrest as described in division (g)
(5) of this section and the chemical test or tests were performed in accordance
with that division, that the person was under arrest as described in that
division, that the chemical test or tests were performed in accordance with
that division, and that test results indicated a prohibited concentration of
alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine at the time
of the alleged offense.
         B.   Division (g)(9)A. of this section does not apply to a person who
is arrested for a violation of division (o) of this section, R.C. § 4511.194 or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or any other substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, who is asked by a law enforcement officer to
submit to a chemical test or tests under this section, and who submits to the
test or tests, regardless of the amount of alcohol, a controlled substance, or
a metabolite of a controlled substance that the test results indicate is
present in the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid,
or urine.
      (10)   Sworn report of arresting officer.
         A.   The arresting officer shall give the officer’s sworn report that
is completed under this section to the arrested person at the time of the
arrest, or the Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall send the report to the person
by regular first-class mail as soon as possible after receipt of the report,
but not later than 14 days after receipt of it. An arresting officer may give
an unsworn report to the arrested person at the time of the arrest, provided
the report is complete when given to the arrested person and subsequently is
sworn to by the arresting officer. As soon as possible, but not later than 48
hours after the arrest of the person, the arresting officer shall send a copy
of the sworn report to the court in which the arrested person is to appear on
the charge for which the person was arrested.
         B.   The sworn report of an arresting officer completed under this
section is prima facie proof of the information and statements that it
contains. It shall be admitted and considered as prima facie proof of the
information and statements that it contains in any appeal under R.C. § 4511.197
relative to any suspension of a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit or nonresident operating privilege that results from the
arrest covered by the report.
(R.C. § 4511.192)
      (11)   Suspension effective immediately. A suspension of a person’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege under this section for the time described in R.C. § 4511.191(B) or
(C) is effective immediately from the time at which the arresting officer
serves the notice of suspension upon the arrested person. Any subsequent
finding that the person is not guilty of the charge that resulted in the
person’s being requested to take the chemical test or tests under division (g)
(1) through (g)(5) of this section does not affect the suspension.
      (12)   Initial appearance. If a person arrested for operating a vehicle
in violation of division (a) or (b) of this section, R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B),
or any other municipal O.V.I. ordinance, or for being in physical control of a
vehicle in violation of division (o) of this section or R.C. § 4511.194 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, regardless of whether the
person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege is or is not suspended under R.C. § 4511.191(B) or (C) or
R.C. Chapter 4510, the person’s initial appearance on the charge resulting from
the arrest shall be held within five days of the person’s arrest or the
issuance of the citation to him or her, subject to any continuance granted by
the court pursuant to R.C. § 4511.197 regarding the issues specified in that
section.
(R.C. § 4511.191(D))
   (h)   Penalty for driving under the influence.
      (1)   Whoever violates any provisions of divisions (a)(1)A. through (a)
(1)I. or (a)(2) of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them. Whoever
violates division (a)(1)J. of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle
while under the influence of a listed controlled substance or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance. The court shall sentence the offender for
either offense under R.C. Chapter 2929, except as otherwise authorized or
required by divisions (h)(1)A. through (h)(1)E. of this section:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (h)(1)B., (h)(1)C., (h)
(1)D. or (h)(1)E. of this section, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree and the court shall sentence the offender to all of the
penalties and sanctions provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(a)(i) to (G)(1)(a)
(iv).
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in division (h)(1)E. of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of division (a) of this
section, or one other equivalent offense is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties and
sanctions provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) to (G)(1)(b)(v).
         C.   Except as otherwise provided in division (h)(1)E. of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of division (a) of this
section or other equivalent offenses is guilty of a misdemeanor. The court
shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties and sanctions provided in
R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(c)(i) to (G)(1)(c)(vi).
         D.   Except as otherwise provided in division (h)(1)E. of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of division (a) of
this section or other equivalent offenses or an offender who, within 20 years
of the offense, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to five or
more violations of that nature, or an offender who previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a specification of the type described in R.C.
§ 2941.1413, is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (2)   An offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (a) of this section and who subsequently seeks reinstatement of the
driver’s or occupational driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege suspended under this section or R.C. § 4511.19 as a result of the
conviction or guilty plea shall pay a reinstatement fee as provided in R.C. §
4511.191(F)(2).
      (3)   A.   If an offender is sentenced to a jail term under R.C. §
4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) or (G)(1)(b)(ii) or (G)(1)(c)(i) or (G)(1)(c)(ii) and if,
within 60 days of sentencing of the offender, the court issues a written
finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail
where the offender is required to serve the term, the offender will not be able
to begin serving that term within the 60-day period following the date of
sentencing, the court may impose an alternative sentence as specified in R.C. §
4511.19(G)(3) that includes a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring,
with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and
continuous alcohol monitoring.
         B.   As an alternative to the mandatory jail terms as required by R.C.
§ 4511.19(G)(1), the court may sentence the offender as provided in R.C. §
4511.19(G)(3).
      (4)   If an offender’s driver’s or occupational driver’s license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended under division (h) of
this section or R.C. § 4511.19(G) and if R.C. § 4510.13 permits the court to
grant limited driving privileges, the court may grant the limited driving
privileges in accordance with that section. If division (A)(7) of that section
requires the court impose as a condition of the privileges that the offender
must display on the vehicle that is driven subject to the privileges restricted
license plates that are issued under R.C. § 4503.231, except as provided in
division (B) of that section, the court shall impose that condition as one of
the conditions of the limited driving privileges granted to the offender,
except as provided in R.C. § 4503.231(B).
      (5)   Fines imposed under this section for a violation of division (a) of
this section shall be distributed as provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(5).
      (6)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order of criminal
forfeiture under division (h)(1)C., (h)(1)D. or (h)(1)E. of this section is
assigned or transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in
addition to or independent of any other penalty established by law, the court
may fine the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of
the National Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds of any fine so
imposed shall be distributed in accordance with division (C)(2) of that
section.
      (7)   In all cases in which an offender is sentenced under division (h)
of this section, the offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, the court, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, may order restitution pursuant to § 698.02(f) or
R.C. § 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under division (h)
of this section.
      (8)   A court may order an offender to reimburse a law enforcement agency
for any costs incurred by the agency with respect to a chemical test or tests
administered to the offender if all of the following apply:
         A.   The offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (a) of this section.
         B.   The test or tests were of the offender's whole blood, blood serum
or plasma, oral fluid, or urine.
         C.   The test or tests indicated that the offender had one of the
following at the time of the offense:
            1.   A prohibited concentration of a controlled substance or a
metabolite of a controlled substance in the offender's whole blood, blood serum
or plasma, or urine;
            2.   A drug of abuse or a metabolite of a drug of abuse in the
offender's oral fluid.
      (9)   A court may warn any person who is convicted of or who pleads
guilty to a violation of division (a) of this section or an equivalent offense
that a subsequent violation of this section or an equivalent offense that
results in the death of another or the unlawful termination of another's
pregnancy may result in the person being guilty of aggravated vehicular
homicide under R.C. § 2903.06. The court may warn the person of the applicable
penalties for that violation under R.C. §§ 2903.06 and 2929.142.
      (10)   As used in division (h) of this section, ELECTRONIC MONITORING has
the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   (i)   Penalty for operating a vehicle after underage alcohol consumption.
Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of operating a motor
vehicle after underage alcohol consumption and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (i)(2) of this section,
the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. In addition to
any other sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class six
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6). The court may grant
limited driving privileges relative to the suspension under R.C. §§ 4510.021
and 4510.13. The court may grant unlimited driving privileges with an ignition
interlock device relative to the suspension and may reduce the period of
suspension as authorized under R.C. § 4510.022. If the court grants unlimited
driving privileges under R.C. § 4510.022, the court shall suspend any jail term
imposed under division (i)(1) of this section as required under that section.
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of division (a)
of this section or other equivalent offense or offenses, the offender is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the third degree. In addition to any other sanction imposed
for the offense, the court shall impose a class four suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4). The court may grant limited driving
privileges relative to the suspension under R.C. §§ 4510.021 and 4510.13.
      (3)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to § 698.02
(f) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing
the violation of division (b) of this section.
      (4)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to § 698.02
(f) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing
the violation of division (b) of this section.
   (j)   Treatment programs.
      (1)   No court shall sentence an offender to an alcohol treatment program
under this section unless the treatment program complies with the minimum
standards for alcohol treatment programs adopted under R.C. Chapter 5119 by the
Director of Mental Health and Addiction Services.
      (2)   An offender who stays in a drivers’ intervention program or in an
alcohol treatment program under an order issued under this section shall pay
the cost of the stay in the program. However, if the court determines that an
offender who stays in an alcohol treatment program under an order issued under
this section is unable to pay the cost of the stay in the program, the court
may order that the cost be paid from the court’s Indigent Drivers’ Alcohol
Treatment Fund.
   (k)   Appeal; effect on suspension. If a person whose driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended
under this section or R.C. § 4511.19 files an appeal regarding any aspect of
the person’s trial or sentence, the appeal itself does not stay the operation
of the suspension.
   (l)   Exception; direction of health professional. Division (a)(1)J. of this
section does not apply to a person who operates a vehicle while the person has
a concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or
urine that equals or exceeds the amount specified in that division, if both of
the following apply:
      (1)   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
      (2)   The person injected, ingested or inhaled the controlled substance
in accordance with the health professional’s directions.
   (m)   Applicability to R.C. § 2923.16(D). The prohibited concentrations of a
controlled substance or a metabolite of a controlled substance listed in
division (a)(1)J. of this section also apply in a prosecution of a violation of
R.C. § 2923.16(D) in the same manner as if the offender is being prosecuted for
a prohibited concentration of alcohol.
   (n)   Applicability of terms. All terms defined in R.C. § 4510.01 apply to
this section. If the meaning of a term defined in R.C. § 4510.01 conflicts with
the meaning of the same term as defined in R.C. § 4501.01 or 4511.01, the term
as defined in R.C. § 4510.01 applies to this section.
(R.C. § 4511.19(G) - (M))
   (o)   Physical control of vehicle while under the influence.
      (1)   Definition. As used in this division (o), PHYSICAL CONTROL means
being in the driver’s position of the front seat of a vehicle and having
possession of the vehicle’s ignition key or other ignition device.
      (2)   Generally. No person shall be in physical control of a vehicle if,
at the time of the physical control, any of the following apply:
         A.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
a combination of them.
         B.   The person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine
contains at least the concentration of alcohol specified in divisions (a)(1)B.,
(a)(1)C., (a)(1)D. or (a)(1)E. of this section.
         C.   Except as provided in division (o)(5) of this section, the person
has a concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of
a controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or
urine that equals or exceeds the concentration specified in division (a)(1)J.
of this section.
      (3)   Field sobriety test.
         A.   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of this section, if a law enforcement officer has administered a
field sobriety test to the person in physical control of the vehicle involved
in the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the
officer administered the test in substantial compliance with the testing
standards for any reliable, credible and generally acceptable field sobriety
tests that were in effect at the time the tests were administered, including
but not limited to any testing standards then in effect that were set by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, all of the following apply:
            1.   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered.
            2.   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field
sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding.
            3.   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
division (o)(3)A.1. or (o)(3)A.2. of this section and if the testimony or
evidence is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the
testimony or evidence, and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the
trier of fact considers to be appropriate.
         B.   Division (o)(3)A. of this section does not limit or preclude a
court, in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by
probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division,
from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by
division (o)(3)A. of this section.
      (4)   Penalty. Whoever violates this division (o) is guilty of having
physical control of a vehicle while under the influence, a misdemeanor of the
first degree. In addition to other sanctions imposed, the court may impose on
the offender a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license
or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02
(A)(7).
      (5)   Exception. Division (o)(2)C. of this section does not apply to a
person who is in physical control of a vehicle while the person has a
concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or
urine that equals or exceeds the amount specified in division (a)(1)J. of this
section if both of the following apply:
         A.   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
         B.   The person injected, ingested or inhaled the controlled substance
in accordance with the health professional’s directions.
(R.C. § 4511.194)
   (p)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL SANCTION, CONTINUOUS ALCOHOL MONITORING,
JAIL, MANDATORY PRISON TERM, MANDATORY TERM OF LOCAL INCARCERATION, PRISON TERM
and SANCTION. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      (2)   DRUG OF ABUSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4506.01.
      (3)   EQUIVALENT OFFENSE. Any of the following:
         A.   A violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A);
         B.   A violation of a municipal O.V.I. ordinance;
         C.   A violation of R.C. § 2903.04 in a case in which the offender was
subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that section;
         D.   A violation of R.C. § 2903.06(A)(1) or 2903.08 or a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to either of those divisions;
         E.   A violation of R.C. § 2903.06(A)(2), (A)(3) or (A)(4), 2903.08(A)
(2), or former R.C. § 2903.07, or a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any of those divisions or that former section, in a case in which
a judge or jury as the trier of fact found that the offender was under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them;
         F.   A violation of R.C. § 1547.11(A);
         G.   A violation of a municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from
operating or being in physical control of any vessel underway or from
manipulating any water skis, aquaplane or similar device on the waters of this
state while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination
of them or prohibiting a person from operating or being in physical control of
any vessel underway or from manipulating any water skis, aquaplane or similar
device on the waters of this state with a prohibited concentration of alcohol,
a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine;
         H.   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
R.C. § 4511.19(A) or 1547.11(A);
         I.   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A) or 1547.11(A).
      (4)   EQUIVALENT OFFENSE THAT IS VEHICLE-RELATED. An equivalent offense
that is any of the following:
         A.   A violation described in division A., B., C., D. or E. of the
definition for “equivalent offense” provided in this division (p);
         B.   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
R.C. § 4511.19(A);
         C.   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A).
      (5)   MANDATORY JAIL TERM. The mandatory term in jail of three, six, ten,
20, 30 or 60 days that must be imposed under R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(a), (G)(1)
(b), or (G)(1)(c) upon an offender convicted of a violation of division (A) of
that section and in relation to which all of the following apply:
         A.   Except as specifically authorized under R.C. § 4511.19, the term
must be served in a jail.
         B.   Except as specifically authorized under R.C. § 4511.19, the term
cannot be suspended, reduced or otherwise modified pursuant to R.C. §§ 2929.21
through 2929.28 or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (6)   MUNICIPAL O.V.I. ORDINANCE and MUNICIPAL O.V.I. OFFENSE. Any
municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle while under
the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them or
prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration
of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance
in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine.
(R.C. § 4511.181)
Statutory reference:
   Continuous alcohol monitoring, see R.C. § 4511.198
   Disposition of fines, immobilization of vehicle and impoundment of license
plates, criminal forfeiture for municipal ordinance conviction, see R.C. §
4511.193
   Effect of refusal to submit to test, seizure of license, suspension periods,
appeal procedures, occupational driving privileges, and Indigent Drivers’
Alcohol Treatment Funds, see R.C. § 4511.191
   Judicial pretrial suspension, initial appearance, see R.C. § 4511.196
   Mayor’s Court to suspend driver’s license, see R.C. § 1905.201
   Seizure of vehicles upon arrest, see R.C. § 4511.195
   Trial judge to suspend driver’s license, see R.C. § 4510.05
§ 434.02 IMMOBILIZING OR DISABLING DEVICE VIOLATION.
   (a)   (1)   No offender who has been granted limited or unlimited driving
privileges, during any period that the offender is required to operate only a
motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device, shall request
or permit any other person to breathe into the device if it is an ignition
interlock device or another type of device that monitors the concentration of
alcohol in a person’s breath or to otherwise start the motor vehicle equipped
with the device, for the purpose of providing the offender with an operable
motor vehicle.
      (2)   No person shall breathe into an immobilizing or disabling device
that is an ignition interlock device or another type of device that monitors
the concentration of alcohol in a person’s breath or otherwise start a motor
vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device, for the purpose of
providing an operable motor vehicle to another person who has been granted
limited or unlimited driving privileges under the condition that the person
operate only a motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device.
      (3)   No unauthorized person shall tamper with or circumvent the
operation of an immobilizing or disabling device.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an immobilizing or
disabling device violation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4510.44)
§ 434.03 RECKLESS OPERATION ON STREETS, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any street or highway in willful
or wanton disregard of the safety of persons or property.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any public or private
property other than streets or highways in willful or wanton disregard of the
safety of persons or property.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to the competitive
operation of vehicles on public or private property when the owner of the
property knowingly permits such operation thereon.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates any
provision of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates any
provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates any
provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. §§ 4511.20, 4511.201)
§ 434.04 MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS; ASSURED CLEAR DISTANCE AHEAD.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater or less
than is reasonable or proper, having due regard for the traffic, surface and
width of the street or highway and any other conditions, and no person shall
drive any motor vehicle in and upon any street or highway at a greater speed
than will permit him or her to bring it to a stop within the assured clear
distance ahead.
   (b)   It is prima facie lawful, in the absence of a lower limit declared or
established pursuant to this section by the Director of Transportation or local
authorities, for the operator of a motor vehicle to operate the same at a speed
not exceeding the following:
      (1)   A.   Twenty miles per hour in school zones during school recess and
while children are going to or leaving school during the opening or closing
hours, and when 20 miles per hour school speed limit signs are erected, except
that on controlled-access highways and expressways, if the right-of-way line
fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be governed
by division (b)(4) of this section, and on freeways, if the right-of-way line
fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be governed
by divisions (b)(10) and (b)(11) of this section. The end of every school zone
may be marked by a sign indicating the end of the zone. Nothing in this section
or in the Manual and Specifications for a Uniform System of Traffic-Control
Devices shall be construed to require school zones to be indicated by signs
equipped with flashing or other lights, or giving other special notice of the
hours in which the school zone speed limit is in effect.
         B.   As used in this section, SCHOOL means all of the following:
            1.   Any school chartered under R.C. § 3301.16;
            2.   Any nonchartered school that during the preceding year filed
with the Ohio Department of Education and Workforce in compliance with O.A.C.
3301-35-08, a copy of the school’s report for the parents of the school’s
pupils certifying that the school meets state minimum standards for
nonchartered, nontax-supported schools and presents evidence of this filing to
the jurisdiction from which it is requesting the establishment of a school
zone;
            3.   Any special elementary school that in writing requests the
County Engineer to create a school zone at the location of the school. Upon
receipt of the written request, the County Engineer shall create a school zone
at that location by erecting appropriate signs;
            4.   Any preschool education program operated by an educational
service center that is located on a street or highway with a speed limit of 45
miles per hour or more, when the educational service center in writing requests
that the County Engineer create a school zone at the location of that program.
Upon receipt of such a written request, the County Engineer shall create a
school zone at that location by erecting the appropriate signs.
         C.   As used in this section, SCHOOL ZONE means that portion of a
street or highway passing a school fronting upon the street or highway that is
encompassed by projecting the school property lines to the fronting street or
highway, and also includes that portion of a state highway. Upon request from
local authorities for streets and highways under their jurisdiction and that
portion of a state highway under the jurisdiction of the Director of
Transportation or a request from a County Engineer in the case of a school zone
for a special elementary school, the Director may extend the traditional school
zone boundaries. The distances in divisions (b)(1)C.1. through (b)(1)C.3. below
shall not exceed 300 feet per approach per direction, and are bounded by
whichever of the following distances or combination thereof the Director
approves as most appropriate:
            1.   The distance encompassed by projecting the school building
lines normal to the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction;
            2.   The distance encompassed by projecting the school property
lines intersecting the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction;
            3.   The distance encompassed by the special marking of the
pavement for a principal school pupil crosswalk plus a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction of the highway.
         D.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the
Director’s initial action on August 9, 1976, establishing all school zones at
the traditional school zone boundaries defined by projecting school property
lines, except when those boundaries are extended as provided in divisions (b)
(1)A. and (b)(1)C. of this section.
         E.   As used in this division, CROSSWALK has the meaning given that
term in R.C. § 4511.01(LL)(2).
         F.   The Director may, upon request by resolution of the legislative
authority and upon submission by the municipality of such engineering, traffic
and other information as the Director considers necessary, designate a school
zone on any portion of a state route lying within the municipality that
includes a crosswalk customarily used by children going to or leaving a school
during recess and opening and closing hours, whenever the distance, as measured
in a straight line, from the school property line nearest the crosswalk to the
nearest point of a crosswalk is no more than 1,320 feet. Such a school zone
shall include the distance encompassed by the crosswalk and extending 300 feet
in each appropriate direction of the state route.
         G.   As used in this section, SPECIAL ELEMENTARY SCHOOL means a school
that meets all of the following:
            1.   It is not chartered and does not receive tax revenue from any
source.
            2.   It does not educate children beyond the eighth grade.
            3.   It is located outside the limits of a municipal corporation.
            4.   A majority of the total number of students enrolled at the
school are not related by blood.
            5.   The principal or other person in charge of the special
elementary school annually sends a report to the superintendent of the school
district in which the special elementary school is located indicating the total
number of students enrolled at the school, but otherwise the principal or other
person in charge does not report any other information or data to the
superintendent.
      (2)   Twenty-five miles per hour in all other portions of the
municipality, except on state routes outside business districts, through
highways outside business districts and alleys;
      (3)   Thirty-five miles per hour on all state routes or through highways
within the municipality outside business districts, except as provided in
divisions (b)(4) and (b)(6) of this section;
      (4)   Fifty miles per hour on controlled-access highways and expressways
within the municipality, except as provided in divisions (b)(12), (b)(13), (b)
(14), (b)(15), and (b)(16) of this section;
      (5)   Fifty-five miles per hour on highways outside the municipality,
other than highways within island jurisdictions as provided in division (b)(8)
of this section, highways as provided in divisions (b)(9) and (b)(10) of this
section, and highways, expressways and freeways as provided in divisions (b)
(12), (b)(13), (b)(14), and (b)(16) of this section;
      (6)   Fifty miles per hour on state routes within the municipality
outside urban districts unless a lower prima facie speed is established as
further provided in this section;
      (7)   Fifteen miles per hour on all alleys within the municipality;
      (8)   Thirty-five miles per hour on highways outside the municipality
that are within an island jurisdiction;
      (9)   Thirty-five miles per hour on through highways, except state
routes, that are outside municipal corporations and that are within a national
park with boundaries extending through two or more counties;
      (10)   Sixty miles per hour on two-lane state routes outside municipal
corporations as established by the Director under R.C. § 4511.21(H)(2);
      (11)   Fifty-five miles per hour on freeways with paved shoulders inside
the municipality, other than freeways as provided in divisions (b)(14) and (b)
(16) of this section;
      (12)   Sixty miles per hour on rural expressways with traffic control
signals and on all portions of rural divided highways, except as provided in
divisions (b)(13) and (b)(14) of this section;
      (13)   Sixty-five miles per hour on all rural expressways without traffic
control signals;
      (14)   Seventy miles per hour on all rural freeways;
      (15)   Fifty-five miles per hour on all portions of freeways or
expressways in congested areas as determined by the Director and that are
located within a municipal corporation or within an interstate freeway
outerbelt, except as provided in division (b)(16) of this section;
      (16)   Sixty-five miles per hour on all portions of freeways or
expressways without traffic control signals in urbanized areas.
   (c)   It is prima facie unlawful for any person to exceed any of the speed
limitations in divisions (b)(1)A., (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7), (b)
(8) and (b)(9) of this section or any declared or established pursuant to this
section by the Director or local authorities and it is unlawful for any person
to exceed any of the speed limitations in division (d) of this section. No
person shall be convicted of more than one violation of this section for the
same conduct, although violations of more than one provision of this section
may be charged in the alternative in a single affidavit.
   (d)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon a street or highway as
follows:
      (1)   At a speed exceeding 55 miles per hour, except upon a two-lane
state route as provided in division (b)(10) of this section and upon a highway,
expressway or freeway as provided in divisions (b)(12), (b)(13), (b)(14), and
(b)(16) of this section;
      (2)   At a speed exceeding 60 miles per hour upon a two-lane state route
as provided in division (b)(10) of this section and upon a highway as provided
in division (b)(12) of this section;
      (3)   At a speed exceeding 65 miles per hour upon an expressway as
provided in division (b)(13) of this section or upon a freeway as provided in
division (b)(16) of this section, except upon a freeway as provided in division
(b)(14) of this section;
      (4)   At a speed exceeding 70 miles per hour upon a freeway as provided
in division (b)(14) of this section;
      (5)   At a speed exceeding the posted speed limit upon a highway,
expressway or freeway for which the Director has determined and declared a
speed limit pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(I)(2) or (L)(2).
   (e)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(E), in every charge of violating this
section, the affidavit and warrant shall specify the time, place and speed at
which the defendant is alleged to have driven, and in charges made in reliance
upon division (c) of this section also the speed which division (b)(1)A., (b)
(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7), (b)(8) or (b)(9) of, or a limit declared
or established pursuant to, this section or R.C. § 4511.21 declares is prima
facie lawful at the time and place of the alleged violation, except that in
affidavits where a person is alleged to have driven at a greater speed than
will permit the person to bring the vehicle to stop within the assured clear
distance ahead, the affidavit and warrant need not specify the speed at which
the defendant is alleged to have driven.
   (f)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(F), when a speed in excess of both a prima
facie limitation and a limitation in division (d) of this section is alleged,
the defendant shall be charged in a single affidavit, alleging a single act,
with a violation indicated of both division (b)(1)A., (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4),
(b)(6), (b)(7), (b)(8) or (b)(9) of this section, or of a limit declared or
established pursuant to this section or R.C. § 4511.21 by the Director or local
authorities, and of the limitation in division (d) of this section. If the
court finds a violation of division (b)(1)A., (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(6),
(b)(7), (b)(8) or (b)(9) of, or a limit declared or established pursuant to,
this section or R.C. § 4511.21 has occurred, it shall enter a judgment of
conviction under that division and dismiss the charge under division (d) of
this section. If it finds no violation of division (b)(1)A., (b)(2), (b)(3),
(b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7), (b)(8) or (b)(9) of, or a limit declared or established
pursuant to, this section or R.C. § 4511.21, it shall then consider whether the
evidence supports a conviction under division (d) of this section.
   (g)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(G), points shall be assessed for a
violation of a limitation under division (d) of this section in accordance with
R.C. § 4510.036.
(R.C. § 4511.21(A) - (G))
   (h)   Whenever, in accordance with R.C. § 4511.21(H) through (N), the
maximum prima facie speed limitations as established herein have been altered,
either higher or lower, and the appropriate signs giving notice have been
erected as required, operators of motor vehicles shall be governed by the speed
limitations set forth on those signs. It is prima facie unlawful for any person
to exceed the speed limits posted upon the signs.
   (i)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   COMMERCIAL BUS. A motor vehicle designed for carrying more than
nine passengers and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.
      (2)   DIVIDED. A roadway having two or more travel lanes for vehicles
moving in opposite directions and that is separated by a median of more than
four feet, excluding turn lanes.
      (3)   INTERSTATE SYSTEM. Has the same meaning as in 23 U.S.C. 101.
      (4)   NONCOMMERCIAL BUS. Includes but is not limited to a school bus, or
a motor vehicle operated solely for the transportation of persons associated
with a charitable or nonprofit organization.
      (5)   OUTERBELT. A portion of a freeway that is part of the interstate
system and is located in the outer vicinity of a major municipal corporation or
group of municipal corporations, as designated by the Director.
      (6)   RURAL. An area outside urbanized areas and outside of a business or
urban district, and areas that extend within urbanized areas where the roadway
characteristics remain mostly unchanged from those outside the urbanized areas.
      (7)   URBANIZED AREA. Has the same meaning as in 23 U.S.C. § 101.
(R.C. § 4511.21(O))
   (j)   Penalty.
      (1)   A violation of any provision of this section is one of the
following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (j)(1)B., (j)(1)C., and
(j)(2) and (j)(3) of this section, a minor misdemeanor;
         B.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of any provision of this
section, R.C. § 4511.21, or any provision of any other municipal ordinance that
is substantially equivalent to any provision of that section, a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree;
         C.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of any
provision of this section, R.C. § 4511.21, or any provision of any other
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any provision of that
section, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   If the offender operated a motor vehicle faster than 35 miles an
hour in a business district of the municipality, faster than 50 miles an hour
in other portions of the municipality, or faster than 35 miles an hour in a
school zone during recess or while children are going to or leaving school
during the school’s opening or closing hours, a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. This division does not apply if penalties may be imposed under division
(j)(1)B. or (j)(1)C. of this section.
      (3)   Notwithstanding division (j)(1) of this section, if the offender
operated a motor vehicle in a construction zone where a sign was then posted in
accordance with R.C. § 4511.98, the court, in addition to all other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a fine of two times the usual
amount imposed for the violation. No court shall impose a fine of two times the
usual amount imposed for the violation upon an offender if the offender
alleges, in an affidavit filed with the court prior to the offender’s
sentencing, that the offender is indigent and is unable to pay the fine imposed
pursuant to this division and if the court determines that the offender is an
indigent person and unable to pay the fine.
      (4)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.21(P))
§ 434.05 SPEED LIMITS ON PRIVATE ROADS AND DRIVEWAYS.
   (a)   The owner of a private road or driveway located in a private
residential area containing 20 or more dwelling units may establish a speed
limit on the road or driveway by complying with all of the following
requirements:
      (1)   The speed limit is not less than 25 miles per hour and is indicated
by a sign that is in a proper position, is sufficiently legible to be seen by
an ordinarily observant person, and meets the specifications for the basic
speed limit sign included in the Manual adopted by the Department of
Transportation pursuant to R.C. § 4511.09;
      (2)   The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the private road or
driveway that is in plain view and clearly informs persons entering the road or
driveway that they are entering private property, a speed limit has been
established for the road or driveway, and the speed limit is enforceable by law
enforcement officers under state law.
   (b)   No person shall operate a vehicle upon a private road or driveway as
provided in division (a) of this section at a speed exceeding any speed limit
established and posted pursuant to division (a).
   (c)   When a speed limit is established and posted in accordance with
division (a) of this section, a law enforcement officer may apprehend a person
violating the speed limit of the residential area by utilizing any of the means
described in R.C. § 4511.091 or by any other accepted method of determining the
speed of a motor vehicle and may stop and charge the person with exceeding the
speed limit.
   (d)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.211(D), points shall be assessed for violation
of a speed limit established and posted in accordance with division (a) of this
section in accordance with R.C. § 4510.036.
   (e)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   OWNER. Includes but is not limited to a person who holds title to
the real property in fee simple, a condominium owners’ association, a property
owners’ association, a board of directors or trustees of a private community,
and a nonprofit corporation governing a private community.
      (2)   PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL AREA CONTAINING 20 OR MORE DWELLING UNITS. Does
not include a Chautauqua assembly as defined in R.C. § 4511.90.
   (f)   Penalty.
      (1)   A violation of division (b) of this section is one of the
following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (f)(1)B. and (f)(1)C.
of this section, a minor misdemeanor;
         B.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of this section, R.C. §
4511.211(B), or any other municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent
to that division, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
         C.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this
section, R.C. § 4511.211(B), or any other municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to that division, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.211)
§ 434.06 SLOW SPEED; POSTED MINIMUM SPEEDS.
   (a)   No person shall stop or operate a vehicle at such an unreasonably slow
speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic,
except when stopping or reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or to
comply with law.
   (b)   Whenever the Director of Transportation or local authorities determine
on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that slow speeds on
any part of a controlled-access highway, expressway or freeway consistently
impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, the Director or local
authority may declare a minimum speed limit below which no person shall operate
a motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe operation or in compliance with
the law. No minimum speed limit established hereunder shall be less than 30
miles per hour, greater than 50 miles per hour, nor effective until the
provisions of R.C. § 4511.21 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
relating to appropriate signs, have been fulfilled and local authorities have
obtained the approval of the Director.
   (c)   In a case involving a violation of this section, the trier of fact, in
determining whether the vehicle was being operated at an unreasonably slow
speed, shall consider the capabilities of the vehicle and its operator.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (e)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.22)
§ 434.07 SPEED LIMITATIONS OVER BRIDGES.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle over any bridge or other
elevated structure constituting a part of a highway at a speed which is greater
than the maximum speed that can be maintained with safety to the bridge or
structure, when the structure is posted with signs as provided in this section.
      (2)   The Department of Transportation upon request from any local
authority shall, or upon its own initiative may, conduct an investigation of
any bridge or other elevated structure constituting a part of a highway, and if
it finds that the structure cannot with safety withstand traffic traveling at
the speed otherwise permissible under this traffic code, the Department shall
determine and declare the maximum speed of traffic which the structure can
withstand, and shall cause or permit suitable signs stating the maximum speed
to be erected and maintained at a distance of a least 100 feet before each end
of the structure.
      (3)   Upon the trial of any person charged with a violation of this
section, proof of such determination of the maximum speed by the Department and
the existence of the signs shall constitute prima facie evidence of the maximum
speed which can be maintained with safety to the bridge or structure.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.23)
§ 434.08 SPEED EXCEPTIONS FOR EMERGENCY OR SAFETY VEHICLES.
   The prima facie speed limitations set forth in R.C. § 4511.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance do not apply to emergency vehicles
or public safety vehicles when they are responding to emergency calls and are
equipped with and displaying at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating
light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet
to the front of the vehicle, and when the drivers thereof sound audible signals
by bell, siren or exhaust whistle. This section does not relieve the driver of
an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons using the street or highway.
(R.C. § 4511.24)
§ 434.09 REASONABLE CONTROL.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, agricultural tractor or
agricultural tractor that is towing, pulling or otherwise drawing a unit of
farm machinery on any street, highway or property open to the public for
vehicular traffic without being in reasonable control of the vehicle,
agricultural tractor or unit of farm machinery.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle
or agricultural tractor without being in control of it, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.202)
§ 434.10 STREET RACING, STUNT DRIVING AND STREET TAKEOVERS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   BURNOUT. A maneuver performed while operating a vehicle whereby the
vehicle is kept in a stationary position, but the wheels of the vehicle are
spun, which may cause the tires of the vehicle to become heated and emit smoke
from the friction.
      (2)   DOUGHNUT. A maneuver performed while operating a vehicle whereby
the front or rear of the vehicle is rotated around the opposite set of wheels
in a continuous motion, which may cause a circular skid-mark pattern of rubber
on the driving surface, or the tires of the vehicle to become heated and emit
smoke from the friction, or both.
      (3)   DRIFTING. A maneuver performed while operating a vehicle whereby
the vehicle is driven in a manner that causes a controlled, sideways skid
during a turn, with the front wheels pointing in a direction that is the
opposite of the direction of the turn.
      (4)   STREET RACING. The operation of two or more vehicles from a point
side by side at accelerating speeds in a competitive attempt to out-distance
each other or the operation of one or more vehicles over a common selected
course, from the same point to the same point, wherein timing is made of the
participating vehicles involving competitive accelerations or speeds. The
operation of two or more vehicles side by side either at speeds in excess of
prima-facie lawful speeds established by R.C. § 4511.21(B)(1)(a) to (B)(9) or
rapidly accelerating from a common starting point to a speed in excess of such
prima-facie lawful speeds shall be prima-facie evidence of street racing.
      (5)   STREET TAKEOVER. Blocking or impeding the regular flow of vehicle
or pedestrian traffic on a public road, street, or highway or on private
property that is open to the general public for the purpose of street racing or
stunt driving.
      (6)   STUNT DRIVING. Performing or engaging in burnouts, doughnuts,
drifting, or wheelies, or allowing a passenger to ride either partially or
fully outside of the vehicle while operating that vehicle.
      (7)   WHEELIE. A maneuver performed while operating a vehicle whereby the
front wheel or wheels of the vehicle are raised off of the ground or whereby
two wheels that are on the same side of the vehicle are raised off of the
ground.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly participate in street racing, stunt driving,
or street takeover upon any public road, street, or highway, or on private
property that is open to the general public.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of street racing, stunt
driving, or street takeover, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to
any other sanctions, the court shall suspend the offender's driver's license,
commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege for not less than 30 days or more
than three years. No judge shall suspend the first 30 days of any suspension of
an offender's license, permit, or privilege imposed under this division.
   (d)   Persons rendering assistance in any manner to street racing, stunt
driving, or street takeover shall be equally charged as the participants.
   (e)   This section does not apply to the competitive operation of vehicles
on public or private property when the political subdivision with jurisdiction
of the location or owner of the property knowingly permits such operation
thereon.
(R.C. § 4511.251)
§ 434.11 VEHICULAR HOMICIDE; VEHICULAR MANSLAUGHTER; VEHICULAR ASSAULT.
   (a)   No person, while operating or participating in the operation of a
motor vehicle, motorcycle, utility vehicle, mini-truck, snowmobile, locomotive,
watercraft, or aircraft, shall cause the death of another or the unlawful
termination of another's pregnancy in any of the following ways:
      (1)   As the proximate result of committing an OVI offense.
      (2)   In one of the following ways:
         A.   Recklessly;
         B.   As the proximate result of committing, while operating or
participating in the operation of a motor vehicle, utility vehicle, mini-truck,
or motorcycle in a construction zone, a reckless operation offense, provided
that this division applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose
pregnancy is unlawfully terminated is in the construction zone at the time of
the offender's commission of the reckless operation offense in the construction
zone and does not apply as described in division (d) of this section.
      (3)   In one of the following ways:
         A.   Negligently;
         B.   As the proximate result of committing, while operating or
participating in the operation of a motor vehicle, utility vehicle, mini-truck,
or motorcycle in a construction zone, a speeding offense, provided that this
division applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose pregnancy is
unlawfully terminated is in the construction zone at the time of the offender's
commission of the speeding offense in the construction zone and does not apply
as described in division (d) of this section.
      (4)   As the proximate result of committing a violation of any provision
of any section contained in R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor or of a
municipal ordinance that, regardless of the penalty set by ordinance for the
violation, is substantially equivalent to any provision of any section
contained in R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is
guilty of aggravated vehicular homicide, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (a)(3) of this section is guilty of
vehicular homicide. Except as otherwise provided in this division, vehicular
homicide is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Vehicular homicide committed in
violation of division (a)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving
under a suspension or cancellation imposed under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other
provision of the Ohio Revised Code or was operating a motor vehicle or
motorcycle, did not have a valid driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege, and was not eligible for renewal of the offender’s driver’s license
or commercial driver’s license without examination under R.C. § 4507.10 or if
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation
of this section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault
offense.
         B.   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to this
division, the court shall impose upon the offender a class four suspension of
the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
      (3)   A.   Whoever violates division (a)(4) of this section is guilty of
vehicular manslaughter. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
vehicular manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the second degree. Vehicular
manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the first degree if, at the time of the
offense, the offender was driving under a suspension or cancellation imposed
under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Revised Code or was
operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle, did not have a valid driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license
or nonresident operating privilege, and was not eligible for renewal of the
offender’s driver’s license or commercial driver’s license without examination
under R.C. § 4507.10 or if the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or any traffic-related homicide,
manslaughter or assault offense.
         B.   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to this
division, the court shall impose upon the offender a class six suspension of
the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6); or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this
section, any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter or assault offense, or a
traffic-related murder, felonious assault or attempted murder offense, a class
four suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
   (c)   The court shall impose a mandatory jail term of at least 15 days on an
offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation of
division (a)(3)B. of this section and may impose upon the offender a longer
jail term as authorized pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24.
   (d)   Divisions (a)(2)B. and (a)(3)B. of this section do not apply in a
particular construction zone unless signs of the type described in R.C. §
2903.081 are erected in that construction zone in accordance with the
guidelines and design specifications established by the Director of
Transportation under R.C. § 5501.27. The failure to erect signs of the type
described in R.C. § 2903.081 in a particular construction zone in accordance
with those guidelines and design specifications does not limit or affect the
application of division (a)(1), (a)(2)A., (a)(3)A. or (a)(4) of this section in
that construction zone or the prosecution of any person who violates any of
those divisions in that construction zone.
   (e)   (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   CONSTRUCTION ZONE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5501.27.
         B.   MANDATORY PRISON TERM and MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 2929.01.
         C.   MOTOR VEHICLE, MINI-TRUCK, and UTILITY VEHICLE. Have the same
meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
         D.   OVI OFFENSE. A violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), a violation R.C. §
1547.11(A), a violation of R.C. § 4561.15(A)(3), or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
         E.   RECKLESS OPERATION OFFENSE. A violation of R.C. § 4511.20 or a
municipal ordinance substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.20.
         F.   SPEEDING OFFENSE. A violation of R.C. § 4511.21 or a municipal
ordinance pertaining to speed.
         G.   TRAFFIC-RELATED HOMICIDE, MANSLAUGHTER OR ASSAULT OFFENSE. A
violation of R.C. § 2903.04 in circumstances in which division (D) of that
section applies, a violation of R.C. § 2903.06 or 2903.08, or a violation of
R.C. § 2903.06, 2903.07 or 2903.08 as they existed prior to March 23, 2000.
         H.   TRAFFIC-RELATED MURDER, FELONIOUS ASSAULT OR ATTEMPTED MURDER
OFFENSE. A violation of R.C. § 2903.01 or 2903.02 in circumstances in which the
offender used a motor vehicle as the means to commit the violation, a violation
of R.C. § 2903.11(A)(2) in circumstances in which the deadly weapon used in the
commission of the violation is a motor vehicle, or an attempt to commit
aggravated murder or murder in violation of R.C. § 2923.02 in circumstances in
which the offender used a motor vehicle as the means to attempt to commit the
aggravated murder or murder.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, when a penalty or suspension is
enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified law or a prior
or current specified offense, the reference to the violation of the specified
law or the specified offense includes any violation of any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this state, or current or former
law of this or another state or the United States.
(R.C. § 2903.06)
   (f)   Vehicular assault.
      (1)   No person, while operating or participating in the operation of a
motor vehicle, motorcycle, utility vehicle, or mini-truck, shall cause serious
physical harm to another person or another's unborn as the proximate result of
committing, while operating or participating in the operation of a motor
vehicle, utility vehicle, mini-truck, or motorcycle in a construction zone, a
speeding offense, provided that this division applies only if the person to
whom the serious physical harm is caused or to whose unborn the serious
physical harm is caused is in the construction zone at the time of the
offender's commission of the speeding offense in the construction zone and does
not apply as described in division (f)(4) of this section.
      (2)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, vehicular
assault committed in violation of division (f)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Vehicular assault committed in violation of
division (f)(1) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving under a
suspension imposed under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Ohio
Revised Code or if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (f)(1) of this section, R.C. § 2903.08, or
any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense.
         B.   In addition to any other sanctions imposed, the court shall
impose upon the offender a class four suspension of the offender’s driver’s
license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
      (3)   The court shall impose a mandatory jail term of at least seven days
on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation
of division (f)(1) of this section and may impose upon the offender a longer
jail term as authorized pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24.
      (4)   Division (f)(1) of this section does not apply in a particular
construction zone unless signs of the type described in R.C. § 2903.081 are
erected in that construction zone in accordance with the guidelines and design
specifications established by the Director of Transportation under R.C. §
5501.27.
      (5)   As used in this division (f):
         A.   CONSTRUCTION ZONE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5501.27.
         B.   MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
         C.   SPEEDING OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.06.
         D.   TRAFFIC-RELATED HOMICIDE, MANSLAUGHTER, OR ASSAULT OFFENSE. Has
the same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.06.
      (6)   For the purposes of this division (f), when a penalty or suspension
is enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified law or a
prior or current specified offense, the reference to the violation of the
specified law or the specified offense includes any violation of any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this state, or
current or former law of another state or the United States.
(R.C. 2903.08(A)(3), (C)(3), (D)(3), (E) - (G))
Statutory reference:
   Trial court to suspend driver’s license, see R.C. §§ 4510.05, 4510.10
   Vehicular assault and aggravated vehicular assault, felony offenses, see
R.C. § 2903.08
§ 434.12 OPERATION RESTRICTED FOR MINI-TRUCKS AND LOW-SPEED, UNDER-SPEED OR
UTILITY VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall operate a low-speed vehicle upon any street or
highway having an established speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour.
      (2)   No person shall operate an under-speed or utility vehicle or a
mini-truck upon any street or highway except as follows:
         A.   Upon a street or highway having an established speed limit not
greater than 35 miles per hour and only upon such streets or highways where the
municipality has granted permission for such operation in accordance with
division (e) of this section;
         B.   A state park or political subdivision employee or volunteer
operating a utility vehicle exclusively within the boundaries of state parks or
political subdivision parks for the operation or maintenance of state or
political subdivision park facilities.
      (3)   No person shall operate a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter upon
any street or highway having an established speed limit greater than 45 miles
per hour.
   (b)   This section does not prohibit either of the following:
      (1)   A person operating a low-speed, under-speed, or utility vehicle or
a mini-truck from proceeding across an intersection of a street or highway
having a speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour;
      (2)   A person operating a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter from
proceeding across an intersection of a street or highway having a speed limit
greater than 45 miles per hour.
   (c)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the municipality from adopting
more stringent local ordinances, resolutions, or regulations governing the
operation of a low-speed vehicle or a mini-truck, or a motor-driven cycle or
motor scooter.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If within one year of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.214)
   (e)   By ordinance or resolution, the municipality may authorize the
operation of under-speed or utility vehicles or mini-trucks on a public street
or highway under its jurisdiction. The municipality shall do all of the
following:
      (1)   Limit the operation of those vehicles to streets and highways
having an established speed limit not greater than 35 miles per hour;
      (2)   Require the vehicle owner who wishes to operate an under-speed or
utility vehicle or a mini-truck on the public streets or highways to submit the
vehicle to an inspection conducted by a local law enforcement agency that
complies with inspection requirements established by the Department of Public
Safety under R.C. § 4513.02;
      (3)   Permit the operation on public streets or highways of only those
vehicles that successfully pass the required vehicle inspection, are registered
in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4503, and are titled in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 4505;
      (4)   Notify the Director of Public Safety, in a manner the Director
determines, of the authorization for the operation of under-speed or utility
vehicles or mini-trucks.
   (f)   The municipality may establish additional requirements for the
operation of under-speed or utility vehicles or mini-trucks on its streets and
highways.
(R.C. § 4511.215)
   (g)   Notwithstanding divisions (a) through (f) of this section, a person
may operate a utility vehicle on any public roads or right-of-way, other than a
freeway, when traveling from one farm field to another for agricultural
purposes if the vehicle is displaying a triangular slow-moving vehicle emblem
as described in R.C. § 4513.112.
(R.C. § 4511.216)
   (h)   (1)   Except as provided in this division (h) and divisions (e) and
(f) of this section, no person shall operate a mini-truck within this
municipality.
      (2)   A person may operate a mini-truck on a farm for agricultural
purposes only when the owner of the farm qualifies for the current agricultural
use valuation tax credit. A mini-truck may be operated by or on behalf of such
a farm owner on public roads and rights-of-way only when traveling from one
farm field to another.
      (3)   A person may operate a mini-truck on property owned or leased by a
dealer who sells mini-trucks at retail.
      (4)   Whoever violates this division (h) shall be penalized as provided
in division (d) of this section.
(R.C. § 4519.401)
§ 434.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 436: LICENSING; ACCIDENTS
Section
   
436.01   Driver’s or commercial driver’s license required
   
436.02   Possession of more than one license prohibited
   
436.03   Driving with temporary instruction permit
   
436.04   Driving with probationary license
   
436.05   Certain acts prohibited
   
436.06   Owner or operator allowing another to drive
   
436.07   Display of license
   
436.08   Driving under suspension or in violation of license restriction
   
436.09   Operating motor vehicle or motorcycle without valid license
   
436.10   Driving under O.V.I. suspension
   
436.11   Driving under financial responsibility law suspension or cancellation;
driving under a nonpayment of judgment suspension
   
436.12   Failure to reinstate license
   
436.13   Operation or sale without certificate of title
   
436.14   Display of license plates; registration; obstructions
   
436.15   Use of illegal license plates
   
436.16   Failure to stop after accident
   
436.17   Stopping after accident on other than public roads or highways
   
436.18   Vehicle accident resulting in damage to realty
   
436.19   Removal of vehicles after accidents
   
436.99   Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Driver’s license law, see R.C. Ch. 4507
   Employment of a minor to operate a taxicab prohibited, see R.C. § 4507.321
   Glass removal from street after accident, see §
412.01
   Licensing requirements of snowmobile, off-highway and all-purpose vehicle
operator, see §
446.05
   Motor vehicle licensing law, see R.C. Ch. 4503
   Power of trial court of record to suspend license for certain violations,
see R.C. §§ 4510.05, 4510.15
   Snowmobile, off-highway and all-purpose vehicle accident reports, see §
446.06
   State accident reports, see R.C. §§ 4509.01, 4509.06, 4509.74, 5502.11
   Suspension of driver’s license, see §§
408.03,
698.06
§ 436.01 DRIVER’S OR COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall permit the operation of a motor vehicle upon any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking, knowing the operator does not have a valid driver’s license issued
to the operator by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a deputy registrar under
R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid commercial driver’s license issued under R.C.
Chapter 4506. Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
this division is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an
unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03, R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case. If, within three years of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
two or more violations of this section or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.02(A)(1))
   (b)   (1)   No person shall be required to obtain a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license for the purpose of temporarily driving, operating, drawing,
moving or propelling a road roller or road machinery upon a street or highway.
      (2)   No person shall be required to obtain a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license for the purpose of temporarily driving, operating, drawing,
moving or propelling any agricultural tractor or implement of husbandry upon a
street or highway at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less.
      (3)   No person shall drive, operate, draw, move or propel any
agricultural tractor or implement of husbandry upon a street or highway at a
speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the person has a current, valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license.
      (4)   No person having a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license
shall be required to have a motorcycle operator’s endorsement to operate a
motorcycle having three wheels with a motor of not more than 50 cubic
centimeters piston displacement.
      (5)   No person having a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license
shall be required to have a motorcycle operator’s endorsement to operate an
autocycle or a cab-enclosed motorcycle.
      (6)   Every person on active duty in the military or naval forces of the
United States, when furnished with a driver’s permit and when operating an
official motor vehicle in connection with that duty, is exempt from the license
requirements of R.C. Chapters 4506 and 4507. Every person on active duty in the
military or naval forces of the United States or in service with the Peace
Corps, Volunteers in Service to America or the foreign service of the United
States is exempt from the license requirements of such sections for the period
of the person’s active duty or service and for six months thereafter, provided
the person was a licensee under such sections at the time the person commenced
the person’s active duty or service. This section does not prevent such a
person or the person’s spouse or dependent from making an application, as
provided in R.C. § 4507.10(C), for the renewal of a driver’s license or
motorcycle operator’s endorsement or as provided in R.C. § 4506.14 for the
renewal of a commercial driver’s license during the period of the person’s
active duty or service.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (b)(3) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.03)
   (c)   Nonresidents, permitted to drive upon the highways of their own state,
may operate any motor vehicle upon any highway in this state without
examination or license under R.C. §§ 4507.01 to 4507.39, inclusive, upon
condition that the nonresident may be required at any time or place to prove
lawful possession or their right to operate the motor vehicle, and to establish
proper identity.
(R.C. § 4507.04)
   (d)   Surrender of driver’s license from another state.
      (1)   Any person who becomes a resident of this state, within 30 days of
becoming a resident, shall surrender any driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card issued by another state to the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a deputy registrar. If such a person intends to
operate a motor vehicle upon the public roads or highways, the person shall
apply for a temporary instruction permit or driver’s license in this state. If
the person fails to apply for a driver’s license or temporary instruction
permit or within 30 days of becoming a resident, the person shall not operate
any motor vehicle in this state under a license or permit issued by another
state.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (d)(1) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor.
         B.   The offense established under division (d)(2)A. of this section
is a strict liability offense and strict liability is a culpable mental state
for purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of this offense as a strict
liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
      (3)   For purposes of division (d)(1) of this section, RESIDENT means any
person to whom any of the following applies:
         A.   The person maintains their principal residence in this state and
does not reside in this state as a result of the person’s active service in the
United States armed forces.
         B.   The person is determined by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles to be
a resident in accordance with standards adopted by the Registrar under R.C. §
4507.01.
(R.C. § 4507.213)
§ 436.02 POSSESSION OF MORE THAN ONE LICENSE PROHIBITED.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall receive a driver’s license, or a motorcycle
operator’s endorsement of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card unless and until the person
surrenders to the Registrar or a deputy registrar all valid licenses, temporary
instruction permits, and identification cards issued to the person by another
jurisdiction recognized by this state.
      (2)   The Registrar shall report the cancellation of a license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card to the issuing authority, together
with information that the license, temporary instruction permit, or
identification card is now issued in this state. The Registrar or a deputy
registrar shall destroy any such license, temporary instruction permit, or
identification card that is not returned to the issuing authority.
      (3)   No person shall possess more than one valid license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card at any time.
(R.C. § 4507.02(A)(2))
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4507.99)
§ 436.03 DRIVING WITH TEMPORARY INSTRUCTION PERMIT.
   (a)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under R.C. §
4507.05(A) shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or
private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking
in violation of the conditions established under R.C. § 4507.05(A).
   (b)   Except as provided in division (c) of this section, no holder of a
temporary instruction permit that is issued under R.C. § 4507.05(A) and that is
issued on or after July 1, 1998, and who has not attained the age of 18 years,
shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property
used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the
hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m.
   (c)   The holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under R.C. §
4507.05(A) on or after July 1, 1998, who has not attained the age of 18 years,
may operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property
used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the
hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. if, at the time of the operation, the holder is
accompanied by the holder’s parent, guardian or custodian, and the parent,
guardian or custodian holds a current valid driver’s or commercial driver’s
license issued by this state, is actually occupying a seat beside the permit
holder, and does not have a prohibited concentration of alcohol in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as provided in R.C. § 4511.19
(A).
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4507.05(F), (I))
§ 436.04 DRIVING WITH PROBATIONARY LICENSE.
   (a)   (1)   A.   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held
the license for less than 12 months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a
highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. unless
the holder is accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian.
         B.   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held the
license for 12 months or longer shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. unless the
holder is accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian.
      (2)   A.   Subject to division (c)(1) of this section, division (a)(1)A.
of this section does not apply to the holder of a probationary driver’s license
who is doing either of the following:
            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours of midnight and 6:
00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession
written documentation from the holder’s employer.
            2.   Traveling to or from an official function sponsored by the
school the holder attends between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided
that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession written documentation
from an appropriate official of the school;
            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious event between the
hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official
affiliated with the event.
         B.   Division (a)(1)B. of this section does not apply to the holder of
a probationary driver’s license who is doing either of the following:
            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
5:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession
written documentation from the holder’s employer.
            2.   Traveling to or from an official function sponsored by the
school the holder attends between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.,
provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession written
documentation from an appropriate official of the school;
            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious event between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official
affiliated with the event.
      (3)   An employer, school official, or official affiliated with a
religious event is not liable in damages in a civil action for any injury,
death, or loss to person or property that allegedly arises from, or is related
to, the fact that the employer, school official, or official affiliated with a
religious event provided the holder of a probationary driver’s license with the
written documentation described in division (a)(2) of this section. The
Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall make available at no cost a form to serve as
the written documentation described in division (a)(2) of this section, and
employers, school officials, officials affiliated with religious events, and
holders of probationary driver’s licenses may utilize that form or may choose
to utilize any other written documentation to meet the requirements of that
division.
      (4)   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held the
license for less than 12 months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking with more than one person who is not a family member
occupying the vehicle unless the probationary license holder is accompanied by
the probationary license holder’s parent, guardian, or custodian.
   (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of division (a)(1)A. or
(a)(1)B. of this section if, at the time of the violation, an emergency existed
that required the holder of the probationary driver’s license to operate a
motor vehicle in violation of division (a)(1)A. or (a)(1)B. of this section or
the holder was an emancipated minor.
   (c)   (1)   If a person is issued a probationary driver’s license prior to
attaining the age of 17 years and the person pleads guilty to, is convicted of,
or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a moving violation
during the six-month period commencing on the date on which the person is
issued the probationary driver’s license, the court with jurisdiction over the
violation may order that the holder must be accompanied by the holder’s parent
or guardian whenever the holder is operating a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking for a period not to exceed six months or the date the holder
attains the age of 17 years, whichever occurs first.
      (2)   Any person who is subject to the operating restrictions established
under division (c)(1) of this section as a result of a first moving violation
may petition the court for driving privileges without being accompanied by the
holder’s parent or guardian during the period of time determined by the court
under that division. In granting the driving privileges, the court shall
specify the purposes of the privileges and shall issue the person appropriate
forms setting forth the privileges granted. If a person is convicted of, pleads
guilty to, or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a second or
subsequent moving violation, the court with jurisdiction over the violation may
terminate any driving privileges previously granted under this division.
      (3)   No person shall violate any operating restriction imposed under
division (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section.
   (d)   No holder of a probationary license shall operate a motor vehicle upon
a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking unless the total number of occupants of the vehicle
does not exceed the total number of occupant restraining devices originally
installed in the motor vehicle by its manufacturer, and each occupant of the
vehicle is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted
occupant restraining device.
   (e)   A restricted license may be issued to a person who is 14 or 15 years
of age under proof of hardship satisfactory to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles.
   (f)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether each occupant of the motor vehicle is wearing all of the
available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device as
required by division (d) of this section, or for the sole purpose of issuing a
ticket, citation or summons if that requirement has been or is being violated,
or for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a
violation of that requirement.
   (g)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (a)(1)A. or (a)(1)B. of this
section has been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a
ticket, citation or summons for such a violation or for causing the arrest or
commencing a prosecution of a person for such a violation.
   (h)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Family member” of a probationary license holder. Includes any of
the following:
         A.   A spouse;
         B.   A child or stepchild;
         C.   A parent, stepparent, grandparent or parent-in-law;
         D.   An aunt or uncle;
         E.   A sibling, whether of the whole or half blood or by adoption, a
brother-in-law or a sister-in-law;
         F.   A son or daughter of the probationary license holder’s stepparent
if the stepparent has not adopted the probationary license holder;
         G.   An eligible adult, as defined in R.C. § 4507.05.
      (2)   MOVING VIOLATION. Any violation of any statute or ordinance that
regulates the operation of vehicles on the highways or streets. MOVING
VIOLATION does not include a violation of R.C. § 4513.263 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of any statute or ordinance
regulating pedestrians or the parking of vehicles, vehicle size or load
limitations, vehicle fitness requirements or vehicle registration.
      (3)   OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4513.263.
   (i)   Whoever violates divisions (a)(1), (a)(4), (c)(3), or (d) of this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4507.071(B) - (J))
§ 436.05 CERTAIN ACTS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Display or cause or permit to be displayed, or possess any
identification card, driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit
knowing the same to be fictitious, or to have been canceled, suspended or
altered;
      (2)   Lend to a person not entitled thereto, or knowingly permit a person
not entitled thereto to use any identification card, driver’s or commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver’s license
temporary instruction permit issued to the person so lending or permitting the
use thereof;
      (3)   Display, or represent as one’s own, any identification card,
driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit or
commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit not issued to the
person so displaying the same;
      (4)   Fail to surrender to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, upon the
Registrar’s demand, any identification card, driver’s or commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit that has been suspended or canceled;
      (5)   In any application for an identification card, driver's or
commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit or commercial
driver's license temporary instruction permit or any renewal, reprint, or
duplicate thereof, knowingly conceal a material fact or present any statement
required under R.C. § 4507.08 or 4507.081 when knowing the same to be false or
fictitious.
   (b)   Whoever violates any division of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.30)
§ 436.06 OWNER OR OPERATOR ALLOWING ANOTHER TO DRIVE.
   (a)   No person shall permit a motor vehicle owned by the person or under
the person’s control to be driven by another if any of the following apply:
      (1)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person does not have a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit or valid nonresident driving privileges.
      (2)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privileges have been suspended or canceled under R.C. Chapter 4510 or
any other provision of the Revised Code.
      (3)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s act of driving the motor vehicle would violate any prohibition
contained in R.C. Chapter 4509.
      (4)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s act of driving would violate R.C. § 4511.19 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (5)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
vehicle is the subject of an immobilization waiver order issued under R.C.
4503.235 and the other person is prohibited from operating the vehicle under
that order.
   (b)   Without limiting or precluding the consideration of any other evidence
in determining whether a violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4)
or (a)(5) of this section has occurred, it shall be prima facie evidence that
the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the operator of the
motor vehicle owned by the offender or under the offender’s control is in a
category described in division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4) or (a)(5) of this
section if any of the following applies:
      (1)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (a)(1), (a)(3) or (a)(5) of this section, the offender and the
operator of the motor vehicle reside in the same household and are related by
consanguinity or affinity.
      (2)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (a)(2) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor
vehicle reside in the same household, and the offender knows or has reasonable
cause to believe that the operator has been charged with or convicted of any
violation of law or ordinance, or has committed any other act or omission, that
would or could result in the suspension or cancellation of the operator’s
license, permit, or privilege.
      (3)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (a)(4) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor
vehicle occupied the motor vehicle together at the time of the offense.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of wrongful entrustment of a
motor vehicle, and shall be punished as provided in divisions (c) to (h) of
this section.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(2) of this section, whoever
violates division (a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) of this section is guilty of an
unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the
offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
698.02, § 698.03 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall
not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a
community residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   A.   If, within three years of a violation of division (a)(1), (a)
(2), or (a)(3) of this section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to
or been convicted of two or more violations of division (a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)
(3) of this section, R.C. § 4511.203(A)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   Whoever violates division (a)(4) or (a)(5) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   For any violation of this section, in addition to the penalties
imposed under this Code or R.C. Chapter 2929, the court may impose a class
seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7), and, if
the vehicle involved in the offense is registered in the name of the offender,
the court may order one of the following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(3)B. or (c)(3)C. of
this section, the court may order, for 30 days, the immobilization of the
vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license
plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and enforced under R.C. §
4503.233.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one violation of this section, R.C. § 4511.203, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order, for 60 days, the
immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of
that vehicle’s license plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and
enforced under R.C. § 4503.233.
         C.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section, R.C. § 4511.203, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order the criminal
forfeiture to the state of the vehicle involved in the offense. If issued, the
order shall be issued and enforced under R.C. § 4503.234.
      (4)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order for
criminal forfeiture under division (c)(3)C. of this section is assigned or
transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in addition to or
independent of any other penalty established by law, the court may fine the
offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the National
Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds from any fine imposed under this
division shall be distributed in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234(C)(2).
   (d)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under division
(c)(3)A. or (c)(3)B. of this section, the court shall not release the vehicle
from the immobilization before the termination of the period of immobilization
ordered unless the court is presented with current proof of financial
responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
   (e)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under division
(c)(3)C. of this section, upon receipt of the order from the court, neither the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor any deputy registrar shall accept any
application for the registration or transfer of registration of any motor
vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the order. The period of denial
shall be five years after the date the order is issued, unless, during that
five-year period, the court with jurisdiction of the offense that resulted in
the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar of the
termination. If the court terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar,
the Registrar shall take all necessary measures to permit the person to
register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to transfer the
registration of the vehicle.
   (f)   This section does not apply to motor vehicle rental dealers or motor
vehicle leasing dealers, as defined in R.C. § 4549.65.
   (g)   Evidence of a conviction of, plea of guilty to, or adjudication as a
delinquent child for a violation of this section shall not be admissible as
evidence in any civil action that involves the offender or delinquent child who
is the subject of the conviction, plea or adjudication and that arises from the
wrongful entrustment of a motor vehicle.
   (h)   For purposes of this section, a vehicle is owned by a person if, at
the time of a violation of this section, the vehicle is registered in the
person’s name.
(R.C. § 4511.203)
§ 436.07 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   (a)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall display the operator’s driver’s
license, or furnish satisfactory proof that the operator has a driver’s
license, upon demand of any peace officer or of any person damaged or injured
in any collision in which the licensee may be involved. When a demand is
properly made, and the operator has the operator’s driver’s license on or about
the operator’s person, the operator shall not refuse to display the license. A
person’s failure to furnish satisfactory evidence that the person is licensed
under R.C. Chapter 4507 when the person does not have the person’s license on
or about the person’s person shall be prima facie evidence of the person’s not
having obtained a driver’s license.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(2) of this section, whoever
violates this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section,
R.C. § 4507.35, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.35)
§ 436.08 DRIVING UNDER SUSPENSION OR IN VIOLATION OF LICENSE RESTRICTION.
   (a)   Driving under suspension or in violation of license restriction.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2) of this section, division (b)
of this section, §
436.11 and in R.C. §§ 4510.111 and 4510.16, no person whose driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege has
been suspended under any provision of the Revised Code, other than R.C. Chapter
4509, or under any applicable law in any other jurisdiction in which the
person’s license or permit was issued shall operate any motor vehicle upon the
public roads and highways or upon any public or private property used by the
public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking within this municipality
during the period of suspension unless the person is granted limited driving
privileges and is operating the vehicle in accordance with the terms of the
limited driving privileges.
      (2)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking in this municipality in violation of any restriction of the person’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit imposed under R.C. § 4506.10
(D) or § 4507.14.
      (3)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under
suspension at the time of the alleged violation of division (a)(1) of this
section or the person operated a motor vehicle in violation of a restriction at
the time of the alleged violation of division (a)(2) of this section. The
person charged with a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section
may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
      (4)   A.   Whoever violates division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court may impose upon the
offender a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. §
4510.02(A)(7).
         B.   1.   Except as provided in division (a)(4)B.2. or (a)(4)B.3. of
this section, the court, in addition to any other penalty that it imposes on
the offender and if the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111
or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court, in
addition to or independent of any other sentence that it imposes upon the
offender, may order the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense
for 30 days and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license plates for 30 days in
accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
            2.   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to two violations of this section, or any combination of
two violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to any
other sentence that it imposes on the offender, may order the immobilization of
the vehicle involved in the offense for 60 days and the impoundment of that
vehicle’s license plates for 60 days in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
            3.   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this section, or any
combination of three or more violations of this section or R.C. § 4510.11,
4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the
court, in addition to any other sentence that it imposes on the offender, may
order the criminal forfeiture of the vehicle involved in the offense to the
state.
      (5)   Any order for immobilization and impoundment under this section
shall be issued and enforced under R.C. §§ 4503.233 and 4507.02, as applicable.
The court shall not release a vehicle from immobilization ordered under this
section unless the court is presented with current proof of financial
responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
      (6)   Any order of criminal forfeiture under this section shall be issued
and enforced under R.C. § 4503.234. Upon receipt of the copy of the order from
the court, neither the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor a deputy registrar shall
accept any application for the registration or transfer of registration of any
motor vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the declaration of
forfeiture. The period of registration denial shall be five years after the
date of the order, unless, during that period, the court having jurisdiction of
the offense that led to the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the
registrar of the termination. The registrar then shall take necessary measures
to permit the person to register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to
transfer registration of the vehicle.
      (7)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to § 698.02
(f) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing
the offense for which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(R.C. § 4510.11)
   (b)   Driving under suspension in violation of other provisions.
      (1)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking in this municipality whose driver's or commercial driver's license
has been suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2151.354, 2935.27, 3123.58, 4301.99,
4510.032, 4510.22, or 4510.33, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
      (2)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (b)(1) of this section may be admitted into evidence as
prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under suspension at the
time of the alleged violation of division (b)(1) of this section. The person
charged with a violation of division (b)(1) of this section may offer evidence
to rebut this prima facie evidence.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (b)(1) of this section is guilty of
driving under suspension and shall be punished as provided in division (b)(3)A.
or division (b)(3)B. of this section.
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(3)B. of this
section, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. The offender shall be
sentenced pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
         B.   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously
was convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (b)(1)
of this section, or any combination of two or more violations of division (b)
(1) of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree, and the offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. § 2929.28 in
an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident
or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s
operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense for
which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(R.C. § 4510.111)
   (c)   Repeat traffic offender; point system suspension. Any person whose
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privileges are suspended as a repeat traffic offender under R.C. § 4510.037 and
who, during the suspension, operates any motor vehicle upon any public roads
and highways is guilty of driving under a 12-point suspension, a misdemeanor of
the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to a minimum term of
three days in jail. No court shall suspend the first three days of jail time
imposed pursuant to this division.
(R.C. § 4510.037(J))
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
§ 436.09 OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE OR MOTORCYCLE WITHOUT VALID LICENSE.
   (a)   (1)   No person, except those expressly exempted under R.C. §§
4507.03, 4507.04 and 4507.05, shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public
road or highway or any public or private property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this municipality unless the person
has a valid driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a commercial
driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4506.
      (2)   No person, except a person expressly exempted under R.C. §§
4507.03, 4507.04 and 4507.05, shall operate any motorcycle upon a public road
or highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking in this municipality unless the person has a valid
license as a motorcycle operator that was issued upon application by the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. Chapter 4507. The license shall be in
the form of an endorsement, as determined by the Registrar, upon a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, if the person has a valid license to operate a
motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle, or in the form of a restricted
license as provided in R.C. § 4507.14, if the person does not have a valid
license to operate a motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle.
   (b)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the person did not have either a valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license at the time of the alleged violation of
division (a)(1) of this section or a valid license as a motorcycle operator
either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or a restricted license at the time of the alleged violation of
division (a)(2) of this section. The person charged with a violation of
division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section may offer evidence to rebut this
prima facie evidence.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle
or motorcycle without a valid license and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   If the trier of fact finds that the offender never has held a valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license issued by this state or any other
jurisdiction, or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the
offender, if the offender has never held a valid license as a motorcycle
operator, either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or in the form of a restricted license, except as otherwise
provided in this division, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case. If the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation of this section or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
      (2)   If the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit
or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the offender, the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license bearing the motorcycle
endorsement or the offender’s restricted license was expired at the time of the
offense, except as otherwise provided in this division, the offense is a minor
misdemeanor. If within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
   (d)   The court shall not impose a license suspension for a first violation
of this section or if more than three years have passed since the offender’s
last violation of R.C. § 4510.12, this section, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (e)   If the offender is sentenced under division (c)(2) of this section, if
within three years of the offense the offender previously was convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one or more violations of R.C. § 4510.12, this section, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance within the past three years, and
if the offender’s license was expired for more than six months at the time of
the offense, the court may impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s
driver license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
(R.C. § 4510.12)
§ 436.10 DRIVING UNDER O.V.I. SUSPENSION.
   (a)   No person whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege has been suspended under R.C. § 4511.19,
4511.191 or 4511.196 or under R.C. § 4510.07 for a conviction of a violation of
a municipal O.V.I. ordinance shall operate any motor vehicle upon the public
roads or highways within this municipality during the period of the suspension.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of driving under O.V.I.
suspension. The court shall sentence the offender under R.C. Chapter 2929,
subject to the differences authorized or required by this section.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this
section, driving under O.V.I. suspension is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         A.   A mandatory jail term of three consecutive days. The three-day
term shall be imposed, unless, subject to division (c) of this section, the
court instead imposes a sentence of not less than 30 consecutive days of house
arrest with electronic monitoring. A period of house arrest with electronic
monitoring imposed under this division shall not exceed six months. If the
court imposes a mandatory three-day jail term under this division, the court
may impose a jail term in addition to that term, provided that in no case shall
the cumulative jail term imposed for the offense exceed six months;
         B.   A fine of not less than $250 and not more than $1,000;
         C.   A license suspension under division (e) of this section;
         D.   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, immobilization for 30 days of the
offender’s vehicle and impoundment for 30 days of the identification license
plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization and impoundment shall be
issued and enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
      (2)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section or one
equivalent offense, driving under O.V.I. suspension is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         A.   A mandatory jail term of ten consecutive days. Notwithstanding
the jail terms provided in R.C. § 2929.21 to 2929.28, the court may sentence
the offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year. The ten-day
mandatory jail term shall be imposed unless, subject to division (c) of this
section, the court instead imposes a sentence of not less than 90 consecutive
days of house arrest with electronic monitoring. The period of house arrest
with electronic monitoring shall not exceed one year;
         B.   Notwithstanding the fines provided for in R.C. Chapter 2929, a
fine of not less than $500 and not more than $2,500;
         C.   A license suspension under division (e) of this section;
         D.   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, immobilization of the offender’s
vehicle for 60 days and the impoundment for 60 days of the identification
license plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization and impoundment
shall be issued and enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
      (3)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section
or two or more equivalent offenses, driving under O.V.I. suspension is a
misdemeanor. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         A.   A mandatory jail term of 30 consecutive days. Notwithstanding the
jail terms provided in R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, the court may sentence the
offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year. The court shall not
sentence the offender to a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring in
lieu of the mandatory portion of the jail term;
         B.   Notwithstanding the fines set forth in R.C. Chapter 2929, a fine
of not less than $500 and not more than $2,500;
         C.   A license suspension under division (e) of this section;
         D.   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, criminal forfeiture to the state
of the offender’s vehicle. The order of criminal forfeiture shall be issued and
enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234. If title to a motor vehicle that
is subject to an order for criminal forfeiture under this division is assigned
or transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, the court may fine
the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the
National Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds from any fine so imposed
shall be distributed in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234(C)(2).
   (c)   (1)   No court shall impose an alternative sentence of house arrest
with electronic monitoring under division (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section
unless, within 60 days of the date of sentencing, the court issues a written
finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail
where the offender is required to serve the jail term imposed, the offender
will not be able to begin serving that term within the 60-day period following
the date of sentencing.
      (2)   An offender sentenced under this section to a period of house
arrest with electronic monitoring shall be permitted work release during that
period.
   (d)   Fifty percent of any fine imposed by a court under division (b)(1),
(b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section shall be deposited into the Municipal Indigent
Drivers’ Alcohol Treatment Fund under the control of that court, as created by
the municipality pursuant to R.C. § 4511.191(H).
   (e)   In addition to or independent of all other penalties provided by law
or ordinance, the trial judge of any court of record or the Mayor of a Mayor’s
Court shall impose on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of this section a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
      (1)   When permitted as specified in R.C. § 4510.021, if the court grants
limited driving privileges during a suspension imposed under this section, the
privileges shall be granted on the additional condition that the offender must
display restricted license plates, issued under R.C. § 4503.231, on the vehicle
driven subject to the privileges, except as provided in R.C. § 4503.231(B).
      (2)   A suspension of a commercial driver’s license under this section
shall be concurrent with any period of suspension or disqualification under
R.C. § 3123.58 or 4506.16. No person who is disqualified for life from holding
a commercial driver’s license under R.C. § 4506.16 shall be issued a driver’s
license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period for which the commercial
driver’s license was suspended under this section, and no person whose
commercial driver’s license is suspended under this section shall be issued a
driver’s license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period of the suspension.
   (f)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
698.02(f) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense that is a misdemeanor of the first degree under this
section for which the offender is sentenced.
   (g)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   ELECTRONIC MONITORING. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      (2)   EQUIVALENT OFFENSE. Any of the following:
         A.   A violation of a municipal ordinance, law of another state, or
law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to division (a) of
this section;
         B.   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to division (a) of this section.
      (3)   JAIL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      (4)   MANDATORY JAIL TERM. The mandatory term in jail of three, ten or 30
consecutive days that must be imposed under division (b)(1), (b)(2) or (b)(3)
of this section upon an offender convicted of a violation of division (a) of
this section and in relation to which all of the following apply:
         A.   Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term
must be served in a jail.
         B.   Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term
cannot be suspended, reduced, or otherwise modified pursuant to any provision
of the Ohio Revised Code.
(R.C. § 4510.14)
   (h)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
Statutory reference:
   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal
forfeiture of vehicle, see R.C. § 4510.161
§ 436.11 DRIVING UNDER FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY LAW SUSPENSION OR CANCELLATION;
DRIVING UNDER A NONPAYMENT OF JUDGMENT SUSPENSION.
   (a)   No person, whose driver's or commercial driver's license or temporary
instruction permit or nonresident's operating privilege has been suspended or
canceled pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4509, shall operate any motor vehicle within
this municipality, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by the person to
be operated by another person in the municipality, during the period of the
suspension or cancellation, except as specifically authorized by R.C. Chapter
4509.
   (b)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any public
or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking in this municipality if the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or temporary instruction permit or nonresident operating privilege has
been suspended pursuant to R.C. § 4509.37 or 4509.40 for nonpayment of a
judgment.
   (c)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (a) or (b) of this section may be admitted into evidence
as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under either a
financial responsibility law suspension at the time of the alleged violation of
division (a) of this section or a nonpayment of judgment suspension at the time
of the alleged violation of division (b) of this section. The person charged
with a violation of division (a) or (b) of this section may offer evidence to
rebut this prima facie evidence.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of driving
under financial responsibility law suspension or cancellation and shall be
punished as provided in division (d)(1) to (d)(3) of this section. Whoever
violates division (b) of this section is guilty of driving under a nonpayment
of judgment suspension and shall be punished as provided in division (d)(1) to
(d)(3) of this section.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (d)(2) of this
section, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an
unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously was
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section, or
any combination of two violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or
4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (3)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. § 2929.28 in
an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident
or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s
operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense for
which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(R.C. § 4510.16)
   (e)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
Statutory reference:
   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal
forfeiture of vehicle, see R.C. § 4510.161
§ 436.12 FAILURE TO REINSTATE LICENSE.
   (a)   No person whose driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit or nonresident’s operating privilege has been
suspended shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public road or highway or any
public or private property after the suspension has expired unless the person
has complied with all license reinstatement requirements imposed by the court,
the Bureau of Motor Vehicles or another provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
   (b)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (a) of this section may be admitted into evidence as
prima facie evidence that the license of the person had not been reinstated by
the person at the time of the alleged violation of division (a) of this
section. The person charged with a violation of division (a) of this section
may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to reinstate a
license, and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(2) of this section, whoever
violates this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of a violation of division (a) of this
section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two
or more violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.21 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (3)   In all cases, the court may impose upon the offender a class seven
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
(R.C. § 4510.21)
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
§ 436.13 OPERATION OR SALE WITHOUT CERTIFICATE OF TITLE.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in this municipality a motor vehicle for which a
certificate of title is required without having that certificate in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 4505 or, if a physical certificate of title has not been
issued for a motor vehicle, operate the motor vehicle in this state knowing
that the ownership information relating to the vehicle has not been entered
into the automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of Common
Pleas;
      (2)   Display or display for sale or sell as a dealer or acting on behalf
of a dealer, a motor vehicle without having obtained a manufacturer’s or
importer’s certificate, a certificate of title or an assignment of a
certificate of title for it as provided in R.C. Chapter 4505;
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title or any certificate of
registration or license plates upon cancellation of the same by the Registrar
of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed in R.C. Chapter
4505;
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas as provided in R.C. Chapter 4505 in case of the destruction or
dismantling or change of a motor vehicle in such respect that it is not the
motor vehicle described in the certificate of title;
      (5)   Violate any rules adopted pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4505;
      (6)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapters 4505 and 4517, sell
at wholesale a motor vehicle ownership of which is not evidenced by an Ohio
certificate of title, or the current certificate of title issued for the motor
vehicle, or the manufacturer’s certificate of origin, and all title assignments
that evidence the seller’s ownership of the motor vehicle, and an odometer
disclosure statement that complies with R.C. § 4505.06 and subchapter IV of the
“Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act”, 86 Stat. 961 (1972), 15
U.S.C. 1981;
      (7)   Operate in this state a motor vehicle knowing that the certificate
of title to the vehicle or ownership of the vehicle as otherwise reflected in
the automated title processing system has been canceled.
   (b)   This section does not apply to persons engaged in the business of
warehousing or transporting motor vehicles for the purpose of salvage
disposition.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $200,
imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4505.18)
§ 436.14 DISPLAY OF LICENSE PLATES; REGISTRATION; OBSTRUCTIONS.
   (a)   (1)   No person who is the owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall
fail to display in plain view on the rear of the motor vehicle a license plate
that displays the distinctive number and registration mark assigned to the
motor vehicle by the Ohio Director of Public Safety, including any county
identification sticker and any validation sticker when required by and issued
under R.C. §§ 4503.19 and 4503.191. However, a commercial tractor shall display
the license plate on the front of the commercial tractor.
      (2)   The license plate shall be securely fastened so as not to swing,
and shall not be covered by any material that obstructs its visibility.
      (3)   No person to whom a temporary motor vehicle license registration
has been issued for the use of a motor vehicle under R.C. § 4503.182, and no
operator of that motor vehicle, shall fail to display the temporary motor
vehicle license registration in plain view from the rear of the vehicle either
in the rear window or on an external rear surface of the motor vehicle.
      (4)   No person shall cover a temporary motor vehicle license
registration by any material that obstructs its visibility.
(R.C. § 4503.21(A))
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided by R.C. §§ 4503.103, 4503.107, 4503.173,
4503.41, 4503.43 and 4503.46, no person who is the owner or chauffeur of a
motor vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads or highways shall fail
to file annually the application for registration or to pay the tax therefor.
(R.C. § 4503.11(A))
   (c)   (1)   Within 30 days of becoming a resident of this state, any person
who owns a motor vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads or highways
shall register the vehicle in this state. If such a person fails to register a
vehicle owned by the person, the person shall not operate any motor vehicle in
this state under a license issued by another state.
      (2)   For purposes of division (c)(1) of this section, RESIDENT means any
person to whom any of the following applies:
         A.   The person maintains their principal residence in this state and
does not reside in this state as a result of the person’s active service in the
United States armed forces.
         B.   The person is determined by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles to be
a resident in accordance with standards adopted by the Registrar under R.C. §
4507.01.
(R.C. § 4503.111(A), (C))
   (d)   Upon the transfer of ownership of a motor vehicle, the registration of
the motor vehicle expires, and the original owner immediately shall remove the
license plates from the motor vehicle, except as otherwise provided in R.C. §
4503.12.
(R.C. § 4503.12(A))
   (e)   No person shall operate or drive upon the highways of this
municipality a motor vehicle acquired from a former owner who has registered
the motor vehicle, while the motor vehicle displays the distinctive number or
identification mark assigned to it upon its original registration.
(R.C. § 4549.11(A))
   (f)   No person who is the owner of a motor vehicle and a resident of this
state shall operate or drive the motor vehicle upon the highways of this
municipality while it displays a distinctive number or identification mark
issued by or under the authority of another state, without complying with the
laws of this state relating to the registration and identification of motor
vehicles.
(R.C. § 4549.12(A))
   (g)   (1)   A.   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor.
         B.   The offenses established under division (a) of this section are
strict liability offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of
these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be construed to imply
that any other offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability,
is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. § 4503.21(B), (C))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4503.11(D))
      (3)   A.   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
         B.   The offense established under division (g)(3)A. of this section
is a strict liability offense and strict liability is a culpable mental state
for purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of this offense as a strict
liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
(R.C. § 4503.111(B))
      (4)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4503.12(D))
      (5)   Whoever violates division (e) of this section is guilty of
operation of a motor vehicle bearing license plates or an identification mark
issued to another, a minor misdemeanor on a first offense and a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4549.11(B))
      (6)   Whoever violates division (f) of this section is guilty of illegal
operation by a resident of this state of a motor vehicle bearing the
distinctive number or identification mark issued by a foreign jurisdiction, a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4549.12(B))
§ 436.15 USE OF ILLEGAL LICENSE PLATES.
   (a)   No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle upon the public roads
and highways in this municipality if it displays a license plate or a
distinctive number or identification mark that meets any of the following
criteria:
      (1)   It is fictitious;
      (2)   It is a counterfeit or an unlawfully made copy of any distinctive
number or identification mark;
      (3)   It belongs to another motor vehicle, provided that this section
does not apply to a motor vehicle that is operated on the public roads and
highways in this municipality when the motor vehicle displays license plates
that originally were issued for a motor vehicle that previously was owned by
the same person who owns the motor vehicle that is operated on the public roads
and highways in this municipality during the 30-day period described in R.C. §
4503.12(A)(4).
   (b)   A person who fails to comply with the transfer of registration
provisions of R.C. § 4503.12 and is charged with a violation of that section
shall not be charged with a violation of this section.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section is
guilty of operating a motor vehicle bearing an invalid license plate or
identification mark, this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the third degree on each
subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4549.08)
§ 436.16 FAILURE TO STOP AFTER ACCIDENT.
   (a)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision with
persons or property on a public road or highway, the operator of the motor
vehicle, having knowledge of the accident or collision, immediately shall stop
the operator’s motor vehicle at the scene of the accident or collision. The
operator shall remain at the scene of the accident or collision until the
operator has given the operator’s name and address and, if the operator is not
the owner, the name and address of the owner of that motor vehicle, together
with the registered number of that motor vehicle, to all of the following:
         A.   Any person injured in the accident or collision;
         B.   The operator, occupant, owner, or attendant of any motor vehicle
damaged in the accident or collision;
         C.   The police officer at the scene of the accident or collision.
      (2)   In the event an injured person is unable to comprehend and record
the information required to be given under division (a)(1) of this section, the
other operator involved in the accident or collision shall notify the nearest
police authority concerning the location of the accident or collision, and the
operator’s name, address, and the registered number of the motor vehicle the
operator was operating. The operator shall remain at the scene of the accident
or collision until a police officer arrives, unless removed from the scene by
an emergency vehicle operated by a political subdivision or an ambulance.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely
attach the information required to be given in this section, in writing, to a
conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after an accident. Except as otherwise provided in division (b)
(2) or (b)(3) of this section, failure to stop after an accident is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm to a
person, failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a person,
failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend the first six months
of suspension of an offender’s license, permit, or privilege required by this
division.
      (5)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. §
2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.02)
§ 436.17 STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT ON OTHER THAN PUBLIC ROADS OR HIGHWAYS.
   (a)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision resulting
in injury or damage to persons or property on any public or private property
other than a public road or highway, the operator of the motor vehicle, having
knowledge of the accident or collision, shall stop at the scene of the accident
or collision. Upon request of any person who is injured or damaged, or any
other person, the operator shall give that person the operator’s name and
address, and, if the operator is not the owner, the name and address of the
owner of that motor vehicle, together with the registered number of that motor
vehicle, and, if available, exhibit the operator’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license.
      (2)   If the operator of the motor vehicle involved in the accident or
collision does not provide the information specified in division (a)(1) of this
section, the operator shall give that information, within 24 hours after the
accident or collision, to the police department of the city or village in which
the accident or collision occurred, or if it occurred outside the corporate
limits of a city or village, to the sheriff of the county in which the accident
or collision occurred.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely
attach the information required under division (a)(1) of this section, in
writing, to a conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor
vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident. Except as otherwise provided
in division (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section, failure to stop after a nonpublic
road accident is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm to a
person, failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a person,
failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend the first six months
of suspension of an offender’s license, permit, or privilege required by this
division.
      (5)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. §
2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.021)
§ 436.18 VEHICLE ACCIDENT RESULTING IN DAMAGE TO REALTY.
   (a)   (1)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in
damage to real property, or personal property attached to real property,
legally upon or adjacent to a public road or highway immediately shall stop and
take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of the
property of that fact, of the driver’s name and address, and of the
registration number of vehicle the driver is driving and, upon request and if
available, shall exhibit the driver’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license.
      (2)   If the owner or person in charge of the property cannot be located
after reasonable search, the driver of the vehicle involved in the accident
resulting in damage to the property within 24 hours after the accident, shall
forward to the Police Department of the municipality the same information
required to be given to the owner or person in control of the property and give
the location of the accident and a description of the damage insofar as it is
known.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after an accident involving the property of others, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
698.02(f) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or
after committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.03)
§ 436.19 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES AFTER ACCIDENTS.
   (a)   If a motor vehicle accident occurs on any highway, public street, or
other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel and if any
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property that has been damaged or spilled as
a result of the motor vehicle accident is blocking the highway, street, or
other property or is otherwise endangering public safety, a public safety
official may do either of the following without the consent of the owner but
with the approval of the law enforcement agency conducting any investigation of
the accident:
      (1)   Remove, or order the removal of, the motor vehicle if the motor
vehicle is unoccupied, cargo, or personal property from the portion of the
highway, public street, or property ordinarily used for vehicular travel on the
highway, public street, or other property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel.
      (2)   If the motor vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle, allow the owner
or operator of the vehicle the opportunity to arrange for the removal of the
motor vehicle within a period of time specified by the public safety official.
If the public safety official determines that the motor vehicle cannot be
removed within the specified period of time, the public safety official shall
remove or order the removal of the motor vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(2) of this section, the
Department of Transportation, any employee of the Department of Transportation,
or a public safety official who authorizes or participates in the removal of
any unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property as authorized by
division (a) of this section, regardless of whether the removal is executed by
a private towing service, is not liable for civil damages for any injury,
death, or loss to person or property that results from the removal of that
unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property. Further, except as
provided in division (b)(2) of this section, if a public safety official
authorizes, employs, or arranges to have a private towing service remove any
unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property as authorized by division
(a) of this section, that private towing service is not liable for civil
damages for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that results from
the removal of that unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
         A.   Any person or entity involved in the removal of an unoccupied
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property pursuant to division (a) of this
section if that removal causes or contributes to the release of a hazardous
material or to structural damage to the roadway;
         B.   A private towing service that was not authorized, employed, or
arranged by a public safety official to remove an unoccupied motor vehicle,
cargo, or personal property under this section;
         C.   Except as provided in division (b)(2)D. of this section, a
private towing service that was authorized, employed, or arranged by a public
safety official to perform the removal of the unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo,
or personal property but the private towing service performed the removal in a
negligent manner;
         D.   A private towing service that was authorized, employed, or
arranged by a public safety official to perform the removal of the unoccupied
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property that was endangering public safety
but the private towing service performed the removal in a reckless manner.
   (c)   As used in divisions (a) and (b) of this section:
      (1)   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.232.
      (2)   PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICIAL. Any of the following:
         A.   The sheriff of the county, or the chief of a law enforcement
agency in the municipal corporation, township, port authority, conservancy
district, university campus police department, park district police force, or
township or joint police district, in which the accident occurred;
         B.   A state highway patrol trooper;
         C.   The chief of the fire department having jurisdiction where the
accident occurred;
         D.   A duly authorized subordinate acting on behalf of an official
specified in divisions A. to C. of this definition;
         E.   A natural resources officer or a wildlife officer.
(R.C. § 4513.66)
   (d)   If a towing service is removing a motor vehicle, and the removal was
not authorized under R.C. § 4513.60, 4513.601, 4513.61, or 4513.66, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, prior to removing the motor
vehicle, the towing service shall provide a written estimate of the price for
the removal to the operator of the motor vehicle, if requested.
   (e)   The towing service shall ensure that any estimate provided under
division (d) of this section includes the fees, services to be rendered, and
destination of the vehicle.
   (f)   If a towing service fails to provide a written estimate as required by
this section, the towing service shall not charge fees for the towing and
storage of the motor vehicle that exceed 25% of any applicable fees established
by the public utilities commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25(B)(4)
or, if the vehicle was towed within a municipal corporation that has
established vehicle removal and storage fees, 25% of the fees established by
the municipal corporation.
   (g)   Any storage facility that accepts towed vehicles shall conspicuously
post a notice at the entrance to the storage facility that states the
limitation on fees established under division (f) of this section.
(R.C. § 4513.68)
§ 436.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 438: SAFETY AND EQUIPMENT
Section
   
438.01   Driving unsafe vehicles; application
   
438.02   Lighted lights; measurement of distances and heights
   
438.03   Headlights on motor vehicles and motorcycles
   
438.04   Tail light; illumination of rear license plate
   
438.05   Rear red reflectors
   
438.06   Safety lighting on commercial vehicles
   
438.07   Obscured lights on vehicles in combination
   
438.08   Red light or red flag on extended loads
   
438.09   Lights on parked or stopped vehicles
   
438.10   Lights, emblems, and reflectors on slow-moving vehicles, farm
machinery, agricultural tractors, and animal-drawn vehicles
   
438.11   Spotlight and auxiliary lights
   
438.12   Cowl, fender and back-up lights
   
438.13   Two lights displayed
   
438.14   Use of headlight beams
   
438.15   Lights of less intensity on slow-moving vehicles
   
438.16   Number of lights permitted; red and flashing lights
   
438.17   Lights and sound-producing devices on coroners’ vehicles
   
438.18   Vehicles transporting preschool children
   
438.19   Focus and aim of headlights
   
438.20   Motor vehicle and motorcycle brakes
   
438.21   Horn, siren and theft alarm signal
   
438.22   Muffler; muffler cutout; excessive smoke, gas or noise
   
438.23   Rear-view mirror; clear view to front, both sides and rear
   
438.24   Windshield required; sign or poster upon windshield; windshield wiper
   
438.25   Tinted glass; materials on glass
   
438.26   Limited load extension on left side of passenger vehicle
   
438.27   Motor vehicle stop lights
   
438.28   Bumpers
   
438.29   Air cleaner required
   
438.30   Use of child restraints
   
438.31   Use of occupant restraining devices
   
438.32   Air bags
   
438.33   Engine brakes and compression brakes
   
438.34   Loud sound systems from motor vehicles
   
438.99   Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Bicycle equipment, see §
444.05
   Collector’s vehicles, see R.C. §§ 4513.38, 4513.41
   Improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle, see §
678.05
   Occupying travel trailers while in motion, see §
440.08
   Snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle and all-purpose vehicle equipment, see §
446.02
   Towing requirements; exception to size and weight restrictions, see §
440.05
   Use of stop and turn signals, see §
432.13
   Vehicles transporting explosives, see §
440.04
   Warning devices for commercial vehicles disabled upon freeways, see R.C. §
4513.28
   Wheel protectors for commercial vehicles, see §
440.03
§ 438.01 DRIVING UNSAFE VEHICLES; APPLICATION.
   (a)   No person shall drive or move, or cause or knowingly permit to be
driven or moved, on any highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is
in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.02(A), (H))
§ 438.02 LIGHTED LIGHTS; MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCES AND HEIGHTS.
   (a)   Every vehicle, other than a motorized bicycle, operated upon a street
or highway within this state shall display lighted lights and illuminating
devices as required by R.C. §§ 4513.04 through 4513.37 during all of the
following times:
      (1)   The time from sunset to sunrise;
      (2)   At any other time when, due to insufficient natural light or
unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons, vehicles and substantial objects
on the highway are not discernible at a distance of 1,000 feet ahead;
      (3)   At any time when the windshield wipers of the vehicle are in use
because of precipitation on the windshield.
   (b)   Every motorized bicycle shall display at such times lighted lights
meeting the rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under R.C. §
4511.521. No motor vehicle, during any time specified in this section, shall be
operated upon a street or highway within this state using only parking lights
as illumination.
   (c)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the distance
from which certain lamps and devices shall render objects visible, or within
which such lamps or devices shall be visible, such distance shall be measured
upon a straight level unlighted highway under normal atmospheric conditions
unless a different condition is expressly stated.
   (d)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the mounted
height of lights or devices, it shall mean from the center of such light or
device to the level ground upon which the vehicle stands.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a vehicle being operated upon a
street or highway within this state to stop the vehicle solely because the
officer observes that a violation of division (a)(3) of this section has been
or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of that division, or causing the arrest of or
commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of that division.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.03)
§ 438.03 HEADLIGHTS ON MOTOR VEHICLES AND MOTORCYCLES.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, shall be equipped
with at least two headlights with at least one near each side of the front of
the motor vehicle.
      (2)   Every motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one and not more
than two headlights.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.04)
§ 438.04 TAIL LIGHT; ILLUMINATION OF REAR LICENSE PLATE.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer or
vehicle which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles shall be
equipped with at least one tail light mounted on the rear which, when lighted,
shall emit a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear,
provided that in the case of a train of vehicles only the tail light on the
rearmost vehicle need be visible from the distance specified.
      (2)   Either a tail light or a separate light shall be so constructed and
placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration plate, when
the registration plate is required, and render it legible from a distance of 50
feet to the rear. Any tail light, together with any separate light for
illuminating the rear registration plate, shall be so wired as to be lighted
whenever the headlights or auxiliary driving lights are lighted, except where
separate lighting systems are provided for trailers for the purpose of
illuminating the registration plate.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.05)
§ 438.05 REAR RED REFLECTORS.
   (a)   (1)   Every new motor vehicle sold after September 6, 1941, and
operated on a highway, other than a commercial tractor to which a trailer or
semitrailer is attached, shall carry at the rear, either as a part of the tail
lamps or separately, two red reflectors meeting the requirements of this
section, except that vehicles of the type mentioned in R.C. § 4513.07 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall be equipped with reflectors
as required by the regulations provided for in that section.
      (2)   Every such reflector shall be of a size and characteristics and so
maintained as to be visible at night from all distances within 300 feet to 50
feet from the vehicle.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.06)
§ 438.06 SAFETY LIGHTING ON COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   When the Director of Public Safety prescribes and promulgates
regulations relating to clearance lights, marker lights, reflectors and stop
lights on buses, trucks, commercial tractors, trailers, semitrailers and pole
trailers, when operated upon any highway, these vehicles shall be equipped as
required by the regulations, and the equipment shall be lighted at all times
mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
except that clearance lights and side marker lights need not be lighted on any
such vehicle when it is operated within the municipality where there is
sufficient light to reveal any person or substantial object on the highway at a
distance of 500 feet.
      (2)   This equipment shall be in addition to all other lights
specifically required by R.C. §§ 4513.03 through 4513.16, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinances.
      (3)   Vehicles operated under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities
Commission are not subject to this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.07)
§ 438.07 OBSCURED LIGHTS ON VEHICLES IN COMBINATION.
   Whenever motor and other vehicles are operated in combination during the
time that lights are required, any light, except tail lights, which by reason
of its location on a vehicle of the combination would be obscured by another
vehicle of the combination, need not be lighted, but this section does not
affect the requirement that lighted clearance lights be displayed on the front
of the foremost vehicle required to have clearance lights or that all lights
required on the rear of the rearmost vehicle of any combination shall be
lighted.
(R.C. § 4513.08)
§ 438.08 RED LIGHT OR RED FLAG ON EXTENDED LOADS.
   (a)   Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four feet or
more beyond the bed or body of this vehicle, there shall be displayed at the
extreme rear end of the load, at the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, a red light or lantern plainly
visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the sides and rear. The red
light or lantern required by this section is in addition to the red rear light
required upon every vehicle. At any other time there shall be displayed at the
extreme rear end of the load a red flag or cloth not less than 16 inches
square.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.09)
§ 438.09 LIGHTS ON PARKED OR STOPPED VEHICLES.
   (a)   Except in case of an emergency, whenever a vehicle is parked or
stopped upon a roadway open to traffic or a shoulder adjacent thereto, whether
attended or unattended, during the times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the vehicle shall be equipped
with one or more lights which shall exhibit a white or amber light on the
roadway side visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle,
and a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear. No lights need
be displayed upon any such vehicle when it is stopped or parked within the
municipality where there is sufficient light to reveal any person or
substantial object within a distance of 500 feet upon the highway. Any lighted
headlights upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed.
(R.C. § 4513.10)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 438.10 LIGHTS, EMBLEMS, AND REFLECTORS ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES, FARM
MACHINERY, AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS, AND ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES.
   (a)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      (1)   BOAT TRAILER. Any vehicle designed and used exclusively to
transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a
marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a distance of no more
than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less.
      (2)   SLOW-MOVING VEHICLE and SMV. A boat trailer, unit of farm
machinery, road construction machinery, or other machinery designed by the
manufacturer to operate at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less. The term does
not include a bicycle, motorized bicycle, electric bicycle, or animal-drawn
vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.11)
   (b)   Generally.
      (1)   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall operate
either of the following vehicles unless it is equipped with and displays the
lamps described in division (b)(2) of this section:
         A.   A vehicle not specifically required to be equipped with lamps or
other lighting devices by R.C. §§ 4513.03 to 4513.10;
         B.   A vehicle referred to in R.C. § 4513.02(G).
      (2)   Vehicles described in division (b)(1) of this section shall be
equipped with both of the following:
         A.   At least one lamp displaying a white light visible from a
distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the front of the vehicle;
         B.   Two lamps displaying red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear of the vehicle, or as an alternative, one lamp
displaying a red light visible from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to
the rear and two red reflectors visible from all distances of 600 feet to 100
feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams of headlamps.
      (3)   A.   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall
operate a multi-wheel agricultural tractor model year 2001 or earlier on a
street or highway unless it is equipped with and displays reflectors and
illuminated amber lamps so that the extreme left and right projections of the
tractor are indicated by all of the following:
            1.   Flashing lamps displaying amber light, visible to the front
and the rear. The lamps need not flash simultaneously and need not flash in
conjunction with any directional signals of the tractor.
            2.   Amber reflectors, all visible to the front;
            3.   Red reflectors, all visible to the rear.
         B.   Rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under R.C. §
4513.111 governing the lamps and reflectors described in division (b)(3)A. of
this section and their placement correlate with and, as far as possible,
conform with paragraphs 4.1.4.1, 4.1.7.1, and 4.1.7.2 respectively of the
American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S279.10 OCT 98,
Lighting and Marking of Agricultural Equipment on Highways.
      (4)   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall operate a
unit of farm machinery model year 2002 or later on a street or highway unless
it is equipped with and displays markings and illuminated lamps that meet or
exceed the lighting, illumination, and marking standards and specifications
that are applicable to that type of farm machinery for the unit's model year
specified in the American society of agricultural engineers standard ANSI/ASAE
S279.10 OCT 98, lighting and marking of agricultural equipment on highways.
      (5)   Any unit of farm machinery designed by its manufacturer to operate
at a speed of 25 miles per hour or greater or any SMV may be equipped with and
display a red flashing light that is visible from a distance of not less than
1,000 feet to the rear at all times specified in R.C. § 4513.03. When a double-
faced light is used, it shall display amber light to the front and red light to
the rear.
      (6)   Lights and reflectors required under divisions (b)(3) and (b)(4) of
this section and authorized under division (b)(5) of this section are in
addition to other lights required or permitted by this division (b) or R.C. §
4513.17.
      (7)   The Ohio Director of Public Safety shall adopt rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 that establish standards and specifications for lamps and
reflectors required or authorized by this section. Lamps and reflectors
required or authorized by this section shall meet those standards and
specifications.
      (8)   This division (b) does not apply to a bicycle, motorized bicycle,
electric bicycle, or animal-drawn vehicle.
      (9)   Whoever violates this division (b) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.111)
   (c)   Slow-moving vehicles.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall
operate an SMV on a street or highway as follows:
         A.   At a speed exceeding 25 miles per hour;
         B.   Without displaying the triangular SMV emblem mounted in
accordance with division (c)(2) of this section.
      (2)   The SMV emblem shall be mounted so as to be visible from a distance
of not less than 500 feet to the rear. In accordance with R.C. Chapter 119, the
Ohio Director of Public Safety shall adopt standards and specifications for the
design and position of mounting the SMV emblem. The standards and
specifications for the SMV emblem correlate with and, so far as possible,
conform with those approved by the American Society of Agricultural Engineers.
      (3)   A person may operate an SMV on a street or highway without
displaying the triangular SMV emblem when any of the following apply:
         A.   The SMV is being used in actual construction and maintenance work
in an area guarded by a flagperson, or where flares are used.
         B.   The SMV is operating or traveling within the limits of a
construction area designated by the Ohio Director of Transportation, a city
engineer, or the county engineer of the several counties, when such
construction area is marked in accordance with requirements of the Ohio
Director of Transportation and the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices,
as set forth in R.C. § 4511.09.
      (4)   No person shall display an SMV emblem on any of the following:
         A.   Any vehicle not required to use the SMV emblem by this division
(c) or R.C. § 4513.113 or 4513.114;
         B.   An SMV being transported upon any other vehicle;
         C.   Any stationary object on the highway.
      (5)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate an SMV, except a unit
designed to be completely mounted on a primary power unit that is manufactured
or assembled on or after April 1, 1966, unless it is equipped with an SMV
emblem mounting device.
      (6)   Whoever violates this division (c) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.112)
   (d)   Farm machinery and agricultural tractors.
      (1)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate on a street or
highway any unit of farm machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to
operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the unit displays both
of the following:
         A.   The SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. § 4513.112(B);
         B.   A speed identification symbol that does both of the following:
            1.   Meets the specifications contained in the American Society of
Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005, Agricultural Equipment:
Speed Identification Symbol (SIS);
            2.   Indicates the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the
unit of farm machinery is designed by its manufacturer to operate.
      (2)   No person operating a tractor on a street or highway that is
designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per
hour and that is towing, pulling, or otherwise drawing a unit of farm machinery
while operating at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour shall fail to display
both of the following on the unit of farm machinery:
         A.   The SMV emblem;
         B.   The speed identification symbol that matches the speed
identification symbol required to be displayed on the agricultural tractor.
      (3)   No person shall operate an agricultural tractor that is designed by
its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless
the person possesses documentation published or provided by the manufacturer
indicating the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the manufacturer
designed the agricultural tractor to operate.
      (4)   Whoever violates this division (d) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.113)
   (e)   Animal-drawn vehicles.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (e)(4) of this section, no
person shall operate an animal-drawn vehicle on a street or highway unless it
is equipped with and displays, at the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, both
of the following:
         A.   At least one lamp displaying a white light visible from a
distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the front of the animal-drawn vehicle;
         B.   Two lamps displaying red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear of the animal-drawn vehicle, or as an
alternative, one lamp displaying a red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear and two red reflectors visible from all
distances of 600 feet to one hundred feet to the rear when illuminated by the
lawful lower beams of headlamps.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (e)(4) of this section, no
person shall operate an animal-drawn vehicle on a street or highway unless it
is equipped with and displays, at all times, all of the following:
         A.   One yellow flashing lamp displaying yellow light that is visible
from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet and that is mounted in either of
the following positions:
            1.   On the top most portion of the rear of the animal-drawn
vehicle;
            2.   On the top of the animal-drawn vehicle.
         B.   At least one of the following:
            1.   An SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. § 4513.112(B);
            2.   Micro-prism reflective tape that is visible from a distance of
not less than 500 feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams
of headlamps;
            3.   Both an SMV emblem and micro-prism reflective tape, as
specified in this division.
         C.   Lamps and micro-prism reflective tape required by this section
shall meet standards and specifications adopted by the Ohio Director of Public
Safety under R.C. § 4513.114.
      (3)   The Ohio Director of Public Safety, in accordance with R.C. Chapter
119, shall adopt rules establishing standards and specifications for the
position and mounting of the lamps and micro-prism reflective tape required by
R.C. § 4513.114. The rules permit the micro-prism reflective tape to be red,
amber, white, or silver in color.
      (4)   A.   Divisions (e)(1) and (e)(2) of this section do not apply to
the operator of animal-drawn agricultural equipment who is not transporting any
livestock or a person other than the operator.
         B.   No operator described in division (e)(4)A. of this section shall
operate animal-drawn agricultural equipment unless it is equipped with and
displays, at all times, the SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. §
4513.112(B).
         C.   As used in division (e)(4) of this section, ANIMAL-DRAWN
AGRICULTURAL EQUIPMENT means equipment drawn by the muscular power of an animal
that is used solely for agricultural purposes. ANIMAL-DRAWN AGRICULTURAL
EQUIPMENT includes any of the following:
            1.   A plow;
            2.   A manure spreader;
            3.   A thresher.
      (5)   Whoever violates this division (e) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.114)
   (f)   Strict liability offenses. The offenses established under this section
are strict liability offenses, and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The
designation of these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be
construed to imply that any other offense, for which there is no specified
degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. § 4513.115)
§ 438.11 SPOTLIGHT AND AUXILIARY LIGHTS.
   (a)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one
spotlight and every lighted spotlight shall be so aimed and used upon
approaching another vehicle that no part of the high-intensity portion of the
beam will be directed to the left of the prolongation of the extreme left side
of the vehicle, nor more than 100 feet ahead of the vehicle.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than three
auxiliary driving lights mounted on the front of the vehicle. Any such lights
which do not conform to the specifications for auxiliary driving lights and the
regulations for their use prescribed by the Director of Public Safety shall not
be used.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.12)
§ 438.12 COWL, FENDER AND BACK-UP LIGHTS.
   (a)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with side cowl or fender
lights which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with lights on each side thereof
which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.
      (3)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with back-up lights, either
separately or in combination with another light. No back-up lights shall be
continuously lighted when the motor vehicle is in forward motion.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.13)
§ 438.13 TWO LIGHTS DISPLAYED.
   (a)   At all times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, at least two lighted lights shall be displayed, one near
each side of the front of every motor vehicle, except when the vehicle is
parked subject to the regulations governing lights on parked vehicles.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.14)
§ 438.14 USE OF HEADLIGHT BEAMS.
   (a)   Whenever a motor vehicle is being operated on a roadway or shoulder
adjacent thereto during the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the driver shall use a
distribution of light, or composite beam, directed high enough and of
sufficient intensity to reveal persons, vehicles and substantial objects at a
safe distance in advance of the vehicle, subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming vehicle,
the driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam, so aimed that
the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the oncoming driver.
      (2)   Every new motor vehicle registered in this state which has
multiple-beam road lighting equipment shall be equipped with a beam indicator,
which shall be lighted whenever the uppermost distribution of light from the
headlights is in use, and shall not otherwise be lighted. This indicator shall
be so designed and located that, when lighted, it will be readily visible
without glare to the driver of the vehicle.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.15)
§ 438.15 LIGHTS OF LESS INTENSITY ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES.
   (a)   Any motor vehicle may be operated under the conditions specified in
R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance when it is
equipped with two lighted lights upon the front thereof capable of revealing
persons and substantial objects 75 feet ahead, in lieu of lights required in
R.C. § 4513.14, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, provided
that the vehicle shall not be operated at a speed in excess of 20 miles per
hour.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.16)
§ 438.16 NUMBER OF LIGHTS PERMITTED; RED AND FLASHING LIGHTS.
   (a)   Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlights is also equipped
with any auxiliary lights or spotlight or any other light on the front thereof
projecting a beam of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower, not more than a
total of five of any such lights on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted at
any one time when the vehicle is upon a highway.
   (b)   Any lighted light or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle, other
than headlights, spotlights, signal lights or auxiliary driving lights, that
projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower shall be
so directed that no part of the beam will strike the level of the roadway on
which the vehicle stands at a distance of more than 75 feet from the vehicle.
   (c)   (1)   Flashing lights are prohibited on motor vehicles, except as a
means for indicating a right or a left turn, or in the presence of a vehicular
traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching, or overtaking or passing.
      (2)   The prohibition in division (c)(1) of this section does not apply
to any of the following:
         A.   Emergency vehicles, road service vehicles servicing or towing a
disabled vehicle, stationary waste collection vehicles actively collecting
garbage, refuse, trash, or recyclable materials on the roadside, rural mail
delivery vehicles, vehicles as provided in R.C. § 4513.182, highway maintenance
vehicles, and similar equipment operated by state or local authorities,
provided such vehicles are equipped with and display, when used on a street or
highway for the special purpose necessitating such lights, a flashing,
oscillating, or rotating amber light;
         B.   Vehicles or machinery permitted by R.C. § 4513.111 to have a
flashing red light;
         C.   Farm machinery and vehicles escorting farm machinery, provided
such machinery and vehicles are equipped with and display, when used on a
street or highway, a flashing, oscillating, or rotating amber light. Farm
machinery also may display the lights described in R.C. § 4513.111.
         D.   A funeral hearse or funeral escort vehicle, provided that the
funeral hearse or funeral escort vehicle is equipped with and displays, when
used on a street or highway for the special purpose necessitating such lights,
a flashing, oscillating, or rotating purple or amber light.
         E.   A vehicle being used for emergency preparedness, response, and
recovery activities, as those terms are defined in R.C. § 5502.21, that is
equipped with and displays, when used on a street or highway for the special
purpose necessitating such lights, a flashing, oscillating, or rotating amber
or red and white light, provided that the vehicle is being operated by a person
from one of the following and the vehicle is clearly marked with the applicable
agency’s or authority’s insignia:
            1.   The Ohio Emergency Management Agency;
            2.   A countywide emergency management agency established under
R.C. § 5502.26;
            3.   A regional authority for emergency management established
under R.C. § 5502.27;
            4.   A program for emergency management established under R.C. §
5502.271.
      (3)   Division (c)(1) of this section does not apply to animal-drawn
vehicles subject to R.C. § 4513.114.
   (d)   (1)   Except a person operating a public safety vehicle, as defined in
R.C. § 4511.01(E), an emergency management agency vehicle, as described in
division (c)(2)E. of this section, or a school bus, no person shall operate,
move, or park upon, or permit to stand within the right-of-way of any public
street or highway any vehicle or equipment that is equipped with and displaying
a flashing red or a flashing combination red and white light, or an oscillating
or rotating red light, or a combination red and white oscillating or rotating
light.
      (2)   Except a public law enforcement officer, or other person sworn to
enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state, operating a public safety
vehicle when on duty, no person shall operate, move, or park upon, or permit to
stand within the right-of-way of any street or highway any vehicle or equipment
that is equipped with, or upon which is mounted, and displaying a flashing blue
or a flashing combination blue and white light, or an oscillating or rotating
blue light, or a combination blue and white oscillating or rotating light.
   (e)   This section does not prohibit the use of warning lights required by
law or the simultaneous flashing of turn signals on disabled vehicles or on
vehicles being operated in unfavorable atmospheric conditions in order to
enhance their visibility. This section also does not prohibit the simultaneous
flashing of turn signals or warning lights whether on farm machinery or
vehicles escorting farm machinery when used on a street or highway.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.17)
§ 438.17 LIGHTS AND SOUND-PRODUCING DEVICES ON CORONERS’ VEHICLES.
   (a)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a motor vehicle operated
by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator may be equipped with a
flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and siren, whistle or bell
capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of
not less than 500 feet. Such a vehicle may display the flashing, oscillating or
rotating red or blue light and may give the audible signal of the siren,
whistle or bell only when responding to a fatality or a fatal motor vehicle
accident on a street or highway and only at those locations where the stoppage
of traffic impedes the ability of the coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s
investigator to arrive at the site of the fatality.
   (b)   This section does not relieve the coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s
investigator operating a motor vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard
for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.171)
§ 438.18 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING PRESCHOOL CHILDREN.
   (a)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle owned, leased or hired by a
nursery school, kindergarten or child care center, while transporting preschool
children to or from such an institution, unless the motor vehicle is equipped
with and displaying two amber flashing lights mounted on a bar attached to the
top of the vehicle, and a sign bearing the designation “caution — children,”
which shall be attached to the bar carrying the amber flashing lights in such a
manner as to be legible to persons both in front of and behind the vehicle. The
lights and sign shall meet standards and specifications adopted by the Ohio
Director of Public Safety.
   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle displaying the lights and sign
required by this section for any purpose other than the transportation of
preschool children as provided in this section.
(R.C. § 4513.182)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 438.19 FOCUS AND AIM OF HEADLIGHTS.
   (a)   No person shall use any lights mentioned in R.C. §§ 4513.03 through
4513.18, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, upon any motor
vehicle, trailer or semitrailer unless these lights are equipped, mounted and
adjusted as to focus and aim in accordance with regulations which are
prescribed by the Director of Public Safety.
   (b)   The headlights on any motor vehicle shall comply with the headlamp
color requirements contained in Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number
108, 49 C.F.R. § 571.108. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in violation
of this division.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.19)
§ 438.20 MOTOR VEHICLE AND MOTORCYCLE BRAKES.
   (a)   The following requirements govern as to brake equipment on vehicles:
      (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, when operated upon a
highway shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and
to stop and hold the motor vehicle, including two separate means of applying
the brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at
least two wheels. If these two separate means of applying the brakes are
connected in any way, then on those motor vehicles, manufactured or assembled
after January 1, 1942, they shall be so constructed that failure of any one
part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the motor vehicle without
brakes on at least two wheels.
      (2)   Every motorcycle, when operated upon a highway shall be equipped
with at least one adequate brake, which may be operated by hand or by foot.
      (3)   Every motorized bicycle shall be equipped with brakes meeting the
rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety under R.C. § 4511.521.
      (4)   When operated upon the highways, the following vehicles shall be
equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and to
hold the vehicle, designed to be applied by the driver of the towing motor
vehicle from its cab, and also designed and connected so that, in case of a
breakaway of the towed vehicle, the brakes shall be automatically applied:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every trailer or
semitrailer, except a pole trailer, with an empty weight of 2,000 pounds or
more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1942;
         B.   Every manufactured home or travel trailer with an empty weight of
2,000 pounds or more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 2001.
      (5)   Every watercraft trailer with a gross weight or manufacturer’s
gross vehicle weight rating of 3,000 pounds or more that is manufactured or
assembled on or after January 1, 2008, shall have separate brakes equipped with
hydraulic surge or electrically operated brakes on two wheels.
      (6)   In any combination of motor-drawn trailers or semitrailers equipped
with brakes, means shall be provided for applying the rearmost brakes in
approximate synchronism with the brakes on the towing vehicle, and developing
the required braking effort on the rearmost wheels at the fastest rate; or
means shall be provided for applying braking effort first on the rearmost
brakes; or both of the above means, capable of being used alternatively, may be
employed.
      (7)   Every vehicle and combination of vehicles, except motorcycles and
motorized bicycles, and except trailers and semitrailers of a gross weight of
less than 2,000 pounds, and pole trailers, shall be equipped with parking
brakes adequate to hold the vehicle on any grade on which it is operated, under
all conditions of loading, on a surface free from snow, ice or loose material.
The parking brakes shall be capable of being applied in conformance with the
foregoing requirements by the driver’s muscular effort or by spring action or
by equivalent means. Their operation may be assisted by the service brakes or
other source of power provided that failure of the service brake actuation
system or other power assisting mechanism will not prevent the parking brakes
from being applied in conformance with the foregoing requirements. The parking
brakes shall be so designed that when once applied they shall remain applied
with the required effectiveness despite exhaustion of any source of energy or
leakage of any kind.
      (8)   The same brake drums, brake shoes and lining assemblies, brake shoe
anchors, and mechanical brake shoe actuation mechanism normally associated with
the wheel brake assemblies may be used for both the service brakes and the
parking brakes. If the means of applying the parking brakes and the service
brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed that failure of
any one part shall not leave the vehicle without operative brakes.
      (9)   Every motor vehicle or combination of motor-drawn vehicles shall,
at all times and under all conditions of loading, be capable of being stopped
on a dry, smooth, level road free from loose material, upon application of the
service or foot brake, within the following specified distances, or shall be
capable of being decelerated at a sustained rate corresponding to these
distances:
         A.   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles having brakes on all wheels
shall come to a stop in 30 feet or less from a speed of 20 miles per hour.
         B.   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles not having brakes on all
wheels shall come to a stop in 40 feet or less from a speed of 20 miles per
hour.
      (10)   All brakes shall be maintained in good working order and shall be
so adjusted as to operate as equally as practicable with respect to the wheels
on opposite sides of the vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.20)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 438.21 HORN, SIREN AND THEFT ALARM SIGNAL.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle when operated upon a highway shall be
equipped with a horn which is in good working order and capable of emitting
sound audible, under normal conditions, from a distance of not less than 200
feet.
      (2)   No motor vehicle shall be equipped with, nor shall any person use
upon a vehicle, any siren, whistle or bell. Any vehicle may be equipped with a
theft alarm signal device which shall be so arranged that it cannot be used as
an ordinary warning signal. Every emergency vehicle shall be equipped with a
siren, whistle or bell, capable of emitting sound audible under normal
conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet and of a type approved by
the Director of Public Safety. The equipment shall not be used except when the
vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or is in the immediate
pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in which case the driver
of the emergency vehicle shall sound the equipment when it is necessary to warn
pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.21)
§ 438.22 MUFFLER; MUFFLER CUTOUT; EXCESSIVE SMOKE, GAS OR NOISE.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle with an internal combustion
engine shall at all times be equipped with a muffler which is in good working
order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise, and no
person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device upon a motor
vehicle on a highway. Every motorcycle muffler shall be equipped with baffle
plates.
      (2)   No person shall own, operate or have in the person’s possession any
motor vehicle or motorcycle equipped with a device for producing excessive
smoke or gas, or so equipped as to permit oil or any other chemical to flow
into or upon the exhaust pipe or muffler of the vehicle, or equipped in any way
to produce or emit smoke or dangerous or annoying gases from any portion of the
vehicle, other than the ordinary gases emitted by the exhaust of an internal
combustion engine under normal operation.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.22)
§ 438.23 REAR-VIEW MIRROR; CLEAR VIEW TO FRONT, BOTH SIDES AND REAR.
   (a)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle shall be equipped with a mirror so
located as to reflect to the operator a view of the highway to the rear of the
vehicle or motorcycle. Operators of vehicles and motorcycles shall have a clear
and unobstructed view to the front and to both sides of their vehicles and
motorcycles and shall have a clear view to the rear of their vehicles and
motorcycles by mirror.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.23)
§ 438.24 WINDSHIELD REQUIRED; SIGN OR POSTER UPON WINDSHIELD; WINDSHIELD WIPER.
   (a)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle on a street or highway in this
municipality, other than a motorcycle or motorized bicycle, that is not
equipped with a windshield.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle, other than a bus, with
any sign, poster or other nontransparent material upon the front windshield,
sidewings, side or rear windows of the vehicle other than a certificate or
other paper required to be displayed by law, except that there may be in the
lower left-hand or right-hand corner of the windshield a sign, poster or decal
not to exceed four inches in height by six inches in width. No sign, poster or
decal shall be displayed in the front windshield in such a manner as to conceal
the vehicle identification number for the motor vehicle when, in accordance
with federal law, that number is located inside the vehicle passenger
compartment and so placed as to be readable through the vehicle glazing without
moving any part of the vehicle.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a passenger car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if either of
the following apply to the device:
         A.   It is a VEHICLE SAFETY TECHNOLOGY as defined in 49 C.F.R. § 393.5
and complies with 49 C.F.R. § 393.60(e)(1)(ii).
         B.   It does not restrict the vehicle operator’s sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals, and it does not conceal the vehicle
identification number.
      (3)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a commercial car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if either of
the following apply to the device:
         A.   It is a VEHICLE SAFETY TECHNOLOGY as defined in 49 C.F.R. § 393.5
and complies with 49 C.F.R. § 393.60(e)(1)(ii).
         B.   It does not restrict the vehicle operator’s sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals, and it is mounted not more than 8.5 inches
below the upper edge of the windshield.
   (c)   The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device
for cleaning rain, snow or other moisture from the windshield. The device shall
be maintained in good working order and so constructed as to be controlled or
operated by the operator of the vehicle.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.24)
§ 438.25 TINTED GLASS; MATERIALS ON GLASS.
   (a)   No person shall operate, on any highway or other public or private
property open to the public for vehicular travel or parking, lease or rent any
motor vehicle that is registered in this state unless the motor vehicle
conforms to the requirements concerning tinted glass and reflectorized material
of R.C. § 4513.241 and of any applicable rule adopted under that section.
   (b)   No person shall install in or on any motor vehicle any glass or other
material that fails to conform to the requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or of any
rule adopted under that section.
   (c)   (1)   No used motor vehicle dealer or new motor vehicle dealer, as
defined in R.C. § 4517.01, shall sell any motor vehicle that fails to conform
to the requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or of any rule adopted under that
section.
      (2)   No manufacturer, remanufacturer, or distributor, as defined in R.C.
§ 4517.01, shall provide to a motor vehicle dealer licensed under R.C. Chapter
4517 or to any other person, a motor vehicle that fails to conform to the
requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or of any rule adopted under that section.
   (d)   No reflectorized materials shall be permitted upon or in any front
windshield, side windows, sidewings or rear window.
   (e)   This section does not apply to the manufacturer’s tinting or glazing
of motor vehicle windows or windshields that is otherwise in compliance with or
permitted by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 205.
   (f)   With regard to any side window behind a driver’s seat or any rear
window other than any window on an emergency door, this division (b) does not
apply to any school bus used to transport a child with disabilities pursuant to
R.C. Chapter 3323, whom it is impossible or impractical to transport by regular
school bus in the course of regular route transportation provided by a school
district. As used in this division, CHILD WITH DISABILITIES has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 3323.01.
   (g)   This section does not apply to any school bus that is to be sold and
operated outside the municipality.
   (h)   (1)   This section does not apply to a motor vehicle used by a law
enforcement agency when the motor vehicle is used by the law enforcement agency
for a purpose within the scope of the law enforcement agency's duties.
      (2)   As used in this division, LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY means a police
department, the office of a sheriff, the State Highway Patrol, a county
prosecuting attorney, or a federal, state, or local governmental body that
enforces criminal laws and that has employees who have a statutory power of
arrest.
(R.C. § 4513.241(C) - (J))
   (i)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a), (c)(2) or (d) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (c)(1) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor if the dealer or the dealer’s agent knew of the nonconformity
at the time of sale.
      (3)   A.   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree, except that an organization may not be
convicted unless the act of installation was authorized by the board of
directors, trustees, partners, or by a high managerial officer acting on behalf
of the organization, and installation was performed by an employee of the
organization acting within the scope of the person’s employment.
         B.   In addition to any other penalty imposed under this section,
whoever violates division (b) of this section is liable in a civil action to
the owner of a motor vehicle on which was installed the nonconforming glass or
material for any damages incurred by that person as a result of the
installation of the nonconforming glass or material, costs of maintaining the
civil action, and attorney fees.
         C.   In addition to any other penalty imposed under this section, if
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation
of division (b) of this section and the offender is a motor vehicle repair
operator registered under R.C. Chapter 4775 or a motor vehicle dealer licensed
under R.C. Chapter 4517, whoever violates division (b) of this section is
subject to a registration or license suspension, as applicable, for a period of
not more than 180 days.
(R.C. § 4513.241(K))
Statutory reference:
   Administrative regulations, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-41
§ 438.26 LIMITED LOAD EXTENSION ON LEFT SIDE OF PASSENGER VEHICLE.
   (a)   No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on a highway with any load
carried on the vehicle which extends more than six inches beyond the line of
the fenders on the vehicle’s left side.
(R.C. § 4513.30)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 438.27 MOTOR VEHICLE STOP LIGHTS.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer and pole trailer when
operated upon a highway shall be equipped with two or more stop lights, except
that passenger cars manufactured or assembled prior to January 1, 1967,
motorcycles and motor-driven cycles shall be equipped with at least one stop
light. Stop lights shall be mounted on the rear of the vehicle, actuated upon
application of the service brake, and may be incorporated with other rear
lights. These stop lights when actuated shall emit a red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear; provided that in the case of a train of
vehicles only the stop lights on the rearmost vehicle need be visible from the
distance specified.
      (2)   These stop lights when actuated shall give a steady warning light
to the rear of a vehicle or train of vehicles to indicate the intention of the
operator to diminish the speed of or stop a vehicle or train of vehicles.
      (3)   When stop lights are used as required by this section, they shall
be constructed or installed so as to provide adequate and reliable illumination
and shall conform to the appropriate rules and regulations established under
R.C. § 4513.19.
      (4)   Historical motor vehicles as defined in R.C. § 4503.181, not
originally manufactured with stop lights, are not subject to this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.071)
§ 438.28 BUMPERS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING. The manufacturer’s gross vehicle
weight rating established for that vehicle.
      (2)   MANUFACTURER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      (3)   MULTIPURPOSE PASSENGER VEHICLE. A motor vehicle with motive power,
except a motorcycle, designed to carry ten persons or less, that is constructed
either on a truck chassis or with special features for occasional off-road
operation.
      (4)   PASSENGER CAR. Any motor vehicle with motive power, designed for
carrying ten persons or less, except a multipurpose passenger vehicle or
motorcycle.
      (5)   TRUCK. Every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers,
designed and used to carry property and having a gross vehicle weight rating of
10,000 pounds or less.
   (b)   Rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety, in accordance with
R.C. Chapter 119, shall govern the maximum bumper height or, in the absence of
bumpers and in cases where bumper height has been lowered or modified, the
maximum height to the bottom of the frame rail of any passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck.
   (c)   No person shall operate upon a street or highway any passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this state that does not
conform to the requirements of this section or any applicable rule adopted
pursuant to R.C. § 4513.021.
   (d)   No person shall modify any motor vehicle registered in this state in
such a manner as to cause the vehicle body or chassis to come in contact with
the ground, expose the fuel tank to damage from collision, or cause the wheels
to come in contact with the body under normal operation, and no person shall
disconnect any part of the original suspension system of the vehicle to defeat
the safe operation of that system.
   (e)   Nothing contained in this section or in the rules adopted pursuant to
R.C. § 4513.021 shall be construed to prohibit either of the following:
      (1)   The installation upon a passenger car, multipurpose passenger
vehicle or truck registered in this state of heavy duty equipment, including
shock absorbers and overload springs.
      (2)   The operation on a street or highway of a passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle, or truck registered in this state with normal
wear to the suspension system if the normal wear does not adversely affect the
control of the vehicle.
   (f)   This section and the rules adopted pursuant to R.C. § 4513.021 do not
apply to any specially designed or modified passenger car, multipurpose
passenger vehicle or truck when operated off a street or highway in races and
similar events.
   (g)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.021)
Statutory reference:
   Maximum height on bumpers, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-43
§ 438.29 AIR CLEANER REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate upon any street, alley or other public place any
motor vehicle which is not equipped with a functioning air cleaner, except for
motor vehicles equipped with electronic fuel-injection engines.
§ 438.30 USE OF CHILD RESTRAINTS.
   (a)   When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that is required by the United States
Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of
manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions in a child
restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;
      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.
   (b)   When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, that is owned,
leased or otherwise under the control of a nursery school or child care center,
the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions in a child restraint system
that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;
      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.
   (c)   When any child who is less than eight years of age and less than four
feet nine inches in height, who is not required by division (a) or (b) of this
section to be secured in a child restraint system, is being transported in a
motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 4511.01 or a vehicle that is regulated under R.C. § 5104.015, that is
required by the United States Department of Transportation to be equipped with
seat belts at the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor
vehicle shall have the child properly secured in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions on a booster seat that meets federal motor vehicle
safety standards.
   (d)   When any child who is at least eight years of age but not older than
15 years of age, and who is not otherwise required by division (a), (b), or (c)
of this section to be secured in a child restraint system or booster seat, is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that is required by the United States
Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of
manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly restrained either in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions
in a child restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards
or in an occupant restraining device as defined in R.C. § 4513.263.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause an operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (c) or (d) of this section has been
or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation or
summons for a violation of division (c) or (d) of this section or causing the
arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of division
(c) or (d) of this section, and absent another violation of law, a law
enforcement officer’s view of the interior or visual inspection of a motor
vehicle being operated on any street or highway may not be used for the purpose
of determining whether a violation of division (c) or (d) of this section has
been or is being committed.
   (f)   The Director of Public Safety shall adopt such rules as are necessary
to carry out this section.
   (g)   The failure of an operator of a motor vehicle to secure a child in a
child restraint system, a booster seat or in an occupant restraining device as
required in this section is not negligence imputable to the child, is not
admissible as evidence in any civil action involving the rights of the child
against any other person allegedly liable for injuries to the child, is not to
be used as a basis for a criminal prosecution of the operator of the motor
vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section, and is not
admissible as evidence in any criminal action involving the operator of the
motor vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section.
   (h)   This section does not apply when an emergency exists that threatens
the life of any person operating or occupying a motor vehicle that is being
used to transport a child who otherwise would be required to be restrained
under this section. This section does not apply to a person operating a motor
vehicle who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4731, a clinical nurse specialist or certified nurse
practitioner licensed to practice in this state under R.C. Chapter 4723, or a
chiropractor licensed to practice in this state under R.C. Chapter 4734 that
states that the child who otherwise would be required to be restrained under
this section has a physical impairment that makes use of a child restraint
system, booster seat, or an occupant restraining device impossible or
impractical, provided that the person operating the vehicle has safely and
appropriately restrained the child in accordance with any recommendations of
the physician, nurse, or chiropractor as noted on the affidavit.
   (i)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any person to
carry with the person the birth certificate of a child to prove the age of the
child, but the production of a valid birth certificate for a child showing that
the child was not of an age to which this section applies is a defense against
any ticket, citation or summons issued for violating this section.
   (j)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a), (b), (c), or (d) of this section
shall be punished as follows, provided that the failure of an operator of a
motor vehicle to secure more than one child in a child restraint system,
booster seat or occupant restraining device as required by this section that
occurred at the same time, on the same day and at the same location is deemed
to be a single violation of this section:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (j)(1)B. of this
section, the offender is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not
less than $25 nor more than $75.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (a), (b),(c) or (d) of this section or of a
state law or municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent any of those
divisions, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   All fines imposed pursuant to division (j)(1) of this section shall
be forwarded to the State Treasurer for deposit in the Child Highway Safety
Fund created by R.C. § 4511.81(I).
(R.C. § 4511.81(A) - (H), (K), (L))
§ 438.31 USE OF OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICES.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   AUTOMOBILE. Any commercial tractor, passenger car, commercial car
or truck that is required to be factory-equipped with an occupant restraining
device for the operator or any passenger by regulations adopted by the United
States Secretary of Transportation pursuant to the “National Traffic and Motor
Vehicle Safety Act of 1966”, 80 Stat. 719, 15 U.S.C. 1392.
      (2)   COMMERCIAL TRACTOR, PASSENGER CAR AND COMMERCIAL CAR. Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      (3)   OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE. A seat safety belt, shoulder belt,
harness or other safety device for restraining a person who is an operator of
or passenger in an automobile and that satisfies the minimum federal vehicle
safety standards established by the United States Department of Transportation.
      (4)   PASSENGER. Any person in an automobile, other than its operator,
who is occupying a seating position for which an occupant restraining device is
provided.
      (5)   TORT ACTION. A civil action for damages for injury, death or loss
to person or property. TORT ACTION includes a product liability claim, as
defined in R.C. § 2307.71, and as asbestos claim, as defined in R.C. § 2307.91,
but does not include a civil action for damages for breach of contract or
another agreement between persons.
      (6)   VEHICLE and MOTOR VEHICLE. As used in the definitions of the terms
set forth above, have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   (b)   Prohibited acts. No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless he or she is
wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device, or operate a school bus that has an occupant restraining
device installed for use in its operator’s seat unless he or she is wearing all
of the available elements of the device, as properly adjusted.
      (2)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless each
passenger in the automobile who is subject to the requirement set forth in
division (b)(3) of this section is wearing all of the available elements of a
properly adjusted occupant restraining device.
      (3)   Occupy, as a passenger, a seating position on the front seat of an
automobile being operated on any street or highway unless he or she is wearing
all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining
device.
      (4)   Operate a taxicab on any street or highway unless all factory-
equipped occupant restraining devices in the taxicab are maintained in usable
form.
   (c)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Division (b)(3) of this section does not apply to a person who is
required by R.C. § 4511.81 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to
be secured in a child restraint device or booster seat.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
an employee of the United States Postal Service or of a newspaper home delivery
service, during any period in which the person is engaged in the operation of
an automobile to deliver mail or newspapers to addressees.
      (3)   Divisions (b)(1) and (b)(3) of this section do not apply to a
person who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4731 or a chiropractor licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4734 that states the following:
         A.   That the person has a physical impairment that makes use of an
occupant restraining device impossible or impractical;
         B.   Whether the physical impairment is temporary, permanent, or
reasonably expected to be permanent;
         C.   If the physical impairment is temporary, how long the physical
impairment is expected to make the use of an occupant restraining device
impossible or impractical.
      (4)   Divisions (b)(1) and (b)(3) of this section do not apply to a
person who has registered with the Registrar of Motor Vehicles in accordance
with division (c)(5) of this section.
      (5)   A person who has received an affidavit under division (c)(3) of
this section stating that the person has a permanent or reasonably expected to
be permanent physical impairment that makes use of an occupant restraining
device impossible or impracticable may register with the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles attesting to that fact. Upon such registration, the Registrar shall
make that information available in the law enforcement automated data system. A
person included in the database under division (c)(5) of this section is not
required to have the affidavit obtained in accordance with division (c)(3) of
this section in their possession while operating or occupying an automobile.
      (6)   A physician or chiropractor who issues an affidavit for the
purposes of division (c)(3) or (c)(4) of this section is immune from civil
liability arising from any injury or death sustained by the person who was
issued the affidavit due to the failure of the person to wear an occupant
restraining device unless the physician or chiropractor, in issuing the
affidavit, acted in a manner that constituted willful, wanton, or reckless
misconduct.
      (7)   The Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall adopt rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 establishing a process for a person to be included in the
database under division (c)(5) of this section. The information provided and
included in the database under division (c)(5) of this section is not a public
record subject to inspection or copying under R.C. § 149.43.
   (d)   Officers not permitted to stop cars to determine violation.
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement
officer shall cause an operator of an automobile being operated on any street
or highway to stop the automobile for the sole purpose of determining whether a
violation of division (b) of this section has been or is being committed or for
the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation or summons for the violation or
for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for the
violation. No law enforcement officer shall view the interior or visually
inspect any automobile being operated on any street or highway for the sole
purpose of determining whether the violation has been or is being committed.
   (e)   Use of fines for educational program. All fines collected for
violations of division (b) of this section shall be forwarded to the State
Treasurer for deposit in the funds as set forth in R.C. § 4513.263(E).
   (f)   Limitations on evidence used for prosecution.
      (1)   Subject to division (f)(2) of this section, the failure of a person
to wear all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device in violation of division (b)(1) or (b)(3) of this section or
the failure of a person to ensure that each minor who is a passenger of an
automobile being operated by that person is wearing all of the available
elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device in violation of
division (b)(2) of this section shall not be considered or used by the trier of
fact in a tort action as evidence of negligence or contributory negligence.
But, the trier of fact may determine based on evidence admitted consistent with
the Ohio Rules of Evidence that the failure contributed to the harm alleged in
the tort action and may diminish a recovery of compensatory damages that
represents non-economic loss, as defined in R.C. § 2307.011, in a tort action
that could have been recovered but for the plaintiff’s failure to wear all of
the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device.
Evidence of that failure shall not be used as a basis for a criminal
prosecution of the person other than a prosecution for a violation of this
section; and shall not be admissible as evidence in a criminal action involving
the person other than a prosecution for a violation of this section.
      (2)   If, at the time of an accident involving a passenger car equipped
with occupant restraining devices, any occupant of the passenger car who
sustained injury or death was not wearing an available occupant restraining
device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a device, or was
not wearing such a device as properly adjusted, then, consistent with the Rules
of Evidence, the fact that the occupant was not wearing the available occupant
restraining device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a
device, or was not wearing such a device as properly adjusted is admissible in
evidence in relation to any claim for relief in a tort action to the extent
that the claim for relief satisfies all of the following:
         A.   It seeks to recover damages for injury or death to the occupant;
         B.   The defendant in question is the manufacturer, designer,
distributor or seller of the passenger car;
         C.   The claim for relief against the defendant in question is that
the injury or death sustained by the occupant was enhanced or aggravated by
some design defect in the passenger car or that the passenger car was not
crashworthy.
   (g)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (b)(1) of this section shall be fined
$30.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b)(2) of this section shall be subject
to the penalty set forth in §
408.02.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (b)(3) of this section shall be fined
$20.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (b)(4) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
division (b)(4) of this section, whoever violates division (b)(4) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4513.263)
§ 438.32 AIR BAGS.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   AIR BAG. Has the same meaning as in 49 C.F.R. § 579.4, as amended.
      (2)   COUNTERFEIT AIR BAG. An air bag displaying a mark identical or
similar to the genuine mark of a motor vehicle manufacturer, without the
authorization of the motor vehicle manufacturer.
      (3)   NONFUNCTIONAL AIR BAG. Any of the following:
         A.   A replacement air bag that has been previously deployed or
damaged;
         B.   A replacement air bag that has an electrical fault that is
detected by the air bag diagnostic system of a vehicle after the air bag is
installed;
         C.   A counterfeit air bag, air bag cover, or some other object that
is installed in a vehicle to deceive an owner or operator of the vehicle into
believing that a functional air bag has been installed.
   (b)   No person shall install or reinstall in any motor vehicle a
counterfeit or nonfunctional air bag or any object intended to fulfill the
function of an air bag other than an air bag that was designed in conformance
with or that is regulated by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208
for the make, model, and model year of the vehicle, knowing that the object is
not in accordance with that standard.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly manufacture, import, sell, or offer for sale
any of the following:
      (1)   A counterfeit air bag;
      (2)   A nonfunctional air bag;
      (3)   Any other object that is intended to be installed in a motor
vehicle to fulfill the function of an air bag and that is not in conformance
with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208 for the make, model, and
model year of the vehicle in which the object is intended to be installed.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly sell, install, or reinstall a device in a
motor vehicle that causes the diagnostic system of a vehicle to inaccurately
indicate that the vehicle is equipped with a functional air bag.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates division (b) or (d) of this section is guilty
of improper replacement of a motor vehicle air bag, a misdemeanor of the first
degree on a first offense. On each subsequent offense, or if the violation
results in serious physical harm to an individual, the person is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (c) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Each manufacture, importation, installation, reinstallation, sale,
or offer for sale in violation of this section shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation.
(R.C. § 4549.20)
§ 438.33 ENGINE BRAKES AND COMPRESSION BRAKES.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to use or operate, or
cause to be used or operated, within the corporate village limits any engine
brake, compression brake or mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the
braking or deceleration of any vehicle that results in excessive, loud, unusual
or explosive noise from such vehicle.
(Ord. 728, passed 5-25-2004)
§ 438.34 LOUD SOUND SYSTEMS FROM MOTOR VEHICLES.
   No owner, operator or person in control of a motor vehicle shall operate a
sound system in, on or around said vehicle that is plainly audible 50 or more
feet away from said vehicle by a person of ordinary sensibilities.
(Ord. 710, passed 6-26-2001)
§ 438.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates §
438.33 shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
   (b)   Whoever violates §
438.34 shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor on the first offense, a fourth
degree misdemeanor if the offender has been previously convicted of a violation
of §
438.34 within the last 12 months and third-degree misdemeanor if the offender
has been previously convicted of two or more violations of §
438.34 within the 12 months.
(Ord. 710, passed 6-26-2001; Ord. 728, passed 5-25-2004)
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 440: COMMERCIAL AND HEAVY VEHICLES
Section
   
440.01   Load limits
   
440.02   Maximum width, height and length
   
440.03   Wheel protectors
   
440.04   Vehicles transporting explosives
   
440.05   Towing requirements; exception to size and weight restrictions
   
440.06   Loads dropping or leaking; tracking mud; removal required
   
440.07   Vehicles with spikes, lugs and chains
   
440.08   Occupying travel trailer, fifth wheel vehicle, or manufactured or
mobile home while in motion
   
440.09   Route and load information
   
440.10   Chauffeured limousines
   
440.99   Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Arrest notice of drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14
   Bus stops and taxicab stands, see § 452.11
   Display of certificates of registration, see R.C. § 4549.18
   Fatigued or ill drivers, see §
442.09
   Riding in cargo storage areas, see §
416.06
   Slow-moving equipment at grade crossings, see §
432.36
   Stopping at grade crossings, see §§
432.35,
432.36
   Truck loading zones, see §
452.10
§ 440.01 LOAD LIMITS.
   (a)   State regulations.
      (1)   A.   The municipality, with respect to highways under their
jurisdiction, upon application in writing, shall issue a special regional heavy
hauling permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or
combination of vehicles as follows:
            1.   At a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum
specified in R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or otherwise not in conformity with
R.C. §§ 4513.01 to 4513.37.
            2.   Upon any highway under the jurisdiction of municipality except
those highways with a condition insufficient to bear the weight of the vehicle
or combination of vehicles as stated in the application.
            3.   Issuance of a special regional heavy hauling permit is subject
to the payment of a fee established by the municipality in accordance with this
section.
         B.   In circumstances where a person is not eligible to receive a
permit under division (a)(1)A. of this section, the municipality, with respect
to highways under its jurisdiction, upon application in writing and for good
cause shown, may issue a special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to
operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight of
vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in R.C. §§ 5577.01 through
5577.09, or otherwise not in conformity with R.C. §§ 4513.01 through 4513.37,
upon any highway under its jurisdiction.
      (2)   A.   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 715.22 and 723.01, the holder of a
permit issued by the Director of Transportation under R.C. § 4513.34 may move
the vehicle or combination of vehicles described in the permit on any highway
that is a part of the state highway system when the movement is partly within
and partly without the corporate limits of the municipality. No local authority
shall require any other permit or license or charge any license fee or other
charge against the holder of a permit for the movement of a vehicle or
combination of vehicles on any highway which is a part of the state highway
system. The Ohio Director of Transportation shall not require the holder of a
permit issued by the municipality to obtain a special permit for the movement
of vehicles or combination of vehicles on highways within the jurisdiction of
the municipality.
         B.   Except as provided in R.C. § 4513.34(B)(3), permits may be issued
for any period of time not to exceed one year, as the local authority in its
discretion determines advisable or for the duration of any public construction
project.
      (3)   A.   The application for a permit issued under this section shall
be in the form that the municipality prescribes. The municipality may prescribe
a permit fee to be imposed and collected when any permit described in this
section is issued. The permit fee may be in an amount sufficient to reimburse
the municipality for the administrative costs incurred in issuing the permit,
and also to cover the cost of normal and expected damage caused to the roadway
or a street or highway structure as the result of the operation of the
nonconforming vehicle or combination of vehicles.
         B.   For the purposes of this section and of rules adopted by the
Director under R.C. § 4513.34, milk transported in bulk by vehicle is deemed a
nondivisible load.
         C.   For purposes of this section and of rules adopted by the Director
under R.C. § 4513.34, three or fewer aluminum coils, transported by a vehicle,
are deemed a nondivisible load. The Director shall adopt rules establishing
requirements for an aluminum coil permit that are substantially similar to the
requirements for a steel coil permit under O.A.C. Chapter 5501:2-1.
      (4)   The municipality shall issue a special regional heavy hauling
permit under division (a)(1)A. of this section upon application and payment of
the applicable fee. However, the municipality may issue or withhold a special
permit specified in division (a)(1)B. of this section. If a permit is to be
issued, the municipality may limit or prescribe conditions of operation for the
vehicle and may require the posting of a bond or other security conditioned
upon the sufficiency of the permit fee to compensate for damage caused to the
roadway or a street or highway structure. In addition, the municipality, as a
condition of issuance of an overweight permit, may require the applicant to
develop and enter into a mutual agreement with the municipality to compensate
for or to repair excess damage caused to the roadway by travel under the
permit.
      (5)   Every permit issued under this section shall be carried in the
vehicle or combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to
inspection by any police officer or authorized agent of any authority granting
the permit. No person shall violate any of the terms of a permit.
      (6)   The Director of Transportation may debar an applicant from applying
for a special permit under this section upon a finding based on a reasonable
belief that the applicant has done any of the actions specified in R.C. §
4513.34(F).
      (7)   Notice and procedures for debarment shall be as provided in R.C. §
4513.34(G).
      (8)   A.   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under
this section that relate to gross load limits.
         B.   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this
section that relate to axle load by more than 2,000 pounds per axle or group of
axles.
         C.   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this
section that relate to an approved route except upon order of a law enforcement
officer or authorized agent of the issuing authority.
      (9)   A permit issued by the municipality under this section for the
operation of a vehicle or combination of vehicles is valid for the purposes of
the vehicle operation in accordance with the conditions and limitations
specified on the permit. Such a permit is voidable by law enforcement only for
operation of a vehicle or combination of vehicles in violation of the weight,
dimension, or route provisions of the permit. However, a permit is not voidable
for operation in violation of a route provision of a permit if the operation is
upon the order of a law enforcement officer.
(R.C. § 4513.34)
   (b)   Violations. Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 440.02 MAXIMUM WIDTH, HEIGHT AND LENGTH.
   (a)   No vehicle shall be operated upon the public highways, streets,
bridges and culverts within this municipality whose dimensions exceed those
specified in this section.
   (b)   No such vehicle shall have a width:
      (1)   In excess of 104 inches for passenger bus type vehicles operated
exclusively within the municipality.
      (2)   In excess of 102 inches, excluding such safety devices as are
required by law, for passenger bus type vehicles operated over freeways, and
other state roads with minimum pavement widths of 22 feet, except those roads
or portions of roads over which operation of 102-inch buses is prohibited by
order of the Director of Transportation.
      (3)   In excess of 132 inches for traction engines.
      (4)   In excess of 102 inches for recreational vehicles, excluding safety
devices and retracted awnings and other appurtenances of six inches or less in
width and except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch
recreational vehicles on designated state highways or portions of highways.
      (5)   In excess of 102 inches, including load, for all other vehicles,
except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch vehicles on the
state highways or portions of state highways as the Director designates.
   (c)   No such vehicle shall have a length:
      (1)   In excess of 66 feet for passenger bus type vehicles and
articulated passenger bus type vehicles operated by a regional transit
authority pursuant to R.C. §§ 306.30 to 306.54.
      (2)   In excess of 45 feet for all other passenger bus type vehicles.
      (3)   In excess of 53 feet for any semitrailer when operated in a
commercial tractor-semitrailer combination, with or without load, except that
the Director may prohibit the operation of any such commercial tractor-
semitrailer combination on the state highways or portions of state highways as
the Director designates.
      (4)   In excess of 28.5 feet for any semitrailer or trailer when operated
in a commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-semitrailer-
semitrailer combination, except that the Director may prohibit the operation of
any such commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-
semitrailer-semitrailer combination on the state highways or portions of state
highways as the Director designates.
      (5)   A.   In excess of 97 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle
transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle
transporter combinations when operated on any interstate, United States route
or state route, including reasonable access travel on all other roadways for a
distance not to exceed one road mile from any interstate, United States route
or state route, not to exceed three saddlemounted vehicles, but which may
include one fullmount;
         B.   In excess of 75 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle
transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle
transporter combinations when operated on any roadway not designated as an
interstate, United States route or state route, not to exceed three
saddlemounted vehicles, but which may include one fullmount.
      (6)   In excess of 65 feet for any other combination of vehicles coupled
together, with or without load, except as provided in division (c)(3) and (c)
(4), and in division (e) below.
      (7)   In excess of 45 feet for recreational vehicles.
      (8)   In excess of 50 feet for all other vehicles, except trailers and
semitrailers, with or without load.
   (d)   No such vehicle shall have a height in excess of 13.5 feet, with or
without load.
   (e)   An automobile transporter or boat transporter shall be allowed a
length of 65 feet, and a stinger- steered automobile transporter or stinger-
steered boat transporter shall be allowed a length of 75 feet, except that the
load thereon may extend no more than four feet beyond the rear of such vehicles
and may extend no more than three feet beyond the front of the vehicles, and
except further that the Director may prohibit the operation of a stinger-
steered automobile transporter, stinger-steered boat transporter, or a B-train
assembly on any state highway or portion of any state highway that the Director
designates.
   (f)   (1)   The widths prescribed in division (b) of this section shall not
include side mirrors, turn signal lamps, marker lamps, handholds for cab entry
and egress, flexible fender extensions, mud flaps, splash and spray suppressant
devices, and load-induced tire bulge.
      (2)   The widths prescribed in division (b)(5) of this section shall not
include automatic covering devices, tarp and tarp hardware, and tiedown
assemblies, provided these safety devices do not extend more than three inches
from either side of the vehicle.
      (3)   The lengths prescribed in divisions (c)(2) to (c)(7) shall not
include safety devices, bumpers attached to the front or rear of the bus or
combination, non-property carrying devices or components that do not extend
more than 24 inches beyond the rear of the vehicle and are needed for loading
or unloading, B-train assembly used between the first and second semitrailer of
a commercial tractor- semitrailer-semitrailer combination, energy conservation
devices as provided in any regulations adopted by the Secretary of the United
States Department of Transportation, or any noncargo-carrying refrigerator
equipment attached to the front of trailers and semitrailers. In special cases,
vehicles that dimensions exceed those prescribed by this section may operate in
accordance with rules adopted by the Director.
   (g)   (1)   This section does not apply to fire engines, fire trucks or
other vehicles or apparatus belonging to the municipality or to the volunteer
fire department thereof or used by that department in the discharge of its
functions. This section does not apply to vehicles and pole trailers used in
the transportation of wooden and metal poles, nor to the transportation of
pipes or well-drilling equipment, nor to farm machinery and equipment.
      (2)   The owner or operator of any vehicle, machinery or equipment not
specifically enumerated in this section but the dimensions of which exceed the
dimensions provided by this section, when operating the same on the highways
and streets of the municipality, shall comply with the rules of the Director
governing such movement. Any person adversely affected shall have the same
right of appeal as provided in R.C. Chapter 119.
      (3)   This section does not require the municipality or any railroad or
other private corporation to provide sufficient vertical clearance to permit
the operation of the vehicle, or to make any changes in or about existing
structures now crossing streets, roads and other public thoroughfares.
   (h)   As used in this section, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 4501.01.
(R.C. § 5577.05)
   (i)   No person shall violate any rule or regulation promulgated by the
Director of Transportation in accordance with R.C. § 5577.05.
(R.C. § 5577.06)
   (j)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second or subsequent offense, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 5577.99(C))
§ 440.03 WHEEL PROTECTORS.
   (a)   No person shall drive or operate, or cause to be driven or operated,
any commercial car, trailer or semitrailer, used for the transportation of
goods or property, the gross weight of which, with load, exceeds three tons,
upon the public highways, streets, bridges and culverts within the
municipality, unless the vehicle is equipped with suitable metal protectors or
substantial flexible flaps on the rearmost wheels of the vehicle or combination
of vehicles to prevent, as far as practicable, the wheels from throwing dirt,
water or other materials on the windshields of following vehicles. The
protectors or flaps shall have a ground clearance of not more than one-third of
the distance from the center of the rearmost axle to the center of the flaps
under any conditions of loading of the vehicle, and they shall be at least as
wide as the tires they are protecting. If the vehicle is so designed and
constructed that the requirements are accomplished by means of fenders, body
construction or other means of enclosure, then no such protectors or flaps are
required. Rear wheels not covered at the top by fenders, bodies or other parts
of the vehicle shall be covered at the top by protective means extending at
least to the centerline of the rearmost axle.
(R.C. § 5577.11)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $25.
(R.C. § 5577.99(E))
§ 440.04 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING EXPLOSIVES.
   (a)   Any person operating any vehicle transporting explosives upon a
highway shall at all times comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   The vehicle shall be marked or placarded on each side and on the
rear with the word “EXPLOSIVES” in letters not less than eight inches high, or
there shall be displayed on the rear of the vehicle a red flag not less than 24
inches square marked with the word “DANGER” in white letters six inches high,
or shall be marked or placarded in accordance with § 177.823 of the United
States Department of Transportation regulations.
      (2)   The vehicle shall be equipped with not less than two fire
extinguishers, filled and ready for immediate use, and placed at convenient
points on the vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.29)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 440.05 TOWING REQUIREMENTS; EXCEPTION TO SIZE AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   (a)   (1)   When one vehicle is towing another vehicle, the drawbar or other
connection shall be of sufficient strength to pull all the weight towed
thereby, and the drawbar or other connection shall not exceed 15 feet from one
vehicle to the other, except the connection between any two vehicles
transporting poles, pipe, machinery or other objects of structural nature which
cannot readily be dismembered.
      (2)   When one vehicle is towing another and the connection consists only
of a chain, rope or cable, there shall be displayed upon the connection a white
flag or cloth not less than 12 inches square.    
      (3)   In addition to the drawbar or other connection, each trailer and
each semitrailer which is not connected to a commercial tractor by means of a
fifth wheel shall be coupled with stay chains or cables to the vehicle by which
it is being drawn. These chains or cables shall be of sufficient size and
strength to prevent the towed vehicle’s parting from the drawing vehicle in
case the drawbar or other connection should break or become disengaged. In case
of a loaded pole trailer, the connecting pole to the drawing vehicle shall be
coupled to the drawing vehicle with stay chains or cables of sufficient size
and strength to prevent the towed vehicle’s parting from the drawing vehicle.
      (4)   Every trailer or semitrailer, except pole and cable trailers and
pole and cable dollies operated by a public utility as defined in R.C. §
5727.01, shall be equipped with a coupling device which shall be so designed
and constructed that the trailer will follow substantially in the path of the
vehicle drawing it, without whipping or swerving from side to side. Vehicles
used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production materials
between a local place of storage and supply and the farm, when drawn or towed
on a street or highway at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less, and vehicles
designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage
and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or
highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per
hour or less, shall have a drawbar or other connection, including the hitch
mounted on the towing vehicle, which shall be of sufficient strength to pull
all the weight towed thereby. Only one such vehicle used to transport
agricultural produce or agricultural production materials as provided in this
section may be towed or drawn at one time except as follows:
         A.   An agricultural tractor may tow or draw more than one such
vehicle;
         B.   A pickup truck or straight truck designed by the manufacturer to
carry a load of not less than one-half ton and not more than two tons may tow
or draw not more than two such vehicles that are being used to transport
agricultural produce from the farm to a local place of storage. No vehicle
being so towed by such a pickup truck or straight truck shall be considered to
be a motor vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.32)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
   (c)   Exception to size and weight restrictions.
      (1)   The size and weight provisions of this chapter and R.C. Chapter
5577 do not apply to any of the following:
         A.   A person who is engaged in the initial towing or removal of a
wrecked or disabled motor vehicle from the site of an emergency on a public
highway where the vehicle became wrecked or disabled to the nearest site where
the vehicle can be brought into conformance with the requirements of this
chapter and R.C. Chapter 5577, to the nearest storage facility, or to the
nearest qualified repair facility;
         B.   A person who is en route to the site of an emergency on a public
highway to remove a wrecked or disabled motor vehicle;
         C.   A person who is returning from delivering a wrecked or disabled
motor vehicle to a site, storage facility, or repair facility as specified in
division (c)(1)A. of this section.
      (2)   Any subsequent towing of a wrecked or disabled vehicle shall comply
with the size and weight provisions of this chapter and R.C. Chapter 5577.
      (3)   No court shall impose any penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99 or
the civil liability established in R.C. § 5577.12 upon a person who is
operating a vehicle in the manner described in division (c)(1) of this section.
(R.C. § 5577.15)
§ 440.06 LOADS DROPPING OR LEAKING; TRACKING MUD; REMOVAL REQUIRED.
   (a)   (1)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the
vehicle is so constructed, loaded or covered as to prevent any of its load from
dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand or
other substances may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water
or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining
the roadway.   
      (2)   Except for a farm vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or
agricultural production materials or a rubbish vehicle in the process of
acquiring its load, no vehicle loaded with garbage, swill, cans, bottles, waste
paper, ashes, refuse, trash, rubbish, waste, wire, paper, cartons, boxes,
glass, solid waste or any other material of an unsanitary nature that is
susceptible to blowing or bouncing from a moving vehicle shall be driven or
moved on any highway unless the load is covered with a sufficient cover to
prevent the load or any part of the load from spilling onto the highway.
(R.C. § 4513.31)
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
   (c)   No person shall operate any vehicle so as to track mud on any public
way or place.
   (d)   It shall be the duty of the driver of a vehicle who unlawfully drops
or deposits mud or permits the load or any portion thereof to be dropped or
deposited upon any public way or place to immediately remove the same or cause
it to be removed.
§ 440.07 VEHICLES WITH SPIKES, LUGS AND CHAINS.
   (a)   No person shall drive over the improved highways of this municipality
a traction engine or tractor with tires or wheels equipped with ice picks,
spuds, spikes, chains or other projections of any kind extending beyond the
cleats, and no person shall tow or in any way pull another vehicle over the
improved highways of this municipality which towed or pulled vehicle has tires
or wheels equipped with ice picks, spuds, spikes, chains or other projections
of any kind. TRACTION ENGINE or TRACTOR, as used in this section, applies to
all self-propelling engines equipped with metal-tired wheels operated or
propelled by any form of engine, motor or mechanical power.
   (b)   This municipality shall not adopt, enforce or maintain any ordinance,
rule or regulation contrary to or inconsistent with division (a), nor shall
this municipality require any license tax upon or registration fee for any
traction engine, tractor or trailer, or any permit or license to operate.
Operators of traction engines or tractors shall have the same rights upon the
public streets and highways as the drivers of any other vehicles, unless some
other safe and convenient way is provided, and no public road open to traffic
shall be closed to traction engines or tractors.
(R.C. § 5589.08)
   (c)   For the purposes of this section, STUDDED TIRE means any tire designed
for use on a vehicle and equipped with metal studs or studs of wear-resisting
material that project beyond the tread of the traction surface of the tire.
   (d)   (1)   Except as provided in division (d)(2) of this section, no person
shall operate any motor vehicle other than a public safety vehicle or school
bus that is equipped with studded tires on any street or highway in this
Municipality, except during the period extending from the first day of November
of each year through the fifteenth day of April of the succeeding year.
      (2)   A person may operate a motor vehicle that is equipped with
retractable studded tires with the studs retracted at any time of the year, but
shall operate the motor vehicle with the studs extended only as provided in
division (d)(1) of this section.
   (e)   Division (d) of this section does not apply to the use of tire chains
when there is snow or ice on the streets or highways where the chains are being
used, or the immediate vicinity thereof.
(R.C. § 5589.081)
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 5589.99(B))
§ 440.08 OCCUPYING TRAVEL TRAILER, FIFTH WHEEL VEHICLE, OR MANUFACTURED OR
MOBILE HOME WHILE IN MOTION.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, no person shall
occupy any travel trailer, fifth wheel trailer, or manufactured or mobile home
while it is being used as a conveyance upon a street or highway.
   (b)   (1)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a fifth wheel
trailer when both of the following apply:
         A.   Any child riding in the fifth wheel trailer is properly secured
in the manner provided in R.C. § 4511.81.
         B.   The operator of the vehicle towing the fifth wheel trailer has
some means of viable communication with the passengers riding in the trailer.
      (2)   As used in this division, “viable communication” includes a
cellular or satellite telephone, a radio, or any other similar electronic
wireless communications device.
   (c)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   The offense established under this section is a strict liability
offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this offense as a
strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.
(R.C. § 4511.701)
§ 440.09 ROUTE AND LOAD INFORMATION.
   Drivers of vehicles described in this chapter are required, upon request by
a police officer, to give full and true information as to the route they are
following and the name of the consignor and consignee and place of delivery or
removal and the location of any consignment being hauled or goods being
removed, and upon a designation by such police officer of a route to be
followed, shall immediately adopt and pursue the route.
§ 440.10 CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINES.
   (a)   The operator of a chauffeured limousine shall accept passengers only
on the basis of prearranged contracts, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, and shall
not cruise in search of patronage unless the limousine is in compliance with
any statute or ordinance governing the operation of taxicabs or other similar
vehicles for hire.
   (b)   The operator of a chauffeured limousine may provide transportation to
passengers who arrange for the transportation through an intermediary,
including a digital dispatching service. Notwithstanding any law to the
contrary, when providing transportation arranged through an intermediary, the
operator of a chauffeured limousine may establish the fare and method of fare
calculation, so long as the method of fare calculation is provided to the
passenger upon request.
   (c)   No person shall advertise or hold himself or herself out as doing
business as a limousine service or livery service or other similar designation
unless each vehicle used by the person to provide the service is registered in
accordance with R.C. § 4503.24 and is in compliance with R.C. § 4509.80.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4511.85)
§ 440.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 442: DRIVERS OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
Section
   
442.01   Definitions
   
442.02   Use of actual gross weight in lieu of rating
   
442.03   Licensing requirements
   
442.04   Physical qualification to operate commercial motor vehicles
   
442.05   Criminal offenses
   
442.06   Application of 49 C.F.R. Part 383
   
442.07   Information required of prospective drivers by employers; unauthorized
driving
   
442.08   Authority of peace officers re drunk driving
   
442.09   Permitting or driving while fatigued or ill prohibited
   
442.99   Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Arrest notice of drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14
   Driving under the influence, generally, see §
434.01
   Hours of service of truck drivers, see R.C. §§ 4921.30
   Load limits, see §
440.01
   Route and load information, see §
440.09
   Stopping after accidents, generally, see §§
436.16,
436.17
   Warning devices when disabled on freeways, see R.C. § 4513.28
§ 442.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   ALCOHOL CONCENTRATION. The concentration of alcohol in a person’s
blood, breath or urine. When expressed as a percentage, it means grams of
alcohol per the following:
      (1)   One hundred milliliters of whole blood, blood serum or blood
plasma;
      (2)   Two hundred ten liters of breath;
      (3)   One hundred milliliters of urine.
   (b)   COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE.
      (1)   A license issued in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4506 that
authorizes an individual to drive a commercial motor vehicle. Except as
otherwise specifically provided, COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE includes an
“enhanced commercial driver’s license.”
      (2)   ENHANCED COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE means a COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S
LICENSE issued in accordance with R.C. §§ 4507.021 and 4506.072 that denotes
citizenship and identity and is approved by the United States Secretary of
Homeland Security or other designated federal agency for purposes of entering
the United States.
   (c)   COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE INFORMATION SYSTEM. The information system
established pursuant to the requirements of the “Commercial Motor Vehicle
Safety Act of 1986”, 100 Stat. 3207-171, 49 U.S.C. App. 2701.
   (d)   COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Except when used in R.C. § 4506.25, any
motor vehicle designed or used to transport persons or property that meets any
of the following qualifications:
      (1)   Any combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight or combined
gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more, provided that the gross
vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight rating of the vehicle or vehicles being
towed is in excess of 10,000 pounds;
      (2)   Any single vehicle with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle
weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more;
      (3)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is not a class A
or class B vehicle, but is designed to transport 16 or more passengers
including the driver;
      (4)   Any school bus with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight
rating of less than 26,001 pounds that is designed to transport fewer than 16
passengers including the driver;
      (5)   Is transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is
required under 49 C.F.R. Part 172, Subpart F, as amended; or
      (6)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is designed to
be operated and to travel on a public street or highway and is considered by
the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration to be a commercial motor
vehicle, including but not limited to a motorized crane, a vehicle whose
function is to pump cement, a rig for drilling wells and a portable crane.
   (e)   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Includes all of the following:
      (1)   Any substance classified as a controlled substance under the
“Controlled Substances Act”, 80 Stat. 1242 (1970), 21 U.S.C. 802(6), as
amended;
      (2)   Any substance included in Schedules I through V of 21 C.F.R. Part
1308, as amended;
      (3)   Any drug of abuse.
   (f)   CONVICTION. An unvacated adjudication of guilt or a determination that
a person has violated or failed to comply with the law in a court of original
jurisdiction or an authorized administrative tribunal, an unvacated forfeiture
of bail or collateral deposited to secure the person’s appearance in court, a
plea of guilty or nolo contendere accepted by the court, the payment of a fine
or court cost, or violation of a condition of release without bail, regardless
of whether or not the penalty is rebated, suspended or probated.
   (g)   DISQUALIFICATION. Any of the following:
      (1)   The suspension, revocation or cancellation of a person’s privileges
to operate a commercial motor vehicle;
      (2)   Any withdrawal of a person’s privileges to operate a commercial
motor vehicle as the result of a violation of state or local law relating to
motor vehicle traffic control other than parking, vehicle weight or vehicle
defect violations;
      (3)   A determination by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
that a person is not qualified to operate a commercial motor vehicle under 49
C.F.R. 391.
   (h)   DOMICILED. Having a true, fixed, principal, and permanent residence to
which an individual intends to return.
   (i)   DOWNGRADE. Any of the following, as applicable:
      (1)   A change in the commercial driver’s license, or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit, holder’s self-certified status as
described in R.C. § 4506.10(A)(1);
      (2)   A change to a lesser class of vehicle;
      (3)   Removal of commercial driver’s license privileges from the
individual’s driver’s license.
   (j)   DRIVE. To drive, operate or be in physical control of a motor vehicle.
   (k)   DRIVER. Any person who drives, operates or is in physical control of a
commercial motor vehicle or is required to have a commercial driver’s license.
   (l)   DRIVER’S LICENSE. A license issued by the Bureau of Motor Vehicles
that authorizes an individual to drive.
   (m)   DRUG OF ABUSE. Any controlled substance, dangerous drug as defined in
R.C. § 4729.01, harmful intoxicant as defined in R.C. § 2925.01, or over-the-
counter medication that, when taken in quantities exceeding the recommended
dosage, can result in impairment of judgment or reflexes.
   (n)   ELECTRONIC DEVICE. Includes a cellular telephone, a personal digital
assistant, a pager, a computer, and any other device used to input, write,
send, receive, or read text.
   (o)   ELIGIBLE UNIT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. A village, township or county that
has a population of not more than 3,000 persons according to the most recent
federal census.
   (p)   EMPLOYER. Any person, including the federal government, any state and
a political subdivision of any state, that owns or leases a commercial motor
vehicle or assigns a person to drive such a motor vehicle.
   (q)   ENDORSEMENT. An authorization on a person’s commercial driver’s
license that is required to permit the person to operate a specified type of
commercial motor vehicle.
   (r)   FARM TRUCK. A truck controlled and operated by a farmer for use in the
transportation to or from a farm, for a distance of not more than 150 miles, of
products of the farm, including livestock and its products, poultry and its
products, floricultural and horticultural products, and in the transportation
to the farm, from a distance of not more than 150 miles, of supplies for the
farm, including tile, fence and every other thing or commodity used in
agricultural, floricultural, horticultural, livestock and poultry production,
and livestock, poultry and other animals and things used for breeding, feeding
or other purposes connected with the operation of the farm, when the truck is
operated in accordance with this definition and is not used in the operations
of a motor carrier, as defined in R.C. § 4923.01.
   (s)   FATALITY. The death of a person as the result of a motor vehicle
accident occurring not more than 365 days prior to the date of death.   
   (t)   FELONY. Any offense under federal or state law that is punishable by
death or imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and includes any offense
specifically classified as a felony under the law of this state, regardless of
the penalty that may be imposed.
   (u)   FOREIGN JURISDICTION. Any jurisdiction other than a state.
   (v)   GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING. The value specified by the manufacturer
as the maximum loaded weight of a single or a combination vehicle. The gross
vehicle weight rating of a combination vehicle is the gross vehicle weight
rating of the power unit plus the gross vehicle weight rating of each towed
unit.
   (w)   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material that has been designated as
hazardous under 49 U.S.C. 5103 and is required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R.
Part 172, Subpart F or any quantity of a material listed as a select agent or
toxin in 42 C.F.R. Part 73, as amended.
   (x)   IMMINENT HAZARD. The existence of a condition that presents a
substantial likelihood that death, serious illness, severe personal injury or a
substantial endangerment to health, property or the environment may occur
before the reasonably foreseeable completion date of a formal proceeding begun
to lessen the risk of death, illness, injury or endangerment.
   (y)   MEDICAL VARIANCE. One of the following received by a driver from the
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration that allows the driver to be issued
a medical certificate:
      (1)   An exemption letter permitting operation of a commercial motor
vehicle under 49 C.F.R. part 381, subpart C or 49 C.F.R. § 391.64;
      (2)   A skill performance evaluation certificate permitting operation of
a commercial motor vehicle pursuant to 49 C.F.R. § 391.49.
   (z)   MOBILE TELEPHONE. A mobile communication device that falls under or
uses any commercial mobile radio service as defined in 47 C.F.R. part 20,
except that mobile telephone does not include two-way or citizens band radio
services.
   (aa)   MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer or semitrailer
propelled or drawn by mechanical power used on highways, except that the term
does not include a vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer or semitrailer operated
exclusively on a rail.
   (bb)   OUT-OF-SERVICE ORDER. A declaration by an authorized enforcement
officer of a federal, state, local, Canadian or Mexican jurisdiction declaring
that the driver, commercial motor vehicle or commercial motor carrier operation
is out of service as defined in 49 C.F.R. 390.5.
   (cc)   PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
   (dd)   PORTABLE TANK. A liquid or gaseous packaging designed primarily to be
loaded on or temporarily attached to a vehicle and equipped with skids,
mountings or accessories to facilitate handling of the tank by mechanical
means.
   (ee)   PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01(E)
(1) and (E)(3).
   (ff)   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Includes every vehicle that is defined as a
recreational vehicle in R.C. § 4501.01 and is used exclusively for purposes
other than engaging in business for profit.
   (gg)   RESIDENCE. Any person’s residence determined in accordance with
standards prescribed in the rules adopted by the Registrar.
   (hh)   SCHOOL BUS. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   (ii)   SERIOUS TRAFFIC VIOLATION. Any of the following:
      (1)   A conviction arising from a single charge of operating a commercial
motor vehicle in violation of any provision of R.C. § 4506.03;
      (2)   A.   Except as provided in division (2)B. of this definition, a
violation while operating a commercial motor vehicle of a law of this state, or
any municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or any other
substantially equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of
another state, prohibiting either of the following:
            1.   Texting while driving;
            2.   Using a handheld mobile telephone.
         B.   It is not a serious traffic violation if the person was texting
or using a handheld mobile telephone to contact law enforcement or other
emergency services.
      (3)   A conviction arising from the operation of any motor vehicle that
involves any of the following:
         A.   A single charge of any speed in excess of the posted speed limit
by 15 miles per hour or more;
         B.   Violations of R.C. § 4511.20 or 4511.201 or any substantially
equivalent ordinance or resolution, or of any substantially equivalent law of
another state or political subdivision of another state;
         C.   Violation of a law of this state or an ordinance or resolution
relating to traffic control, other than a parking violation, or of any
substantially equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of
another state, that results in a fatal accident;
         D.   Violation of R.C. § 4506.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or of any substantially
equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of another state, that
involves the operation of a commercial motor vehicle without a valid commercial
driver’s license with the proper class or endorsement for the specific vehicle
group being operated or for the passengers or type of cargo being transported;
         E.   Violation of R.C. § 4506.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or of any substantially
equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of another state, that
involves the operation of a commercial motor vehicle without a valid commercial
driver’s license being in the person’s possession;
         F.   Violation of R.C. § 4511.33 or 4511.34, or any municipal
ordinance or county or township resolution substantially equivalent to either
of those sections, or any substantially equivalent law of another state or
political subdivision of another state;
         G.   Violation of any other law of this state, any law of another
state, or any ordinance or resolution of a political subdivision of this state
or another state that meets both of the following requirements:
            1.   It relates to traffic control, other than a parking violation;
            2.   It is determined to be a serious traffic violation by the
United States Secretary of Transportation and is designated by the director as
such by rule.
   (jj)   STATE. A state of the United States and includes the District of
Columbia.
   (kk)   TANK VEHICLE. Any commercial motor vehicle that is designed to
transport any liquid or gaseous materials within a tank or tanks that are
either permanently or temporarily attached to the vehicle or its chassis and
have an individual rated capacity of more than 119 gallons and an aggregate
rated capacity of 1,000 gallons or more. The term does not include a commercial
motor vehicle transporting an empty storage container tank that is not designed
for transportation, has a rated capacity of 1,000 gallons or more, and is
temporarily attached to a flatbed trailer.
   (ll)   TESTER. A person or entity acting pursuant to a valid agreement
entered into pursuant to R.C. § 4506.09(B).
   (mm)   TEXTING. Manually entering alphanumeric text into, or reading text
from, an electronic device. TEXTING includes short message service (SMS), e-
mail, instant messaging, a command or request to access a world wide web page,
pressing more than a single button to initiate or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone, or engaging in any other form of
electronic text retrieval or entry, for present or future communication.
TEXTING does not include the following:
      (1)   Using voice commands to initiate, receive, or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone;
      (2)   Inputting, selecting, or reading information on a global
positioning system or navigation system;
      (3)   Pressing a single button to initiate or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone; or
      (4)   Using, for a purpose that is not otherwise prohibited by law, a
device capable of performing multiple functions, such as a fleet management
system, a dispatching device, a mobile telephone, a citizens band radio, or a
music player.
   (nn)   TEXTING WHILE DRIVING. Texting while operating a commercial motor
vehicle, with the motor running, including while temporarily stationary because
of traffic, a traffic control device, or other momentary delays. Texting while
driving does not include operating a commercial motor vehicle with or without
the motor running when the driver has moved the vehicle to the side of, or off,
a highway and is stopped in a location where the vehicle can safely remain
stationary.
   (oo)   UNITED STATES. The 50 states and the District of Columbia.
   (pp)   UPGRADE. A change in the class of vehicles, endorsements, or self-
certified status as described in R.C. § 4506.10(A)(1) that expands the ability
of a current commercial driver’s license holder to operate commercial motor
vehicles under this chapter or R.C. Chapter 4506.
   (qq)   USE OF A HANDHELD MOBILE TELEPHONE. Means:
      (1)   Using at least one hand to hold a mobile telephone to conduct a
voice communication;
      (2)   Dialing or answering a mobile telephone by pressing more than a
single button; or
      (3)   Reaching for a mobile telephone in a manner that requires a driver
to maneuver so that the driver is no longer in a seated driving position, or
restrained by a seat belt that is installed in accordance with 49 C.F.R. §
393.93 and adjusted in accordance with the vehicle manufacturer’s instructions.
   (rr)   VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(R.C. § 4506.01)
§ 442.02 USE OF ACTUAL GROSS WEIGHT IN LIEU OF RATING.
   For purposes of this chapter, the actual gross weight of a vehicle or
combination of vehicles may be used in lieu of a gross vehicle weight rating to
determine whether a vehicle or combination of vehicles qualifies as a
commercial motor vehicle if the gross vehicle weight rating specified by the
manufacturer for the vehicle of combination of vehicles is not determinable, or
if the manufacturer of the vehicle has not specified a gross vehicle weight
rating.
(R.C. § 4506.011)
§ 442.03 LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having in the person’s
possession or otherwise under the person’s control more than one valid driver’s
license issued by this state, any other state or by a foreign jurisdiction;
      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this municipality
in violation of an out-of-service order while the person’s driving privilege is
suspended, revoked or cancelled, or while the person is subject to
disqualification;
      (3)   Drive a motor vehicle on a highway in the municipality under the
authority of a commercial driver’s license issued by another state or a foreign
jurisdiction, after having been a resident of this state for 30 days or longer;
      (4)   Knowingly give false information in any application or
certification required by R.C. § 4506.07.
      (5)   Knowingly provide false statements or engage in any fraudulent act
related to testing for a commercial driver’s license as required in R.C. §
4506.09.
   (b)   The municipality shall give every conviction occurring out of this
state and notice of which was received by the State Department of Public Safety
after December 31, 1989, full faith and credit and treat it for sanctioning
purposes under this chapter as though the conviction had occurred in this
state.
(R.C. § 4506.04(A), (B))
   (c)   No person shall drive any commercial motor vehicle for which an
endorsement is required under R.C. § 4506.12 unless the proper endorsement
appears on the person’s commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit. No person shall drive a commercial motor
vehicle in violation of a restriction established under R.C. § 4506.12 that
appears on the person’s commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit.
(R.C. § 4506.12(I))
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(1), (2) or (3) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(4) of this section is guilty of
falsification, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition, the provisions
of R.C. § 4507.19 apply.
(R.C. § 4506.04(C))
      (3)   Whoever violates division (a)(5) of this section is guilty of
falsification, a misdemeanor of the third degree. In addition, the provisions
of R.C. § 4507.19 apply.
      (4)   A.   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   The offenses established under division (c) of this section are
strict liability offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of
these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be construed to imply
that any other offense for which there is no specified degree of culpability,
whether in this section or another section of this code or the Ohio Revised
Code, is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. § 4506.12(J))
§ 442.04 PHYSICAL QUALIFICATION TO OPERATE COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (a)   No person who holds a valid commercial driver’s license shall drive a
commercial motor vehicle unless the person is physically qualified to do so.
      (1)   Any person applying for a commercial driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit, the renewal or upgrade of a
commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit, or the transfer of a commercial driver’s license from out
of state shall self-certify to the Registrar for purposes of 49 C.F.R. § 383.71
one of the following in regard to the applicant’s operation of a commercial
motor vehicle, as applicable:
         A.   1.   If the applicant operates or expects to operate a commercial
motor vehicle in interstate or foreign commerce and is subject to and meets the
requirements under 49 C.F.R. part 391, the applicant shall self-certify that
the applicant is non-excepted interstate and shall provide the Registrar with
the original or a copy of a medical examiner’s certificate and each
subsequently issued medical examiner’s certificate prepared by a qualified
medical examiner to maintain a medically certified status on the applicant’s
commercial driver licensing system driver record;
            2.   If the applicant operates or expects to operate a commercial
motor vehicle in interstate commerce, but engages in transportation or
operations excepted under 49 C.F.R. §§ 390.3(f), 391.2, 391.68, or 398.3 from
all or parts of the qualification requirements of 49 C.F.R. part 391, the
applicant shall self-certify that the applicant is excepted interstate and is
not required to obtain a medical examiner’s certificate;
         B.   1.   If the applicant operates only in intrastate commerce and is
subject to state driver qualification requirements, the applicant shall self-
certify that the applicant is non-excepted intrastate;
            2.   If the applicant operates only in intrastate commerce and is
excepted from all or parts of the state driver qualification requirements, the
applicant shall self-certify that the applicant is excepted intrastate.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the expiration date on a person’s commercial
driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit,
every commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit holder shall provide the Registrar with the certification
required by this section on or after January 30, 2012, but prior to January 30,
2014.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4506.10(A), (E))
§ 442.05 CRIMINAL OFFENSES.
   (a)   No person who holds a commercial driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit or who operates a motor vehicle
for which a commercial driver’s license or permit is required shall do any of
the following:
      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having a measurable or
detectable amount of alcohol or of a controlled substance in the person’s
blood, breath or urine;
      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of 0.04% or more by whole blood or breath;
      (3)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of 0.048% or more by blood serum or blood plasma;
      (4)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of 0.056% or more by urine;
      (5)   Drive a motor vehicle while under the influence of a controlled
substance;
      (6)   Drive a motor vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a municipal
O.V.I. ordinance as defined in R.C. § 4511.181;
      (7)   Use a vehicle in the commission of a felony;
      (8)   Refuse to submit to a test under R.C. § 4506.17 or R.C. § 4511.191,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (9)   Operate a commercial motor vehicle while the person’s commercial
driver’s license or permit or other commercial driving privileges are revoked,
suspended, cancelled, or disqualified;
      (10)   Cause a fatality through the negligent operation of a commercial
motor vehicle, including but not limited to the offenses of aggravated
vehicular homicide, vehicular homicide and vehicular manslaughter;
      (11)   Fail to stop after an accident in violation of R.C. §§ 4549.02 to
4549.03, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (12)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle in violation of any provision of
R.C. §§ 4511.61 to 4511.63 or any federal or local law or ordinance pertaining
to railroad-highway grade crossings;
      (13)   Use a motor vehicle in the commission of a felony involving the
manufacture, distribution, or dispensing of a controlled substance as defined
in R.C. § 3719.01 or the possession with intent to manufacture, distribute, or
dispense a controlled substance;
      (14)   Use a commercial motor vehicle in the commission of a violation of
R.C. § 2905.32 or any other substantially equivalent offense established under
federal law or the laws of another state.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
   (c)   The offenses established under this section are strict liability
offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of these offenses
as strict liability offenses shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.
(R.C. § 4506.15)
Statutory reference:
   Alcohol or controlled substance testing, disqualification of drivers, see
R.C. § 4506.17
   Disqualification of drivers for violations, see R.C. § 4506.16
§ 442.06 APPLICATION OF 49 C.F.R. PART 383.
   (a)   The provisions of 49 C.F.R. Part 383, Subpart C (Notification
Requirements and Employer Responsibilities), as amended, shall apply to all
commercial drivers or persons who apply for employment as commercial drivers.
No person shall fail to make a report to the person’s employer as required by
this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4506.19)
§ 442.07 INFORMATION REQUIRED OF PROSPECTIVE DRIVERS BY EMPLOYERS; UNAUTHORIZED
DRIVING.
   (a)   Each employer shall require every applicant for employment as a driver
of a commercial vehicle to provide the applicant’s employment history for the
ten years preceding the date the employment application is submitted to the
prospective employer. The following information shall be submitted:
      (1)   A list of the names and addresses of the applicant’s previous
employers for which the applicant was the operator of a commercial motor
vehicle;
      (2)   The dates the applicant was employed by these employers;
      (3)   The reason for leaving each of these employers.
   (b)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize any driver employed by
the employer to drive a commercial motor vehicle during any period in which any
of the following apply:
      (1)   The driver’s commercial driver’s license is suspended, revoked or
cancelled by any state or a foreign jurisdiction;
      (2)   The driver has lost the privilege to drive, or currently is
disqualified from driving, a commercial motor vehicle in any state or foreign
jurisdiction;
      (3)   The driver, the commercial motor vehicle the driver is driving, or
the motor carrier operation is subject to an out-of-service order in any state
or a foreign jurisdiction;
      (4)   The driver has more than one driver’s license.
   (c)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a
commercial motor vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4506.15.
   (d)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a
commercial motor vehicle if the driver does not hold a valid, current
commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit bearing the proper class or endorsements for the vehicle. No
employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a commercial
motor vehicle in violation of the restrictions on the driver’s commercial
driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (a), (b) or (d) of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 4506.20)
§ 442.08 AUTHORITY OF PEACE OFFICERS RE DRUNK DRIVING.
   (a)   Within the jurisdictional limits of the appointing authority, any
peace officer shall stop and detain any person found violating R.C. § 4506.15,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, without obtaining a
warrant. When there is reasonable ground to believe that a violation of R.C. §
4506.15, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, has been
committed and a test or tests of the person’s whole blood, blood plasma or
blood serum, breath or urine is necessary, the peace officer shall take the
person to an appropriate place for testing. If a person refuses to submit to a
test after being warned as provided in R.C. § 4506.17(C), or submits to a test
that discloses the presence of a controlled substance or an alcohol
concentration of 0.04% or more by whole blood or breath, an alcohol
concentration of 0.048% or more by blood serum or blood plasma, or an alcohol
concentration of 0.056% or more by urine, the peace officer shall require that
the person immediately surrender the person’s commercial driver’s license to
the peace officer.
   (b)   As used in this section, “jurisdictional limits” means the limits
within which a peace officer may arrest and detain a person without a warrant
under R.C. § 2935.03, except that the Superintendent and the troopers of the
State Highway Patrol may stop and detain, without warrant, any person who, in
the presence of the Superintendent or any trooper, is engaged in a violation of
any of the provisions of R.C. Chapter 4506.
(R.C. § 4506.23)
§ 442.09 PERMITTING OR DRIVING WHILE FATIGUED OR ILL PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle, as defined in R.C. §
4506.01, or a commercial car or commercial tractor, as defined in R.C. §
4501.01, while the person’s ability or alertness is so impaired by fatigue,
illness or other causes that it is unsafe for the person to drive the vehicle.
No driver shall use any drug which would adversely affect the driver’s ability
or alertness.
   (b)   No owner, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, of a commercial motor vehicle,
commercial car or commercial tractor, or a person employing or otherwise
directing the driver of the vehicle, shall require or knowingly permit a driver
in any such condition described in division (a) of this section to drive the
vehicle upon any street or highway.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
R.C. § 4511.79, or R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764 or
4511.77, or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of
those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.79)
§ 442.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 444: BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES GENERALLY
Section
   
444.01   Code application to bicycles
   
444.02   Riding upon seats; carrying packages; motorcycle handle bars; helmets
and glasses
   
444.03   Attaching bicycles, motorcycles to other vehicles
   
444.04   Riding on right side of roadway; riding abreast
   
444.05   Lights, signal devices, brakes on bicycles
   
444.06   Operation of motorized bicycles
   
444.07   Safe riding regulations for bicycles
   
444.08   Parking; locks
   
444.09   Parent’s responsibility
   
444.10   Suspension of riding privileges; impounding of bicycles
   
444.11   Electric bicycles
   
444.99   Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Bicycle defined, see §
402.01
   Bicycle regulations to be consistent with state law, see R.C. § 4511.07(A)
(8)
   Bicycles prohibited on freeways, see §
412.05
   Motorcycle brakes, see §
438.20
   Motorcycle defined, see §
402.01
   Motorcycle headlight, see §
438.03
   Motorcycle operator’s license required, see §
436.01
   Off-highway motorcycles, see
Ch. 446
   Operation of vehicles on bicycle paths, see §
432.42
§ 444.01 CODE APPLICATION TO BICYCLES.
   (a)   The provisions of this title that are applicable to bicycles and
electric bicycles apply whenever a bicycle or electric bicycle is operated upon
any highway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
   (b)   Except as provided in division (d) of this section, a bicycle operator
or electric bicycle operator who violates any provisions of this title
described in division (a) of this section that is applicable to bicycles or
electric bicycles may be issued a ticket, citation, or summons by a law
enforcement officer for the violation in the same manner as the operator of a
motor vehicle would be cited for the same violation. A person who commits any
such violation while operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall not have any
points assessed against the person’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, or probationary license under R.C. §
4510.036.
   (c)   Except as provided in division (d) of this section, in the case of a
violation of any provision of this title described in division (a) of this
section by a bicycle operator, electric bicycle operator, or motor vehicle
operator when the trier of fact finds that the violation by the motor vehicle
operator endangered the lives of bicycle riders or electric bicycle riders at
the time of the violation, the court, notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio
Revised Code to the contrary, may require the bicycle operator, electric
bicycle operator, or motor vehicle operator to take and successfully complete a
bicycling skills course approved by the court in addition to or in lieu of any
penalty otherwise prescribed by this Traffic Code or the Ohio Revised Code for
that violation.
   (d)   Divisions (b) and (c) of this section do not apply to violations of
R.C. § 4511.19, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 4511.52)
   (e)   Every person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of
official traffic-control devices and signals applicable to vehicles, unless
otherwise directed by a police officer.
§ 444.02 RIDING UPON SEATS; CARRYING PACKAGES; MOTORCYCLE HANDLE BARS; HELMETS
AND GLASSES.
   (a)   For purposes of this section, SNOWMOBILE has the same meaning as given
that term in R.C. § 4519.01.
   (b)   (1)   No person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall ride
other than upon or astride the permanent and regular seat attached thereto or
carry any other person upon the bicycle or electric bicycle other than upon a
firmly attached and regular seat thereon, and no person shall ride upon a
bicycle or electric bicycle other than upon such a firmly attached and regular
seat.
      (2)   No person operating a motorcycle shall ride other than upon or
astride the permanent and regular seat or saddle attached thereto, or carry any
other person upon the motorcycle other than upon a firmly attached and regular
seat or saddle thereon, and no person shall ride upon a motorcycle other than
upon such a firmly attached and regular seat or saddle.
      (3)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a
saddle other than while sitting astride the saddle, facing forward, with one
leg on each side of the motorcycle.
      (4)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a seat
other than while sitting upon the seat.
      (5)   No person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall carry any
package, bundle or article that prevents the driver from keeping at least one
hand upon the handlebars.
      (6)   No bicycle, electric bicycle, or motorcycle shall be used to carry
more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
No motorcycle shall be operated on a highway when the handlebars rise higher
than the shoulders of the operator when the operator is seated in the
operator’s seat or saddle.
   (c)   (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(3) of this section, no person
shall operate or be a passenger on a snowmobile or motorcycle without using
safety glasses or other protective eye device. Except as provided in division
(c)(3) of this section, no person who is under the age of 18 years, or who
holds a motorcycle operator’s endorsement or license bearing a “novice”
designation that is currently in effect as provided in R.C. § 4507.13, shall
operate a motorcycle on a highway, or be a passenger on a motorcycle, unless
wearing a protective helmet on the person’s head, and no other person shall be
a passenger on a motorcycle operated by such a person unless similarly wearing
a protective helmet. The helmet, safety glasses, or other protective eye device
shall conform with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety. The
provisions of this paragraph or a violation thereof shall not be used in the
trial of any civil action.
      (2)   A.   Except as provided in division (c)(3) of this section, no
person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary instruction permit and
temporary instruction permit identification card issued by the Registrar of
Motor Vehicles pursuant to R.C. § 4507.05 unless the person, at the time of
such operation, is wearing on the person’s head a protective helmet that
conforms with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety.
         B.   No person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary
instruction permit and temporary instruction permit identification card issued
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles pursuant to R.C. § 4507.05 in any of the
following circumstances:
            1.   At any time when lighted lights are required by R.C. § 4513.03
(A)(1);
            2.   While carrying a passenger;
            3.   On any limited access highway or heavily congested roadway.
      (3)   Divisions (c)(1) and (c)(2)A. of this section do not apply to a
person who operates or is a passenger in an autocycle or cab-enclosed
motorcycle when the occupant compartment top is in place enclosing the
occupants.
   (d)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the carrying
of a child in a seat or trailer that is designed for carrying children and is
firmly attached to the bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (b) or (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates division (b) or (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates division (b) or (c)(1) or
(c)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.53)
§ 444.03 ATTACHING BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES TO OTHER VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   No person riding upon any bicycle, electric bicycle, coaster,
roller skates, sled, skateboard, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or self
to any vehicle upon a roadway.
      (2)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person riding upon any
bicycle, electric bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, skateboard, or toy
vehicle to attach the same or self to any vehicle while it is moving upon a
roadway.
      (3)   This section does not apply to towing a disabled vehicle.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.54)
§ 444.04 RIDING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; RIDING ABREAST.
   (a)   Every person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle upon a roadway
shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable obeying all
traffic rules applicable to vehicles and exercising due care when passing a
standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
   (b)   Persons riding bicycles, electric bicycles, or motorcycles upon a
roadway shall ride not more than two abreast in a single lane, except on paths
or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, electric
bicycles, or motorcycles.
   (c)   This section does not require a person operating a bicycle or electric
bicycle to ride at the edge of the roadway when it is unreasonable or unsafe to
do so. Conditions that may require riding away from the edge of the roadway
include when necessary to avoid fixed or moving objects, parked or moving
vehicles, surface hazards, or if it otherwise is unsafe or impracticable to do
so, including if the lane is too narrow for the bicycle or electric bicycle and
an overtaking vehicle to travel safely side by side within the lane.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (e)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.55)
§ 444.05 LIGHTS, SIGNAL DEVICES, BRAKES ON BICYCLES.
   (a)   Every bicycle or electric bicycle when in use at the times specified
in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall be
equipped with the following:
      (1)   A lamp mounted on the front of either the bicycle or electric
bicycle or the operator that shall emit a white light visible from a distance
of at least 500 feet to the front and 300 feet to the sides. A generator-
powered lamp that emits light only when the bicycle or electric bicycle is
moving may be used to meet this requirement.
      (2)   A red reflector on the rear that shall be visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of
lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle.
      (3)   A lamp emitting either flashing or steady red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear shall be used in addition to the red
reflector. If the red lamp performs as a reflector in that it is visible as
specified in division (a)(2) of this section, the red lamp may serve as the
reflector and a separate reflector is not required.
   (b)   Additional lamps and reflectors may be used in addition to those
required under division (a) of this section, except that red lamps and red
reflectors shall not be used on the front of the bicycle or electric bicycle
and white lamps and white reflectors shall not be used on the rear of the
bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (c)   A bicycle or electric bicycle may be equipped with a device capable of
giving an audible signal, except that a bicycle or electric bicycle shall not
be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle or electric bicycle
any siren or whistle.
   (d)   Every bicycle and electric bicycle shall be equipped with an adequate
brake when used on a street or highway.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.56)
§ 444.06 OPERATION OF MOTORIZED BICYCLES.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motorized bicycle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking, unless all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The person is 14 or 15 years of age and holds a valid probationary
motorized bicycle license issued after the person has passed the test provided
for in this section, or the person is 16 years of age or older and holds either
a valid commercial driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4506 or a
driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid motorized bicycle
license issued after the person has passed the test provided for in this
section, except that if a person is 16 years of age, has a valid probationary
motorized bicycle license and desires a motorized bicycle license, the person
is not required to comply with the testing requirements provided for in this
section.
      (2)   The motorized bicycle is equipped in accordance with the rules
adopted under division (b) of this section and is in proper working order.
      (3)   The person, if under 18 years of age, is wearing a protective
helmet on the person’s head with the chin strap properly fastened and the
motorized bicycle is equipped with a rearview mirror.
      (4)   The person operates the motorized bicycle when practicable within
three feet of the right edge of the roadway obeying all traffic rules
applicable to vehicles.
   (b)   The Director of Public Safety, subject to R.C. Chapter 119, shall
adopt and promulgate rules concerning protective helmets, the equipment of
motorized bicycles, and the testing and qualifications of persons who do not
hold a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license. The test shall be as near
as practicable to the examination required for a motorcycle operator’s
endorsement under R.C. § 4507.11. The test shall also require the operator to
give an actual demonstration of the operator’s ability to operate and control a
motorized bicycle by driving one under the supervision of an examining officer.
   (c)   Every motorized bicycle license expires on the birthday of the
applicant in the fourth or eighth year after the date it is issued, based on
the period of renewal requested by the applicant. No motorized bicycle license
shall be issued for a period longer than eight years. A person who is 65 years
of age or older may only apply for a motorized bicycle license that expires on
the birthday of the applicant in the fourth year after the date it is issued.
   (d)   No person operating a motorized bicycle shall carry another person
upon the motorized bicycle.
   (e)   The protective helmet and rearview mirror required by division (a)(3)
of this section shall, on and after January 1, 1985, conform with rules adopted
by the Director under division (b) of this section.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (a), (d) or (e) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.521)
Statutory reference:
   Suspension of probationary motorized bicycle license by the state, see R.C.
§ 4510.34
§ 444.07 SAFE RIDING REGULATIONS FOR BICYCLES.
   (a)   Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk or street, the
person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible
signal before attempting to overtake and pass a pedestrian or another bicycle.
This audible signal must be given only by bell or other warning device capable
of giving an audible signal and shall be given at such a distance and in such a
manner as not to startle the person being overtaken and passed.
   (b)   No person shall ride a bicycle across or through any intersection
involving a through street. These intersections are to be crossed by walking
the bicycle across or through the intersection.
   (c)   Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, the person,
before overtaking and passing a blind person carrying a white or metallic cane,
shall dismount and overtake or pass on foot.
   (d)   When a bicycle is operated on the street, the operator shall give hand
signals before turning, changing lanes or stopping. The signals shall conform
with R.C. § 4511.40, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (e)   Every rider of a bicycle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding
with any pedestrian or any vehicle upon any roadway, sidewalk or bicycle path,
or endangering the life, limb or property of any person while in the lawful use
of the streets, sidewalks or any other private or public property.
   (f)   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is
reasonable and proper under the conditions then existing.
   (g)   The operator of a bicycle emerging from or turning into an alley,
driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area
extending across any alley, driveway or building, yield the right-of-way to all
pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk area. Upon entering the street, the
operator shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the
street.
   (h)   No person shall engage in trick riding or operate a bicycle without
both hands upon the handle grips except when necessary to give the hand signals
required herein.
§ 444.08 PARKING; LOCKS.
   (a)   No person shall park a bicycle upon a sidewalk in such a manner as to
interfere with pedestrian traffic or damage the property of another.
   (b)   No person shall park a bicycle upon a roadway in such a manner as to
interfere with vehicular traffic.
   (c)   No bicycle shall remain unlocked when parked upon any public way or
place.
§ 444.09 PARENT’S RESPONSIBILITY.
   No parent of any child or guardian of any ward shall authorize or knowingly
permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 444.10 SUSPENSION OF RIDING PRIVILEGES; IMPOUNDING OF BICYCLES.
   In addition to the penalties provided in §§
408.01 and
408.02, a court may prohibit any person who violates or fails to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter relating to bicycles from riding a
bicycle for a period not to exceed three months. In addition, any person
violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter
relating to bicycles may be punished by having his or her bicycle impounded for
a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 444.11 ELECTRIC BICYCLES.
   (a)   (1)   On and after January 1, 2020, manufacturers and distributors of
electric bicycles shall permanently affix a label, in a prominent location, to
each electric bicycle. The label shall specify whether the electric bicycle is
a class 1, class 2, or class 3 electric bicycle, the top assisted speed that
the electric bicycle is capable of reaching, and the motor wattage of the
electric bicycle.
      (2)   No person shall modify an electric bicycle in a manner that changes
the top assisted speed that the electric bicycle is capable of reaching unless
the person also modifies the label required under division (a)(1) of this
section to reflect the modification.
   (b)   (1)   The manufacturer of an electric bicycle shall ensure that the
electric bicycle complies with the equipment and manufacturing requirements for
bicycles established by the consumer product safety commission under 16 C.F.R.
§§ 1512 et seq.
      (2)   The manufacturer shall manufacture all class 1 electric bicycles
and class 3 electric bicycles so that when the rider ceases pedaling the
electric motor ceases to provide assistance. The manufacturer shall manufacture
all class 2 electric bicycles so that when the rider applies the brakes or
releases or activates a switch or similar mechanism the electric motor ceases
to provide assistance.
      (3)   All class 3 electric bicycles shall be equipped with a speedometer
that displays the speed of the electric bicycle in miles per hour.
   (c)   (1)   The operation of a class 1 electric bicycle and a class 2
electric bicycle is permitted on a path set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles or on a shared-use path, unless the county, township, municipal
corporation, other local authority, or state agency as defined in R.C. § 1.60
with control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule prohibits the use
of a class 1 electric bicycle or class 2 electric bicycle on such a path.
      (2)   No person shall operate a class 3 electric bicycle on a path set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles or a shared-use path unless that path
is within or adjacent to a highway or the county, township, municipal
corporation, or local authority, or state agency as defined in R.C. § 1.60 with
control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule authorizes the use of a
class 3 electric bicycle on such a path.
      (3)   No person shall operate a class 1 electric bicycle, a class 2
electric bicycle, or a class 3 electric bicycle on a path that is intended to
be used primarily for mountain biking, hiking, equestrian use, or other similar
uses, or any other single track or natural surface trail that has historically
been reserved for non-motorized use, unless the county, township, municipal
corporation, other local authority, or state agency as defined in R.C. § 1.60
with control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule authorizes the use
of a class 1 electric bicycle, a class 2 electric bicycle, or a class 3
electric bicycle on such a path.
      (4)   Divisions (c)(2) and (c)(3) of this section do not apply to a law
enforcement officer, or other person sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic
laws of the state, using an electric bicycle while in the performance of the
officer’s duties.
   (d)   (1)   No person under 16 years of age shall operate a class 3 electric
bicycle; however, a person under 16 years of age may ride as a passenger on a
class 3 electric bicycle that is designed to accommodate passengers.
      (2)   No person shall operate or be a passenger on a class 3 electric
bicycle unless the person is wearing a protective helmet that meets the
standards established by the Consumer Product Safety Commission or the American
Society for Testing and Materials.
   (e)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever operates
an electric bicycle in a manner that is prohibited under division (c) of this
section and whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   The offenses established under division (e)(1) of this section are
strict liability offenses and strict liability is a culpable mental state for
purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of these offenses as strict
liability offenses shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
(R.C. § 4511.522)
§ 444.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 446: SNOWMOBILES, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLES AND ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLES
Section
   
446.01   Definitions
   
446.02   Equipment
   
446.03   Code application; prohibited operation
   
446.04   Permitted operation
   
446.05   Licensing requirements of operator
   
446.06   Accident reports
   
446.07   Local control within police power
   
446.08   Registration of vehicles
   
446.09   Operation of off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle without
certificate of title; failure to surrender
   
446.99   Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Bicycles and motorcycles generally, see
Ch. 444
   Operation on bicycle paths, see §
432.42
   Power of court to impound registration certificates for certain violations,
see R.C. § 4519.47
   Required usage of helmets and safety glasses, see §
444.02
   Street or highway defined, see §
402.01
§ 446.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for
cross-country travel on land and water, or on more than one type of terrain,
and steered by wheels or caterpillar treads, or any combination thereof,
including vehicles that operate on a cushion of air, vehicles commonly known as
all-terrain vehicles, all season vehicles, mini-bikes and trail bikes. The term
does not include a utility vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4501.01 or any vehicle
principally used in playing golf, any motor vehicle or aircraft required to be
registered under R.C. Chapter 4503 or R.C. Chapter 4561, and any vehicle
excepted from definition as a motor vehicle by R.C. § 4501.01(B).
   (b)   DEALER. Any person or firm engaged in the business of manufacturing or
selling snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles or all-purpose vehicles at
wholesale or retail, or who rents, leases or otherwise furnishes snowmobiles,
off-highway motorcycles or all-purpose vehicles for hire.
   (c)   ELECTRONIC and ELECTRONIC RECORD. Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
4501.01.
   (d)   ELECTRONIC DEALER. A dealer whom the Registrar of Motor Vehicles
designates under R.C. § 4519.511.
   (e)   INTERSTATE HIGHWAY. Any part of the interstate system of highways as
defined in subsection (e), 90 Stat. 431 (1976), 23 U.S.C. 103, as amended.
   (f)   LIMITED-ACCESS HIGHWAY or FREEWAY. Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
5511.02.
   (g)   MINI-TRUCK. A vehicle that has four wheels, is propelled by an
electric motor with a rated power of 7,500 watts or less or an internal
combustion engine with a piston displacement capacity of 660 cubic centimeters
or less, has a total dry weight of 900 to 2,200 pounds, contains an enclosed
cabin and a seat for the vehicle operator, resembles a pickup truck or van with
a cargo area or bed located at the rear of the vehicle, and was not originally
manufactured to meet federal motor vehicle safety standards.
   (h)   OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE. Every motorcycle, as defined in R.C. §
4511.01, that is designed to be operated primarily on lands other than a street
or highway.
   (i)   OPERATOR. Any person who operates or is in actual physical control of
a snowmobile, off- highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle.
   (j)   OWNER. Any person or firm, other than a lienholder or dealer, having
title to a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, or other
right to the possession thereof.
   (k)   PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4509.01.
   (l)   SNOWMOBILE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for use on
snow or ice, and steered by skis, runners or caterpillar treads.
   (m)   STATE HIGHWAY and STATE ROUTE. Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
4511.01.
   (n)   STREET OR HIGHWAY. Have the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(R.C. § 4519.01)
§ 446.02 EQUIPMENT.
   (a)   In addition to any rules or regulations promulgated by the Ohio
Director of Public Safety pursuant to R.C. § 4519.20 and R.C. Chapter 119,
equipment of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles and all-purpose vehicles
shall include but not necessarily be limited to requirements for the following
items of equipment:
      (1)   At least one headlight having a minimum candlepower of sufficient
intensity to reveal persons and objects at a distance of at least 100 feet
ahead under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;
      (2)   At least one red tail light having a minimum candlepower of
sufficient intensity to be plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the
rear under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;
      (3)   Every snowmobile, while traveling on packed snow, shall be capable
of carrying a driver who weighs 175 pounds or more, and, while carrying the
driver, be capable of stopping in no more than 40 feet from an initial steady
speed of 20 miles per hour, or locking its traction belt; and
      (4)   A muffler system capable of precluding the emission of excessive
smoke or exhaust fumes, and of limiting the engine noise of vehicles. On
snowmobiles manufactured after January 1, 1973, the requirement shall include
sound dampening equipment such that noise does not exceed 82 decibels on the
“A” scale at 50 feet as measured according to SAE J192 (September 1970).
   (b)   No person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle in violation of this section, except that equipment specified
in division (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section shall not be required on
snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles or all-purpose vehicles operated during
the daylight hours.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (b) of this section shall be fined not more than $50. If the offender
within the preceding year previously has committed a violation of division (b)
of this section or of R.C. § 4519.20(B), whoever violates division (b) of this
section shall be fined not less than $15 nor more than $100, imprisoned not
more than three days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.20)
§ 446.03 CODE APPLICATION; PROHIBITED OPERATION.
   (a)   The applicable provisions of this traffic code apply to the operation
of snowmobiles, off- highway motorcycles, and all-purpose vehicles, except that
no person shall operate a snowmobile, off- highway motorcycle, or all-purpose
vehicle as follows:
      (1)   On any state highway, including a limited access highway or freeway
or the right-of-way thereof, except for emergency travel during such time and
in such manner as the Ohio Director of Public Safety designates or except as
authorized by R.C. § 4519.41(F);
      (2)   On any private property, or in any nursery or planting area,
without the permission of the owner or other person having the right to
possession of the property;
      (3)   On any land or waters controlled by the state, except at those
locations where a sign has been posted permitting the operation;
      (4)   On the tracks or right-of-way of any operating railroad;
      (5)   While transporting any firearm, bow or other implement for hunting
that is not unloaded and securely encased;
      (6)   For the purpose of chasing, pursuing, capturing or killing any
animal or wild fowl; or
      (7)   During the time from sunset to sunrise, unless displaying lighted
lights as required by R.C. § 4519.20 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $50 nor
more than $500, or imprisoned not less than 3 nor more than 30 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.40)
§ 446.04 PERMITTED OPERATION.
   Snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles and all-purpose vehicles may be
operated as follows:
   (a)   To make a crossing of a highway, other than a highway as designated in
R.C. § 4519.40(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
whenever the crossing can be made in safety and will not interfere with the
movement of vehicular traffic approaching from any direction on the highway,
and provided that the operator yields the right-of-way to any approaching
traffic that presents an immediate hazard;
   (b)   On highways in the county or township road systems whenever the local
authority having jurisdiction over the highways so permits;
   (c)   Off and alongside street or highway for limited distances from the
point of unloading from a conveyance to the point at which the snowmobile, off-
highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle is intended and authorized to be
operated;
   (d)   On the berm or shoulder of a highway, other than a highway as
designated in R.C. § 4519.40(A)(1), or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, when the terrain permits the operation to be undertaken safely and
without the necessity of entering any traffic lane;
   (e)   On the berm or shoulder or a county or township road, while traveling
from one area of operation of the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle to another such area.
   (f)   For snowmobiles without metal studded tracks and all-purpose vehicles,
on state highways located on an island in Lake Erie, including limited access
highways and freeways, between the first day of November and the thirtieth day
of April, provided that all of the following conditions apply:
      (1)   The operator has a valid driver’s license as required under R.C. §
4519.44.
      (2)   The snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle is in compliance with rules
governing safety equipment adopted under R.C. § 4519.20.
      (3)   The owner of the snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle maintains proof
of financial responsibility for both on-road and off-road use of the snowmobile
or all-purpose vehicle.
      (4)   The operator obeys all traffic rules and regulations.
(R.C. § 4519.41)
§ 446.05 LICENSING REQUIREMENTS OF OPERATOR.
   (a)   No person who does not hold a valid, current motor vehicle driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, motorcycle operator’s endorsement or probationary
license, issued under R.C. Chapter 4506 or R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid,
current driver’s license issued by another jurisdiction, shall operate a
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle on any street or
highway in this municipality, on any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or on
any public land or waters.
   (b)   No person who is less than 16 years of age shall operate a snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle on any land or waters other than
private property or waters owned by or leased to the person’s parent or
guardian, unless accompanied by another person who is 18 years of age or older,
and who holds a license as provided in division (a) of this section, except
that the Ohio Department of Natural Resources may permit the operation on
state-controlled land under its jurisdiction when the person is less than 16
years of age and is accompanied by a parent or guardian who is a licensed
driver 18 years of age or older.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $50 nor
more than $500, or imprisoned not less than three nor more than 30 days, or
both.
(R.C. § 4519.44)
§ 446.06 ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   (a)   The operator of a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle involved in any accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of any
person or damage to the property of any person in excess of $100 shall report
the accident within 48 hours to the Chief of Police, and within 30 days shall
forward a written report of the accident to the Ohio Registrar of Motor
Vehicles on a form prescribed by the Registrar. If the operator is physically
incapable of making the reports and there is another participant in the
accident not so incapacitated, the participant shall make the reports. In the
event there is no other participant, and the operator is other than the owner,
the owner, within the prescribed periods of time, shall make the reports.
   (b)   Any law enforcement officer or other person authorized by R.C. §§
4519.42 and 4519.43 who investigates or receives information of an accident
involving a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle shall
forward to the Registrar a written report of the accident within 48 hours.
(R.C. § 4519.46)
§ 446.07 LOCAL CONTROL WITHIN POLICE POWER.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the municipality from
regulating the operation of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycle and all-purpose
vehicles on streets and highways and other public property under municipal
jurisdiction, and within the reasonable exercise of the police power, except
that no registration or licensing of any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or
all-purpose vehicle required to be registered or titled under R.C. Chapter 4519
shall be required.
(R.C. § 4519.48)
§ 446.08 REGISTRATION OF VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b), (c) and (d) of this section,
no person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle within this municipality unless the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle
or all-purpose vehicle is registered and numbered in accordance with R.C. §§
4519.03 and 4519.04.
      (2)   Except as provided in R.C. § 4511.215 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, no registration is required for a mini-truck that is
operated within this state. A mini-truck may be operated only in accordance
with R.C. § 4511.215 and R.C. § 4519.401, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (b)   (1)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or off-highway
motorcycle that is operated exclusively upon lands owned by the owner of the
snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle, or on lands to which the owner of the
snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle has a contractual right.
      (2)   No registration is required for an all-purpose vehicle that is used
primarily for agricultural purposes when the owner qualifies for the current
agricultural use valuation tax credit, unless it is to be used on any public
land, trail, or right-of-way.
      (3)   Any all-purpose vehicle exempted from registration under division
(b)(2) of this section and operated for agricultural purposes may use public
roads and rights-of-way when traveling from one farm field to another, when
such use does not violate R.C. § 4519.41.
      (4)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle
that is operated on a state highway as authorized by R.C. § 4519.41(F).
   (c)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle
or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this state by a resident of another
state whenever that state has in effect a registration law similar to R.C.
Chapter 4519 and the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle
is properly registered under that state’s law. Any snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this state by a resident of
a state not having a registration law similar to R.C. Chapter 4519 shall comply
with R.C. § 4519.09.
   (d)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle
or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this municipality by the United
States, another state or a political subdivision thereof, but the snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle shall display the name of the
owner thereon.
   (e)   The owner or operator of any all-purpose vehicle operated or used upon
the waters in this municipality shall comply with R.C. Chapters 1547 and 1548
relative to the operation of watercraft.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section shall be fined not less
than $50 nor more than $100.
(R.C. § 4519.02)
Statutory reference:
   Destruction or disposal of vehicle; transfer of ownership; change of
address; loss of certificate, see R.C. § 4519.05
   Registration of emergency vehicles, see R.C. § 4519.08
   Registration procedure, see R.C. § 4519.03
   Temporary license placards and fees, see R.C. § 4519.10
   Temporary operating permit for certain nonresidents, see R.C. § 4519.09
§ 446.09 OPERATION OF OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE OR ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE WITHOUT
CERTIFICATE OF TITLE; FAILURE TO SURRENDER.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in this state an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle without having a certificate of title for the off-highway motorcycle or
all-purpose vehicle if such a certificate is required by R.C. Chapter 4519 to
be issued for the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, or, if a
physical certificate of title has not been issued for it, operate an off-
highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle knowing that the ownership
information related to the motorcycle or vehicle has not been entered into the
automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of Common Pleas.
      (2)   Operate in this municipality an off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle if a certificate of title to the off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle has been issued and then has been canceled.
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title upon cancellation of it
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed
in R.C. Chapter 4519.
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas as provided in R.C. Chapter 4519, in case of the destruction or
dismantling of, or change in, the off- highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle described in the certificate of title.
      (5)   Violate any provision of R.C. §§ 4519.51 to 4519.70 for which no
penalty is otherwise provided or any lawful rules adopted pursuant to those
sections.
      (6)   Operate in this state an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle knowing that the certificate of title to or ownership of the motorcycle
or vehicle as otherwise reflected in the automated title processing system has
been canceled.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $200, or
imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.66)
§ 446.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 448: WATERCRAFT
Section
   
448.01   Definitions; applicability
   
448.02   Flashing lights prohibited; exceptions
   
448.03   Siren prohibited; exceptions
   
448.04   Regulations for operation of powercraft of more than ten horsepower
   
448.05   Restrictions on child operators; duty of supervisory adult
   
448.06   Reckless operation; maintaining sufficient control; wakes restricted
   
448.07   Unsafe conditions
   
448.08   Marking of bathing and vessel areas
   
448.09   Mooring prohibited in certain areas
   
448.10   Operating under influence of alcohol or drugs prohibited
   
448.11   Implied consent
   
448.12   Incapacitated operators prohibited
   
448.13   Water skiing confined to ski zones
   
448.14   Observer required when towing skier
   
448.15   Water skiing after dark prohibited
   
448.16   Personal flotation device required for towed person
   
448.17   Ski jumps prohibited
   
448.18   Permit for special water events
   
448.19   Sale of single celled inflatable vessels prohibited
   
448.20   Sitting, standing, walking on moving vessels restricted
   
448.21   Engine warm-up required
   
448.22   Personal flotation devices for children under ten
   
448.23   Operation without personal flotation devices prohibited
   
448.24   Distress signal or flag required
   
448.25   Anchor requirements
   
448.26   Specification for fire extinguishers
   
448.27   Backfire flame control device required
   
448.28   Ventilation requirement on powercraft
   
448.29   Abandonment of junk vessels or outboard motors
   
448.30   Exhaust muffler required; noise levels; exceptions
   
448.31   Safety equipment on rental vessels
   
448.32   Capacity plate
   
448.33   Dwellings; sanitary systems
   
448.34   Prima facie evidence of negligence
   
448.35   Requirements for operating personal watercraft
   
448.36   Numbering
   
448.37   Registration
   
448.38   Altering of serial numbers; false information prohibited
   
448.39   Accident reports
   
448.40   Enforcement
   
448.41   Certificate of title; exceptions
   
448.42   Manufacturer’s or importer’s certificate
   
448.43   Prohibitions
   
448.44   Permanently displayed hull identification number
   
448.45   Firearms offenses; signaling devices
   
448.46   Tampering with navigation aid or vessel prohibited
   
448.99   Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Polluting watercourses, see §
660.04
   Unauthorized use of a vehicle, see §
642.04
   Watercraft, see R.C. Chs. 1547 and 1548
§ 448.01 DEFINITIONS; APPLICABILITY.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CANOE. A paddlecraft that is normally an open, narrow vessel of
shallow draft, typically pointed at both ends and propelled by its occupants
through the use of paddles while kneeling or sitting on a raised seat,
including a flat-backed canoe and a racing canoe.
      (2)   COAST GUARD APPROVED. Bearing an approval number assigned by the
United States Coast Guard.
      (3)   CONDITIONAL APPROVAL. A personal flotation device approval that has
one or more conditions with which the user must comply in order for the device
to be considered appropriate for meeting the requirements for personal
flotation devices for the vessel on which it is being used.
      (4)   DIVER’S FLAG. A red flag not less than one foot square having a
diagonal white stripe extending from the masthead to the opposite lower corner
that when displayed indicates that divers are in the water.
      (5)   DRUG OF ABUSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4506.01.
      (6)   ELECTRONIC. Includes electrical, digital, magnetic, optical,
electromagnetic, or any other form of technology that entails capabilities
similar to these technologies.
      (7)   ELECTRONIC RECORD. A record generated, communicated, received, or
stored by electronic means for use in an information system or for transmission
from one information system to another.
      (8)   ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE. A signature in electronic form attached to or
logically associated with an electronic record.
      (9)   IDLE SPEED. The slowest possible speed needed to maintain steerage
or maneuverability.
      (10)   IMPOUNDMENT. The reservoir created by a dam or other artificial
barrier across a watercourse that causes water to be stored deeper than and
generally beyond the banks of the natural channel of the watercourse during
periods of normal flow, but does not include water stored behind rock piles,
rock riffle dams, and low channel dams where the depth of water is less than
ten feet above the channel bottom and is essentially confined within the banks
of the natural channel during periods of normal stream flow.
      (11)   INFLATABLE WATERCRAFT. Any vessel constructed of rubber, canvas,
or other material that is designed to be inflated with any gaseous substance,
constructed with two or more air cells, and operated as a vessel. An inflatable
watercraft propelled by a motor is a powercraft. An inflatable watercraft
propelled by a sail is a sailboat. An inflatable watercraft propelled by human
muscular effort utilizing a paddle or pole is a paddlecraft. An inflatable
watercraft propelled by human muscular effort utilizing an oar with the aid of
a fulcrum provided by oarlocks, tholepins, crutches, or similar arrangements is
a rowboat.
      (12)   IN OPERATION. In reference to a vessel means that the vessel is
being navigated or otherwise used on the waters in this state.
      (13)   KAYAK. A paddlecraft that is typically pointed at both ends and is
propelled by human muscular effort by one or more seated individuals who use a
double-bladed paddle, including an open kayak with an open deck for operator
seating, an enclosed kayak designed to enclose an occupant within a cockpit, a
tandem kayak designed for multiple occupants, and a racing kayak.
      (14)   LAW ENFORCEMENT VESSEL. Any vessel used in law enforcement or
under the command of a law enforcement officer.
      (15)   MUFFLER. An acoustical suppression device or system that is
designed and installed to abate the sound of exhaust gases emitted from an
internal combustion engine and that prevents excessive or unusual noise.
      (16)   NAVIGABLE WATERS. Waters that come under the jurisdiction of the
Department of the Army of the United States and any waterways within or
adjacent to this state, except inland lakes having neither a navigable inlet
nor outlet.
      (17)   NO WAKE. Has the same meaning as IDLE SPEED.
      (18)   OPERATOR. Includes any person who uses, navigates, employs, or has
under the person’s control a vessel, or vessel and detachable motor, on the
waters in this state.
      (19)   OWNER. Includes any person, other than a secured party, who claims
lawful possession of a vessel by virtue of legal title or equitable interest
therein that entitled the person to use or possess the vessel, including a
person entitled to use or possess a vessel subject to a security interest in
another person, but does not include a lessee under a lease not intended as a
security.
      (20)   PADDLECRAFT. Any type of canoe, kayak, paddleboard, or other
vessel powered only by its occupants using a single or double-bladed paddle as
a lever without the aid of a fulcrum provided by oarlocks, tholepins, crutches,
or similar mechanisms.
      (21)   PERFORMANCE TYPE. The in-water performance classification of a
personal flotation device as determined by the United States Coast Guard.
      (22)   PERSON. Includes any legal entity defined as a person in R.C. §
1.59 and any body politic, except the United States and this state, and
includes any agent, trustee, executor, receiver, assignee, or other
representative thereof.
      (23)   PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE. A United States Coast Guard approved
personal safety device designed to provide buoyancy to support a person in the
water.
      (24)   PERSONAL WATERCRAFT. A vessel, less than 16 feet in length, that
is propelled by a water-jet pump or other machinery and designed to be operated
by an individual sitting, standing, or kneeling on the vessel rather than by an
individual sitting or standing inside the vessel.
      (25)   POWERCRAFT. Any vessel propelled by machinery, fuel, rockets, or
similar device.
      (26)   ROWBOAT. An open vessel, other than a paddlecraft, that is
designed to be rowed and that is propelled by human muscular effort by oars and
upon which no mechanical propulsion device, electric motor, internal combustion
engine, or sail has been affixed or is used for the operation of the vessel.
The term includes a racing shell and a rowing skull regardless of length or
construction.
      (27)   RULES. Rules adopted by the Chief of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft under R.C. Chapter 1547, unless the context indicates otherwise.
      (28)   SAILBOAT. Any vessel, equipped with mast and sails, dependent upon
the wind to propel it in the normal course of operation. A vessel with sail as
its primary method of propulsion and mechanical propulsion as its secondary
method of propulsion is an auxiliary sail. Any sailboat being propelled by
mechanical power, whether under sail or not, is deemed a powercraft and subject
to all laws and rules governing powercraft operation.
      (29)   SEWAGE. Human body wastes and the wastes from toilets and other
receptacles intended to receive or retain body waste.
      (30)   THROWABLE PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE. A device that is intended to
be thrown to a person in the water. The phrase includes a personal flotation
device marked as TYPE IV or TYPE V WITH TYPE IV PERFORMANCE. The phrase does
not include a wearable personal flotation device unless it is specifically
marked otherwise.
      (31)   TOWED WATERSPORT. Any activity that involves being towed by or
riding in the wake of a recreational vessel, including both of the following:
         A.   Riding or attempting to ride on one or more water skis, a
wakeboard, a surfboard, an inflatable device, or any other device manufactured
or used for the purpose of being towed by a recreational vessel;
         B.   Engaging or attempting to engage in barefoot skiing or
parasailing.
      (32)   TYPE ONE PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE. A device that is designed to
turn an unconscious person floating in water from a face downward position to a
vertical or slightly face upward position and that has at least nine kilograms,
approximately 20 pounds, of buoyancy.
      (33)   TYPE TWO PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE. A device that is designed to
turn an unconscious person in the water from a face downward position to a
vertical or slightly face upward position and that has at least seven
kilograms, approximately 15.4 pounds, of buoyancy.
      (34)   TYPE THREE PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE. A device that is designed to
keep a conscious person in a vertical or slightly face upward position and that
has at least seven kilograms, approximately 15.4 pounds, of buoyancy.
      (35)   TYPE FOUR PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE. A device that is designed to
be thrown to a person in the water and not worn and that has at least 7.5
kilograms, approximately 16.5 pounds, of buoyancy.
      (36)   TYPE FIVE PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE. A device that, unlike other
personal flotation devices, has limitations on its approval by the United
States Coast Guard, including, without limitation, any of the following:
         A.   A designation that states the device is approved only for use
while participating in specific activities;
         B.   A designation that states the device is approved only for use by
an operator or passenger of specific types of vessels;
         C.   A designation that states the device is specifically approved as
a substitute for the type of personal flotation device required for use while
engaged in certain activities or as an operator or passenger of a vessel.
      (37)   VESSEL. Includes every description of craft, including
nondisplacement craft, multimodal craft, and submersibles, being used or
capable of being used as a means of transportation on water.
      (38)   VISIBLE. Means visible on a dark night with clear atmosphere.
      (39)   WATERCOURSE. A substantially natural channel with recognized banks
and bottom in which a flow of water occurs, with an average of at least ten
feet mean surface water width and at least five miles of length.
      (40)   WATERCRAFT.
         A.   Any of the following when used or capable of being used for
transportation on the water:
            1.   A vessel operated by machinery either permanently or
temporarily affixed;
            2.   A sailboat other than a sailboard;
            3.   An inflatable, manually propelled vessel that is required by
federal law to have a hull identification number meeting the requirements of
the United States Coast Guard;
            4.   A canoe, kayak, pedalboat, or rowboat;
            5.   Any of the following multimodal craft being operated on waters
in this state:
               a.   An amphibious vehicle;
               b.   A submersible;
               c.   An airboat or hovercraft.
            6.   A vessel that has been issued a certificate of documentation
with a recreational endorsement under 46 C.F.R. 67.
         B.   The term does not include ferries as referred to in R.C. Chapter
4583.
         C.   Watercraft subject to R.C. § 1547.54 are divided into five
classes as follows:
            1.   Class A: less than 16 feet in length;
            2.   Class 1: at least 16 feet, but less than 26 feet in length;
            3.   Class 2: At least 26 feet, but less than 40 feet in length;
            4.   Class 3: At least 40 feet, but less than 65 feet in length;
            5.   Class 4: At least 65 feet in length.
      (41)   WATERCRAFT DEALER. Any person who is regularly engaged in the
business of manufacturing, selling, displaying, offering for sale, or dealing
in vessels at an established place of business that is used primarily for the
selling, displaying, offering for sale, or dealing of vessels. The phrase does
not include a person who is a marine salvage dealer or any other person who
dismantles, salvages, or rebuilds vessels using used parts.
      (42)   WATERS IN THIS STATE. All streams, rivers, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, and other bodies of water, natural or human-made, that
are situated wholly or partially within this state or within its jurisdiction
and are used for recreational boating.
      (43)   WEARABLE PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE. A device that is intended to
be worn or otherwise attached to a person’s body. The phrase includes a
personal flotation device marked as “Type I”, “Type II”, “Type III”, “Type V
with Type II performance”, or “Type V with Type III performance”.
(R.C. § 1546.01)
   (b)   Unless otherwise provided, this chapter applies to all vessels
operating on the waters in this municipality. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed in contravention of any valid federal or state act or regulation, but
is in addition to the act or regulation where not inconsistent.
(R.C. § 1547.02)
§ 448.02 FLASHING LIGHTS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   No person shall install or use any intermittently flashing light of
any type or color on any vessel in use or operation on the waters in this
municipality, except in accordance with federal law.
   (b)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.03)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.03 SIREN PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   No person, except an authorized watercraft representative of the
federal government, the state or any of its political subdivisions shall use or
operate a siren on the waters in this municipality except for emergency
purposes.
   (b)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.04)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.04 REGULATIONS FOR OPERATION AND RENTAL OF POWERCRAFT OF MORE THAN TEN
HORSEPOWER.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2) of this section, no person
born on or after January 1, 1982, shall operate on the waters in this
municipality a powercraft powered by more than ten horsepower, unless the
operator successfully has completed either a safe boater course approved by the
National Association of State Boating Law Administrators or a proctored or
nonproctored proficiency examination that tests knowledge of information
included in the curriculum of such a course, and has received a certificate as
evidence of successful completion of the course or examination.
      (2)   Division (a)(1) of this section does not apply to an individual who
possesses valid merchant mariner credentials issued by the United States Coast
Guard in accordance with 46 C.F.R. 10.109 with at least one endorsement of
master or operator as defined in 46 C.F.R. § 10.107. Such an individual, while
operating any recreational vessel on the waters in this municipality, shall
carry onboard documentation of the merchant mariner credentials and required
endorsements and shall present the documentation to a natural resources officer
or law enforcement officer upon request.
      (3)   No person shall permit a powercraft to be operated in this
municipality in violation of division (a)(1) of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.05)
   (b)   A person born on or after January 1, 1982, who is operating on the
waters in this municipality a powercraft powered by more than ten horsepower
and who is stopped by a law enforcement officer in the enforcement of R.C.
Chapter 1547 or rules shall present to the law enforcement officer, not later
than 72 hours after being stopped, a certificate obtained by the person
pursuant to division (a) of this section prior to being stopped or proof of
holding such a certificate. Failure of the person to present the certificate or
proof of holding it within 72 hours constitutes prima facie evidence of a
violation of division (a) of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.051)
   (c)   No rental business shall lease, hire or rent a powercraft powered by
more than ten horsepower for operation on the waters in this municipality to a
person born on or after January 1, 1982, unless the person meets one of the
following requirements:
      (1)   The person signs a statement on the rental agreement or attached to
the rental agreement that the person has successfully completed a safe boater
course approved by the National Association of State Boating Law Administrators
or has successfully completed a proficiency examination as provided in division
(a) of this section.
      (2)   The person receives educational materials from the rental business
and successfully passes, with a score of 90% or better, an abbreviated
examination given by the rental business. The achievement of a passing score on
the examination shall be indicated on or attached to the powercraft rental
agreement.
   (d)   Any person born on or after January 1, 1982, operating or supervising
the operation of a leased, hired or rented powercraft shall:
      (1)   Meet the requirements for boater education of division (c) of this
section.
      (2)   Be named as an operator on the agreement that leases, hires or
rents the powercraft.
   (e)   The Division of Parks and Watercraft shall make available to all
watercraft rental businesses in the state boater safety educational materials
and an abbreviated examination that shall be used by the watercraft rental
business for the purposes of division (c)(2) of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.052)
   (f)   Whoever violates division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the violation is not related to a
collision, injury to a person, or damage to property and a misdemeanor of the
third degree if the violation is related to a collision, injury to a person, or
damage to property.
(R.C. § 1547.99(K))
   (g)   Whoever violates division (c) or (d) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
   (h)   The sentencing court, in addition to the penalty provided under this
section for a violation of this section or a rule adopted under it that
involves a powercraft powered by more than ten horsepower and that, in the
opinion of the court, involves a threat to the safety of persons or property,
shall order the offender to complete successfully a boating course approved by
the National Association of State Boating Law Administrators before the
offender is allowed to operate a powercraft powered by more than ten horsepower
on the waters in this state. Violation of a court order entered under this
division is punishable as contempt under R.C. Chapter 2705.
(R.C. § 1547.99(L))
§ 448.05 RESTRICTIONS ON CHILD OPERATORS; DUTY OF SUPERVISORY ADULT.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, no person under 16
years of age shall operate a personal watercraft on the waters in this
municipality. A person who is not less than 12 nor more than 15 years of age
may operate a personal watercraft if a supervising person 18 years of age or
older is aboard the personal watercraft and, in the case of a supervising
person born on or after January 1, 1982, if the supervising person holds a
certificate obtained under §
448.04(a) or, in the case of a rented powercraft, meets the requirements of §
448.04(c) and (d).
   (b)   No person under 12 years of age shall operate any vessel on the waters
in this municipality unless the person is under the direct visual and audible
supervision, during the operation, of a person who is 18 years of age or older.
This division does not apply to a personal watercraft, which shall be governed
by division (a) of this section, or to a powercraft, other than a personal
watercraft, powered by more than ten horsepower, which shall be governed by
division (c) of this section.
   (c)   No person under 12 years of age shall operate on the waters in this
municipality a powercraft, other than a personal watercraft, powered by more
than ten horsepower unless the person is under the direct visual and audible
supervision, during the operation, of a person 18 years of age or older who is
aboard the powercraft and, in the case of such a supervising person born on or
after January 1, 1982, who holds a certificate obtained under § 448.04(a) or,
in the case of a rented powercraft, meets the requirements of §
448.04(c) and (d).
   (d)   No supervising person 18 years of age or older shall permit any person
who is under the supervising person’s supervision and who is operating a vessel
on the waters in this municipality to violate any section of this chapter, R.C.
Chapter 1547 or a rule.
(R.C. § 1547.06)
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.06 RECKLESS OPERATION; MAINTAINING SUFFICIENT CONTROL; WAKES RESTRICTED.
   (a)   Reckless operation.
      (1)   Any person who operates any vessel or manipulates any water skis,
aquaplane or similar device on the waters in this municipality carelessly or
heedlessly, or in disregard of the rights or safety of any person, vessel or
property, or without due caution, at a rate of speed or in a manner so as to
endanger any person, vessel or property is guilty of reckless operation of the
vessel or other device.
      (2)   No person shall operate or permit the operation of a vessel in an
unsafe manner. A vessel shall be operated in a reasonable and prudent manner at
all times. Unsafe vessel operation includes, without limitation, any of the
following:
         A.   A vessel becoming airborne or completely leaving the water while
crossing the wake of another vessel at a distance of less than 100 feet, or at
an unsafe distance, from the vessel creating the wake;
         B.   Operating at such a speed and proximity to another vessel or to a
person attempting to ride on one or more water skis, surfboard, inflatable
device or similar device being towed by a vessel so as to require the operator
of either vessel to swerve or turn abruptly to avoid collision;
         C.   Operating less than 200 feet directly behind a person water
skiing or attempting to water ski;
         D.   Weaving through congested traffic.
(R.C. § 1547.07)
   (b)   Maintaining sufficient control. No person shall operate or permit the
operation of a vessel on the waters in this municipality without maintaining
sufficient control to avoid an incident that results in property damage,
physical injury, loss of life or any combination of them.
(R.C. § 1547.072)
   (c)   Wakes restricted.
      (1)   As used in this division (c), PUBLIC SERVICE means activities that
include but are not limited to escorting or patrolling special water events,
traffic control, salvage, firefighting, medical assistance, assisting disabled
vessels, and search and rescue.
      (2)   No person shall operate a vessel at a speed that creates a wake
within 100 feet of a stationary law enforcement vessel displaying at least one
flashing, oscillating or rotating light conforming with 33 C.F.R. 88.11.
      (3)   No person shall operate a vessel at a speed that creates a wake
within 100 feet of a vessel that is being used to provide public service and
that displays at least one flashing, oscillating or rotating light conforming
with 33 C.F.R. 88.12.
      (4)   No person shall permit any vessel to be operated on the waters in
this municipality in violation of this division (c).
(R.C. § 1547.132)
   (d)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates divisions (a) or (c) of this section without
causing injury to persons or damage to property is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(D))
      (2)   Whoever violates divisions (a) or (c) of this section causing
injury to persons or damage to property is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(E))
      (3)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section shall be subject to
the penalty provided in §
448.99.
§ 448.07 UNSAFE CONDITIONS.
   (a)   If a law enforcement officer observes a vessel being used and
determines that at least one of the unsafe conditions identified in division
(c) of this section is present and that an especially hazardous condition
exists, the officer may direct the operator of the vessel to take whatever
immediate and reasonable actions are necessary for the safety of the persons
aboard the vessel, including directing the operator to return the vessel to
mooring and remain there until the situation creating the hazardous condition
is corrected or has ended. For the purposes of this section, an ESPECIALLY
HAZARDOUS CONDITION is one in which a reasonably prudent person would believe
that the continued operation of a vessel would create a special hazard to the
safety of the persons aboard the vessel.
   (b)   The refusal by an operator of a vessel to terminate use of the vessel
after being ordered to do so by a law enforcement officer under division (a) of
this section is prima facie evidence of a violation of §
448.06.
   (c)   For the purposes of this section, any of the following is an unsafe
condition:
      (1)   Insufficient personal flotation devices;
      (2)   Insufficient fire extinguishers;
      (3)   Overloaded, insufficient freeboard for the water conditions in
which the vessel is operating;
      (4)   Improper display of navigation lights;
      (5)   Fuel leaks, including fuel leaking from either the engine or the
fuel system;
      (6)   Accumulation of or an abnormal amount of fuel in the bilges;
      (7)   Inadequate backfire flame control;
      (8)   Improper ventilation.
   (d)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   Foreign vessels temporarily using waters that are subject to the
jurisdiction of the United States;
      (2)   Military vessels, vessels owned by the state or a political
subdivision, or other public vessels, except those that are used for
recreation;
      (3)   A ship’s lifeboats, as defined in R.C. § 1548.01;
      (4)   Vessels that are solely commercial and that are carrying more than
six passengers for hire.
(R.C. § 1547.071)
§ 448.08 MARKING OF BATHING AND VESSEL AREAS.
   (a)   No person shall operate a vessel within or through a designated
bathing area or within or through any area that has been buoyed off designating
it as an area in which vessels are prohibited.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall operate a vessel at greater than idle speed or
at a speed that creates a wake under any of the following circumstances:
         A.   Within 300 feet of any marina, boat docking facility, boat
gasoline dock, launch ramp, recreational boat harbor or harbor entrance on Lake
Erie or on the Ohio River;
         B.   During the period from sunset to sunrise according to local time
within any water between the Dan Beard bridge and the Brent Spence bridge on
the Ohio River for any vessel not documented by the United States Coast Guard
as commercial;
         C.   Within any area buoyed or marked as a “no wake” area on the
waters in this municipality.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply in either of the
following places:
         A.   An area designated by the Chief of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft unless it is marked by a buoy or sign as a “no wake” or “idle speed”
area;
         B.   Within any water between the Dan Beard bridge and the Brent
Spence bridge on the Ohio River when the United States Coast Guard has
authorized the holding of a special event of a community nature on that water.
   (c)   No person shall operate a vessel in any area of restricted or
controlled operation in violation of the designated restriction.
   (d)   No person shall operate a vessel within 300 feet of an official
diver’s flag unless the person is tendering the diving operation.
   (e)   (1)   All areas of restricted or controlled operation as described in
division (a) of this section or as provided for in §
448.13 or R.C. §§ 1547.16 or 1547.61 shall be marked by a buoy or sign
designating the restriction. All waters surrounded by or lying between such a
buoy or sign and the closest shoreline are thereby designated as an area in
which the designated restrictions shall apply in the operation of any vessel.
      (2)   Markings on buoys designating areas of restricted or controlled
operation shall be so spaced as to show all around the horizon. Lineal spacing
between the buoys shall be such that under normal conditions of visibility any
buoy shall be readily visible from the next adjacent buoy. No colors or
symbols, except as provided for in rules, shall be used on buoys or signs for
marking closed or controlled areas of boating waters.
      (3)   Any state department, conservancy district or political subdivision
having jurisdiction and control of impounded boating waters may place such
buoys or signs on its waters. Any political subdivision may apply to the Chief
of the Division of Parks and Watercraft for permission to place such buoys or
signs on other waters within its territorial limits. No person shall place or
cause to be placed a regulatory buoy or sign on, into or along the waters in
this municipality unless the person has complied with all the provisions of
this chapter and R.C. Chapter 1547.
   (f)   No person shall enter, operate a vessel that enters or allow a vessel
to enter a federally- declared security zone as defined in 33 C.F.R. Chapter 1,
subparts 6.01-1, 6.01-2, 6.01-3, 6.01-4, 6.01-5, 6.04-1, 6.04-5, 6.04-6, 6.04-
7 and 6.04-8.
   (g)   No person shall permit any vessel to be operated on the waters in this
municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.08)
   (h)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) or (g) of this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (f) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(B))
§ 448.09 MOORING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREAS.
   (a)   No person shall moor or anchor any vessel in a designated speed zone
or water ski zone. No person, unless in distress and no other vessel is
endangered thereby, shall moor to, anchor to or tie up to any marker, aid,
buoy, light or other aid to navigation.
   (b)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.09)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.10 OPERATING UNDER INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL OR DRUGS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall operate or be in physical control of any vessel
underway or shall manipulate any water skis, aquaplane or similar device on the
waters in this municipality if, at the time of the operation, control or
manipulation, any of the following applies:
      (1)    The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
a combination of them;
      (2)   The person has a concentration of 0.08% or more by weight of
alcohol per unit volume in the person’s whole blood;
      (3)   The person has a concentration of 0.096% or more by weight per unit
volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or plasma;
      (4)   The person has a concentration of 0.11 grams or more by weight of
alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine;
      (5)   The person has a concentration of 0.08 grams or more by weight of
alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath.
      (6)   Except as provided in division (h) of this section, the person has
a concentration of any of the following controlled substances or metabolites of
a controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or
urine that equals or exceeds any of the following:
         A.   The person has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s
urine of at least 500 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter
of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
         B.   The person has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s urine
of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s urine or
has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma of at least 50 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.
         C.   The person has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine metabolite per milliliter
of the person’s urine or has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of
cocaine metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.
         D.   The person has a concentration of heroin in the person’s urine of
at least 2,000 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s urine or has
a concentration of heroin in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma
of at least 50 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s whole blood
or blood serum or plasma.
         E.   The person has a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl
morphine) in the person’s urine of at least ten nanograms of heroin metabolite
(6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a
concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s whole blood
or blood serum or plasma.
         F.   The person has a concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s urine of
at least 25 nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a
concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of
at least ten nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma.
         G.   The person has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s urine
of at least ten nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the person’s urine or
has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma of at least two nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
         H.   The State Board of Pharmacy has adopted a rule pursuant to R.C. §
4729.041 that specifies the amount of salvia divinorum and the amount of
salvinorin A that constitute concentrations of salvia divinorum and salvinorin
A in a person’s urine, in a person’s whole blood, or in a person’s blood serum
or plasma at or above which the person is impaired for purposes of operating or
being in physical control of any vessel underway or manipulating any water
skis, aquaplane or similar device on the waters of this state, the rule is in
effect, and the person has a concentration of salvia divinorum or salvinorin A
of at least that amount so specified by rule in the person’s urine, in the
person’s whole blood, or in the person’s blood serum or plasma.
         I.   Either of the following applies:
            1.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse,
or a combination of them, and, as measured by gas chromatography mass
spectrometry, the person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the
person’s urine of at least 15 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter
of the person’s urine or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least five nanograms of
marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum
or plasma.
            2.   As measured by gas chromatography mass spectrometry, the
person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person’s urine of at
least 35 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s urine
or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
         J.   The person has a concentration of methamphetamine in the person’s
urine of at least 500 nanograms of methamphetamine per milliliter of the
person’s urine or has a concentration of methamphetamine in the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of methamphetamine per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
         K.   The person has a concentration of phencyclidine in the person’s
urine of at least 25 nanograms of phencyclidine per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of phencyclidine in the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of phencyclidine per milliliter
of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
   (b)   No person under 21 years of age shall operate or be in physical
control of any vessel underway or shall manipulate any water skis, aquaplane or
similar device on the waters in this municipality if, at the time of the
operation, control or manipulation, any of the following applies:
      (1)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02% but less than
0.08% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood;
      (2)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.03% but less than
0.096% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or
plasma;
      (3)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.028 grams, but less
than 0.11 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine;
      (4)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02 grams, but less
than 0.08 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath.
   (c)   In any proceeding arising out of one incident, a person may be charged
with a violation of division (a)(1) and a violation of division (b)(1), (b)(2),
(b)(3) or (b)(4) of this section, but the person shall not be convicted of more
than one violation of those divisions.
   (d)   (1)   A.   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding
for a violation of division (a) or (b) of this section or for an equivalent
offense that is watercraft-related, the result of any test of any blood, oral
fluid, or urine withdrawn and analyzed at any health care provider, as defined
in R.C. § 2317.02, may be admitted with expert testimony to be considered with
any other relevant and competent evidence in determining the guilt or innocence
of the defendant.
         B.   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (a) or (b) of this section or for an equivalent offense
that is watercraft-related, the court may admit evidence on the presence and
concentration of alcohol, drugs of abuse, controlled substances, metabolites of
a controlled substance, or a combination of them in the defendant's or child's
whole blood, blood serum or plasma, urine, oral fluid, or breath at the time of
the alleged violation as shown by chemical analysis of the substance withdrawn,
or specimen taken within three hours of the time of the alleged violation. The
three-hour time limit specified in this division regarding the admission of
evidence does not extend or affect the two-hour time limit specified in R.C. §
1547.111(C), or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, as the
maximum period of time during which a person may consent to a chemical test or
tests as described in that section. The court may admit evidence on the
presence and concentration of alcohol, drugs of abuse, or a combination of them
as described in this division when a person submits to a blood, breath, urine,
oral fluid, or other bodily substance test at the request of a law enforcement
officer under R.C. § 1547.111, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, or a blood or urine sample is obtained pursuant to a search warrant.
Only a physician, a registered nurse, an emergency medical technician-
intermediate, an emergency medical technician-paramedic, or a qualified
technician, chemist, or phlebotomist shall withdraw blood for the purpose of
determining the alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled
substance, or combination content of the whole blood, blood serum, or blood
plasma. This limitation does not apply to the taking of breath, oral fluid, or
urine specimens. A person authorized to withdraw blood under this division may
refuse to withdraw blood under this division if, in that person's opinion, the
physical welfare of the defendant or child would be endangered by withdrawing
blood.
         C.   The whole blood, blood serum or plasma, urine, oral fluid, or
breath withdrawn under division (d)(1)B. of this section shall be analyzed in
accordance with methods approved by the Director of Health by an individual
possessing a valid permit issued by the Director pursuant to R.C. § 3701.143.
      (2)   In a criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (a) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is
watercraft-related, if there was at the time the bodily substance was taken a
concentration of less than the applicable concentration of alcohol specified
for a violation of division (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), or (a)(5) of this section
or less than the applicable concentration of a listed controlled substance or a
listed metabolite of a controlled substance specified for a violation of
division (a)(6) of this section, that fact may be considered with other
competent evidence in determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant or in
making an adjudication for the child. This division does not limit or affect a
criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of division
(b) of this section or for a violation of a prohibition that is substantially
equivalent to that division.
      (3)   A.   Upon the request of the person who was tested, the results of
the chemical test shall be made available to the person or the person's
attorney immediately upon completion of the test analysis.
         B.   If the chemical test was administered pursuant to division (d)
(1)B. of this section, the person tested may have a physician, registered
nurse, or qualified technician, chemist, or phlebotomist of the person's own
choosing administer a chemical test or tests in addition to any administered at
the direction of a law enforcement officer, and shall be so advised. The
failure or inability to obtain an additional test by a person shall not
preclude the admission of evidence relating to the test or tests taken at the
direction of a law enforcement officer.
   (e)   (1)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (a) or (b) of this section, of a municipal ordinance
relating to operating or being in physical control of any vessel underway or to
manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or similar device on the waters of this
state while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination
of them, or of a municipal ordinance relating to operating or being in physical
control of any vessel underway or to manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or
similar device on the waters of this state with a prohibited concentration of
alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine, if a law
enforcement officer has administered a field sobriety test to the operator or
person found to be in physical control of the vessel underway involved in the
violation or the person manipulating the water skis, aquaplane, or similar
device involved in the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing
evidence that the officer administered the test in substantial compliance with
the testing standards for reliable, credible, and generally accepted field
sobriety tests for vehicles that were in effect at the time the tests were
administered, including but not limited to any testing standards then in effect
that have been set by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, that
by their nature are not clearly inapplicable regarding the operation or
physical control of vessels underway or the manipulation of water skis,
aquaplanes, or similar devices, all of the following apply:
         A.   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered.
         B.   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field sobriety
test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal prosecution
or juvenile court proceeding.
         C.   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
division (e)(1)A. or (e)(1)B. of this section and if the testimony or evidence
is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the testimony
or evidence, and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the trier of
fact considers to be appropriate.
      (2)   Division (e)(1) of this section does not limit or preclude a court,
in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by
probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division,
from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by
division (e)(1) of this section.
   (f)   (1)   Subject to division (f)(3) of this section, in any criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of division (a) or (b)
of this section or for an equivalent offense that is substantially equivalent
to either of those divisions, the court shall admit as prima facie evidence a
laboratory report from any laboratory personnel issued a permit by the
Department of Health authorizing an analysis as described in this division that
contains an analysis of the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine
or other bodily substance tested and that contains all of the information
specified in this division. The laboratory report shall contain all of the
following:
         A.   The signature, under oath, of any person who performed the
analysis;
         B.   Any findings as to the identity and quantity of alcohol, a drug
of abuse, a controlled substance, a metabolite of a controlled substance, or a
combination of them that was found;
         C.   A copy of a notarized statement by the laboratory director or a
designee of the director that contains the name of each certified analyst or
test performer involved with the report, the analyst’s or test performer’s
employment relationship with the laboratory that issued the report, and a
notation that performing an analysis of the type involved is part of the
analyst’s or test performer’s regular duties;
         D.   An outline of the analyst’s or test performer’s education,
training and experience in performing the type of analysis involved and a
certification that the laboratory satisfies appropriate quality control
standards in general and, in this particular analysis, under rules of the
Department of Health.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding the admission
of evidence, a report of the type described in division (f)(1) of this section
is not admissible against the defendant or child to whom it pertains in any
proceeding, other than a preliminary hearing or a grand jury proceeding, unless
the prosecutor has served a copy of the report on the defendant’s or child’s
attorney or, if the defendant or child has no attorney, on the defendant or
child.
      (3)   A report of the type described in division (f)(1) of this section
shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents, identity or amount of any
substance if, within seven days after the defendant or child to whom the report
pertains or the defendant’s or child’s attorney receives a copy of the report,
the defendant or child or the defendant’s or child’s attorney demands the
testimony of the person who signed the report. The judge in the case may extend
the seven-day time limit in the interests of justice.
   (g)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, any physician,
registered nurse, emergency medical technician-intermediate, emergency medical
technician-paramedic, or qualified technician, chemist or phlebotomist who
withdraws blood from a person pursuant to this section, R.C. § 1547.111 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and a hospital, first-aid station
or clinic at which blood is withdrawn from a person pursuant to this section,
R.C. § 1547.111 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, is immune
from criminal and civil liability based upon a claim of assault and battery or
any other claim that is not a claim of malpractice, for any act performed in
withdrawing blood from the person. The immunity provided in this division also
extends to an emergency medical service organization that employs an emergency
medical technician-intermediate or an emergency medical technician-paramedic
who withdraws blood under this section. The immunity provided in this division
is not available to a person who withdraws blood if the person engages in
willful or wanton misconduct.
   (h)   Division (a)(6) of this section does not apply to a person who
operates or is in physical control of a vessel underway or manipulates any
water skis, aquaplane or similar device while the person has a concentration of
a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance
in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or
exceeds the amount specified in that division, if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
      (2)   The person injected, ingested or inhaled the controlled substance
in accordance with the health professional’s directions.
   (i)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   COCAINE and L.S.D. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2925.01.
      (2)   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE and MARIHUANA. Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 3719.01.
      (3)   EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-INTERMEDIATE and EMERGENCY MEDICAL
TECHNICIAN-PARAMEDIC. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4765.01.
      (4)   EQUIVALENT OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.181.
      (5)   EQUIVALENT OFFENSE THAT IS WATERCRAFT-RELATED. An equivalent
offense that is one of the following:
         (a)   A violation of division (a) of this section;
         (b)   A violation of a municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from
operating or being in physical control of any vessel underway or from
manipulating any water skis, aquaplane or similar device on the waters of this
state while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination
of them or prohibiting a person from operating or being in physical control of
any vessel underway or from manipulating any water skis, aquaplane or similar
device on the waters of this state with a prohibited concentration of alcohol,
a controlled substance or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine;
         (c)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
division (a) of this section;
         (d)   A violation of an existing or former law of this state that is
or was substantially equivalent to division (a) of this section.
      (6)   NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY ADMINISTRATION. Has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 4511.19.
      (7)   OPERATE. A vessel is being used on the waters in this state when
the vessel is not securely affixed to a dock or to shore or to any permanent
structure to which the vessel has the right to affix or that a vessel is not
anchored in a designated anchorage area or boat camping area that is
established by the United States Coast Guard, this state or a political
subdivision and in which the vessel has the right to anchor.
(R.C. § 1547.11)
   (j)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree and shall be punished as provided in division (j)(1), (j)(2) or (j)(3)
of this section.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (j)(2) or (j)(3) of this
section, the court shall sentence the offender to a jail term of three
consecutive days and may sentence the offender pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24 to a
longer jail term. In addition, the court shall impose upon the offender a fine
of not less than $150 nor more than $1,000. The court may suspend the execution
of the mandatory jail term of three consecutive days that it is required to
impose by this division (j)(1) if the court, in lieu of the suspended jail
term, places the offender under a community control sanction pursuant to R.C. §
2929.25 and requires the offender to attend, for three consecutive days, a
drivers’ intervention program that is certified pursuant to R.C. § 5119.38. The
court also may suspend the execution of any part of the mandatory jail term of
three consecutive days that it is required to impose by this division (j)(1) if
the court places the offender under a community control sanction pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.25 for part of the three consecutive days; requires the offender to
attend, for that part of the three consecutive days, a drivers’ intervention
program that is certified pursuant to R.C. § 5119.38; and sentences the
offender to a jail term equal to the remainder of the three consecutive days
that the offender does not spend attending the drivers’ intervention program.
The court may require the offender, as a condition of community control, to
attend and satisfactorily complete any treatment or education programs, in
addition to the required attendance at a drivers’ intervention program, that
the operators of the drivers’ intervention program determine that the offender
should attend and to report periodically to the court on the offender’s
progress in the programs. The court also may impose any other conditions of
community control on the offender that it considers necessary.
      (2)   If, within ten years of the offense, the offender has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of division (a) of this
section, R.C. § 1547.11(A) or one other equivalent offense, the court shall
sentence the offender to a jail term of ten consecutive days and may sentence
the offender pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24 to a longer jail term. In addition, the
court shall impose upon the offender a fine of not less than $150 nor more than
$1,000. In addition to any other sentence that it imposes upon the offender,
the court may require the offender to attend a drivers’ intervention program
that is certified pursuant to R.C. § 5119.38.
      (3)   If, within ten years of the offense, the offender has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to more than one violation or offense identified
in division (j)(2) of this section, the court shall sentence the offender to a
jail term of 30 consecutive days and may sentence the offender to a longer jail
term of not more than one year. In addition, the court shall impose upon the
offender a fine of not less than $150 nor more than $1,000. In addition to any
other sentence that it imposes upon the offender, the court may require the
offender to attend a drivers’ intervention program that is certified pursuant
to R.C. § 5119.38.
      (4)   Upon a showing that serving a jail term would seriously affect the
ability of an offender sentenced pursuant to division (j)(1), (j)(2) or (j)(3)
of this section to continue the offender’s employment, the court may authorize
that the offender be granted work release after the offender has served the
mandatory jail term of three, ten or 30 consecutive days that the court is
required by division (j)(1), (j)(2) or (j)(3) of this section to impose. No
court shall authorize work release during the mandatory jail term of three, ten
or 30 consecutive days that the court is required by division (j)(1), (j)(2) or
(j)(3) of this section to impose. The duration of the work release shall not
exceed the time necessary each day for the offender to commute to and from the
place of employment and the place in which the jail term is served and the time
actually spent under employment.
      (5)   Notwithstanding any section of the Ohio Revised Code that
authorizes the suspension of the imposition or execution of a sentence or the
placement of an offender in any treatment program in lieu of being imprisoned
or serving a jail term, no court shall suspend the mandatory jail term of ten
or 30 consecutive days required to be imposed by division (j)(2) or (j)(3) of
this section or place an offender who is sentenced pursuant to division (j)(2)
or (j)(3) of this section in any treatment program in lieu being imprisoned or
serving a jail term until after the offender has served the mandatory jail term
of ten or 30 consecutive days required to be imposed pursuant to division (j)
(2) or (j)(3) of this section. Notwithstanding any section of the Ohio Revised
Code that authorizes the suspension of the imposition or execution of a
sentence or the placement of an offender in any treatment program in lieu of
being imprisoned or serving a jail term, no court, except as specifically
authorized by division (j)(1) of this section, shall suspend the mandatory jail
term of three consecutive days required to be imposed by division (j)(1) of
this section or place an offender who is sentenced pursuant to division (j)(1)
of this section in any treatment program in lieu of being imprisoned or serving
a jail term until after the offender has served the mandatory jail term of
three consecutive days required to be imposed pursuant to division (j)(1) of
this section.
      (6)   For the purpose of this division (j) of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         A.   EQUIVALENT OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.181.
         B.   JAIL TERM and MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 2929.01.
(R.C. § 1547.99(G))
§ 448.11 IMPLIED CONSENT.
   (a)   (1)   A.   Any person who operates or is in physical control of a
vessel or manipulates any water skis, aquaplane, or similar device upon any
waters in this municipality shall be deemed to have given consent to a chemical
test or tests to determine the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance,
metabolite of a controlled substance, or combination content of the person's
whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine if arrested
for operating or being in physical control of a vessel or manipulating any
water skis, aquaplane, or similar device in violation of R.C. § 1547.11 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
         B.   The test or tests under division (a)(1)A. of this section shall
be administered at the request of a law enforcement officer having reasonable
grounds to believe the person was operating or in physical control of a vessel
or manipulating any water skis, aquaplane or similar device in violation of
R.C. § 1547.11 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance. The law
enforcement agency by which the officer is employed shall designate which test
or tests shall be administered.
      (2)   Any person who is dead or unconscious or who otherwise is in a
condition rendering the person incapable of refusal shall be deemed to have
consented as provided in division (a)(1) of this section, and the test or tests
may be administered, subject to R.C. §§ 313.12 to 313.16.
   (b)   (1)   If a law enforcement officer arrests a person for operating or
being in physical control of a vessel or manipulating any water skis, aquaplane
or similar device in violation of R.C. § 1547.11 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and if the person previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to two or more violations of § 1547.11(A) or other equivalent
offenses, the law enforcement officer shall request the person to submit, and
the person shall submit, to a chemical test or tests of the person's whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine for the purpose of
determining the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a
controlled substance, or combination content of the person's whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine. A law enforcement officer who
makes a request pursuant to this division that a person submit to a chemical
test or tests is not required to advise the person of the consequences of
refusing to submit to the test or tests and is not required to give the person
the form described in division (c) of this section, but the officer shall
advise the person at the time of the arrest that if the person refuses to take
a chemical test the officer may employ whatever reasonable means are necessary
to ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the person's whole
blood or blood serum or plasma. The officer shall also advise the person at the
time of the arrest that the person may have an independent chemical test taken
at the person's own expense. The advice shall be in written form prescribed by
the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft and shall be read to the
person. The form shall contain a statement that the form was shown to the
person under arrest and read to the person by the arresting officer. The
reading of the form shall be witnessed by one or more persons, and the
witnesses shall certify to this fact by signing the form. Divisions (a)(1)B.
and (a)(2) of this section apply to the administration of a chemical test or
tests pursuant to this division.
      (2)   If a person refuses to submit to a chemical test upon a request
made pursuant to division (b)(1) of this section, the law enforcement officer
who made the request may employ whatever reasonable means are necessary to
ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the person’s whole blood
or blood serum or plasma. A law enforcement officer who acts pursuant to this
division to ensure that a person submits to a chemical test of the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma is immune from criminal and civil
liability based upon a claim for assault and battery or any other claim for the
acts, unless the officer so acted with malicious purpose, in bad faith, or in a
wanton or reckless manner.
   (c)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, any person under
arrest for violating R.C. § 1547.11 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance shall be advised of the consequences of refusing to submit to a
chemical test or tests designated as provided in division (a) of this section.
The advice shall be in a written form prescribed by the Chief of the Division
of Parks and Watercraft and shall be read to the person. The form shall contain
a statement that the form was shown to the person under arrest and read to the
person by the arresting officer. The reading of the form shall be witnessed by
one or more persons, and the witnesses shall certify to this fact by signing
the form. The person must submit to the chemical test or tests, subsequent to
the request of the arresting officer, within two hours of the time of the
alleged violation, and if the person does not submit to the test or tests
within that two-hour time limit, the failure to submit automatically
constitutes a refusal to submit to the test or tests.
   (d)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, if a law
enforcement officer asks a person under arrest for violating R.C. § 1547.11 or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to submit to a chemical test or
tests as provided in division (a) of this section, if the arresting officer
advises the person of the consequences of the person’s refusal as provided in
division (c) of this section, and the person refuses to submit, no chemical
test shall be given. Upon receipt of a sworn statement of the officer that the
arresting law enforcement officer had reasonable grounds to believe the
arrested person violated R.C. § 1547.11 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance and that the person refused to submit to the chemical test upon the
request of the officer, and upon receipt of the form as provided in division
(d) of this section certifying that the arrested person was advised of the
consequences of the refusal, the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft
shall inform the person by written notice that the person is prohibited from
operating or being in physical control of a vessel, from manipulating any water
skis, aquaplane or similar device, and from registering any watercraft in
accordance with R.C. § 1547.54, for one year following the date of the alleged
violation. The suspension of these operation, physical control, manipulation
and registration privileges shall continue for the entire one-year period,
subject to review as provided in this section.
      (2)   If the person under arrest is the owner of the vessel involved in
the alleged violation, the law enforcement officer who arrested the person
shall seize the watercraft registration certificate and tags from the vessel
involved in the violation and forward them to the Chief of the Division of
Parks and Watercraft. The Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft shall
retain the impounded registration certificate and tags and shall impound all
other registration certificates and tags issued to the person in accordance
with R.C. §§ 1547.54 and 1547.57, for a period of one year following the date
of the alleged violation, subject to review as provided in this section.
      (3)   If the arrested person fails to surrender the registration
certificate because it is not on the person of the arrested person or in the
watercraft, the law enforcement officer who made the arrest shall order the
person to surrender it within 24 hours to the law enforcement officer or the
law enforcement agency that employs the law enforcement officer. If the person
fails to do so, the law enforcement officer shall notify the Chief of the
Division of Parks and Watercraft of that fact in the statement the officer
submits to the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft under this
division.
   (e)   Upon suspending a person’s operation, physical control, manipulation
and registration privileges in accordance with division (d) of this section,
the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft shall notify the person in
writing, at the person’s last known address, and inform the person that the
person may petition for a hearing in accordance with division (f) of this
section. If a person whose operation, physical control, manipulation and
registration privileges have been suspended petitions for a hearing or appeals
any adverse decision, the suspension shall begin at the termination of any
hearing or appeal unless the hearing or appeal results in a decision favorable
to the person.
   (f)   (1)   Any person who has been notified by the Chief of the Division of
Parks and Watercraft that the person is prohibited from operating or being in
physical control of a vessel or manipulating any water skis, aquaplane or
similar device and from registering any watercraft in accordance with R.C. §
1547.54, or who has had the registration certificate and tags of the person’s
watercraft impounded pursuant to division (d) of this section, within 20 days
of the notification or impoundment, may file a petition in the municipal court
or the county court, or if the person is a minor in juvenile court, with
jurisdiction over the place at which the arrest occurred, agreeing to pay the
cost of the proceedings and alleging error in the action taken by the Chief of
the Division of Parks and Watercraft under division (d) of this section or
alleging one or more of the matters within the scope of the hearing as provided
in this section, or both. The petitioner shall notify the Chief of the Division
of Parks and Watercraft of the filing of the petition and send the Chief of the
Division of Parks and Watercraft a copy of the petition.
      (2)   The scope of the hearing is limited to the issues of whether the
law enforcement officer had reasonable grounds to believe the petitioner was
operating or in physical control of a vessel or manipulating any water skis,
aquaplane or similar device in violation of R.C. § 1547.11 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, whether the petitioner was placed under arrest,
whether the petitioner refused to submit to the chemical test upon request of
the officer, and whether the petitioner was advised of the consequences of the
petitioner’s refusal.
   (g)   (1)   The Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft shall furnish
the court a copy of the affidavit as provided in division (c) of this section
and any other relevant information requested by the court.
      (2)   In hearing the matter and in determining whether the person has
shown error in the decision taken by the Chief of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft as provided in division (d) of this section, the court shall decide
the issue upon the relevant, competent and material evidence submitted by the
Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft or the person whose operation,
physical control, manipulation and registration privileges have been suspended.
In the proceedings, the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft shall be
represented by the prosecuting attorney of the county in which the petition is
filed if the petition is filed in a county court or juvenile court, except that
if the arrest occurred within a city or village within the jurisdiction of the
county court in which the petition is filed, the city director of law or
village solicitor of that city or village shall represent the Chief of the
Division of Parks and Watercraft. If the petition is filed in the municipal
court, the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft shall be represented
as provided in R.C. § 1901.34.
      (3)   If the court finds from the evidence submitted that the person has
failed to show error in the action taken by the Chief of the Division of Parks
and Watercraft under division (d) of this section or in one or more of the
matters within the scope of the hearing as provided in division (f) of this
section, or both, the court shall assess the cost of the proceeding against the
person and shall uphold the suspension of the operation, physical control, use
and registration privileges provided in division (d) of this section. If the
court finds that the person has shown error in the action taken by the Chief of
the Division of Parks and Watercraft under division (d) of this section or in
one or more of the matters within the scope of the hearing as provided in
division (f) of this section, or both, the cost of the proceedings shall be
paid out of the county treasury of the county in which the proceedings were
held, Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft shall reinstate the
operation, physical control, manipulation and registration privileges of the
person without charge, and the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft
shall return the registration certificate and tags, if impounded, without
charge.
      (4)   The court shall give information in writing of any action taken
under this section to the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft.
   (h)   At the end of any period of suspension or impoundment imposed under
this section, and upon request of the person whose operation, physical control,
use and registration privileges were suspended or whose registration
certificate and tags were impounded, the Chief of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft shall reinstate the person’s operation, physical control,
manipulation and registration privileges by written notice and return the
certificate and tags.
   (i)   No person who has received written notice from the Chief of the
Division of Parks and Watercraft that the person is prohibited from operating
or being in control of a vessel, from manipulating any water skis, aquaplane or
similar device, and from registering a watercraft, or who has had the
registration certificate and tags of the person’s watercraft impounded, in
accordance with division (d) of this section or R.C. § 1547.111(D), shall
operate or be in physical control of a vessel or manipulate any water skis,
aquaplane or similar device for a period of one year following the date of the
person’s alleged violation of R.C. § 1547.11 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 1547.111)
   (j)   Whoever violates division (i) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(B))
§ 448.12 INCAPACITATED OPERATORS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall operate any vessel if the person is so mentally or
physically incapacitated as to be unable to operate the vessel in a safe and
competent manner.
   (b)   No person shall permit any vessel to be operated on the waters in this
municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.12)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section without causing injury to persons or
damage to property is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(D))
   (d)   Whoever violates this section causing injury to persons or damage to
property is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(E))
§ 448.13 WATER SKIING CONFINED TO SKI ZONES.
   (a)   Except on the waters of the Ohio River or Lake Erie and immediately
connected harbors and bays, any person who rides or attempts to ride upon one
or more water skis, surfboard or similar device, or who engages or attempts to
engage in barefoot skiing, and any person who operates a vessel towing a person
riding or attempting to ride on one or more water skis, surfboard or similar
device, or engaging or attempting to engage in barefoot skiing, shall confine
that activity to the water area within a designated ski zone on all bodies of
water on which a ski zone has been established.
   (b)   On all bodies of water where no specific activity zones have been
established, the activities described in division (a) of this section shall be
confined to areas where the activities are not specifically restricted by this
chapter, R.C. Chapter 1547 and rules.
   (c)   Divisions (a) and (b) of this section do not apply to an activity
described in division (a) of this section if the vessel involved in the
activity is traveling at idle speed in a designated “no wake zone” and the
activity is not being conducted in any of the following areas:
      (1)   Within 300 feet of a gas dock, marina, launch ramp or harbor
entrance;
      (2)   Within a designated anchorage area, swim zone, boat swim zone or
boat camping area;
      (3)   Under a bridge or within 300 feet of a bridge underpass;
      (4)   Any area designated as a “no ski zone”.
   (d)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.14)
   (e)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.14 OBSERVER REQUIRED WHEN TOWING SKIER.
   (a)   Any person who operates a vessel towing any person riding or
attempting to ride upon one or more water skis or upon a surfboard or similar
device, or engaging or attempting to engage in barefoot skiing, on the waters
in this municipality shall have present in the vessel a person or persons other
than the operator, ten years of age or older, who shall at all times observe
the progress of the person being towed. The operator of the towing vessel shall
at all times observe the traffic pattern toward which the vessel is
approaching.
   (b)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.15)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.15 WATER SKIING AFTER DARK PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall ride or attempt to ride upon water skis, surfboard or
similar device, or engage or attempt to engage in barefoot skiing, or use or
operate any vessel to tow any person thereon on the waters in this municipality
during that period of the day between sunset and sunrise, except upon special
permit issued by the state department, conservancy district or political
subdivision having jurisdiction and control of the water.
(R.C. § 1547.16)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.16 PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE REQUIRED FOR TOWED PERSON.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, no person shall
engage in any form of towed watersports without wearing an adequate and
effective Coast Guard approved wearable personal flotation device specifically
designed for towed watersports, in good and serviceable condition and of
appropriate size, except upon special permit issued by one of the following
persons or entities that manages the waterway:
      (1)   The political subdivision having primary jurisdiction;
      (2)   The administrator of a federal agency;
      (3)   The director of a state agency;
      (4)   The board of directors of a conservancy district;
      (5)   Any other governing body having jurisdiction.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a person engaging or
attempting to engage in barefoot skiing if the person is wearing a wet suit
specifically designed for barefoot skiing that is in good and serviceable
condition and of appropriate size.
   (c)   No operator of a vessel shall allow any person who fails to comply
with division (a) or (b) of this section to engage in any form of towed
watersports.
(R.C. § 1547.18)
   (d)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.17 SKI JUMPS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall install or maintain any structure or inclined platform
known as a water ski jump on the waters in this municipality. No person shall
use any such platform or structure for the purpose of water ski jumping, except
upon special permit issued by the state department, conservancy district or
political subdivision having jurisdiction and control over the water.
(R.C. § 1547.19)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.18 PERMIT FOR SPECIAL WATER EVENTS.
   (a)   No person or organization shall conduct any race, regatta or other
special event upon the waters in this municipality without first obtaining
written permission, upon application not less than 30 days prior to the time of
the proposed race, regatta or event, of the federal agency, state department,
conservancy district or political subdivision having jurisdiction and control
over the waters. Any state department, conservancy district or political
subdivision may suspend its respective rules during a race, regatta or special
event. Nothing in this section shall be construed to mean that the operator of
a vessel competing in a specially authorized race, regatta or special event
shall not attempt to attain high speeds on a marked racing course.
   (b)   On any waters in this municipality over which no federal agency, state
department, conservancy district or political subdivision has jurisdiction and
control, no person or organization shall conduct any race, regatta or other
special event without first obtaining written permission, upon application not
less than 30 days prior to the time of the proposed race, regatta or event, of
the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft. The Chief of the Division of
Parks and Watercraft may, after determining that the public safety will be
adequately protected, grant written permission for holding the race, regatta or
special event. This section does not apply to privately owned lakes or ponds
nor to canoes or rowboats.
(R.C. § 1547.20)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.19 SALE OF SINGLE CELLED INFLATABLE VESSELS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall use or offer for use on the waters in this
municipality any inflatable vessel made of canvas, rubber, synthetic rubber or
vinyl plastic unless the inflatable vessel is of multiple air cell or
compartment construction and is capable of remaining afloat if one air cell or
compartment is punctured or collapsed.
(R.C. § 1547.21)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.20 SITTING, STANDING, WALKING ON MOVING VESSELS RESTRICTED.
   (a)   No occupant of any vessel underway on the waters in this municipality
shall sit, stand or walk upon any portion of the vessel not specifically
designed for that movement, except when immediately necessary for the safe and
reasonable navigation or operation of the vessel. No operator of a vessel
underway on the waters in this municipality shall allow any occupant of the
vessel to sit, stand or walk on any portion of the vessel underway not
specifically designed for that use, except when immediately necessary for the
safe and reasonable navigation or operation of the vessel.
   (b)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.22)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.21 ENGINE WARM-UP REQUIRED.
   (a)   The pilot or engineer of any powercraft for hire to carry passengers
shall not permit passengers to come aboard before the engine of the powercraft
has been permitted to run for a minimum of two minutes.
(R.C. § 1547.23)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.22 PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICES FOR CHILDREN UNDER TEN.
   (a)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel under 18
feet in length while there is present in the vessel any person under ten years
of age, not wearing a Coast Guard approved wearable personal flotation device
in good and serviceable condition of appropriate size securely attached to the
person under ten years of age.
(R.C. § 1547.24)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.23 OPERATION WITHOUT PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel, other
than a vessel exempted by rules, on the waters in this municipality:
      (1)   That is 16 feet or greater in length without carrying aboard one
wearable personal flotation device for each person aboard and one throwable
personal flotation device;
      (2)   That is less than 16 feet in length, including paddlecraft of any
length, without carrying aboard one wearable personal flotation device for each
person aboard.
   (b)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any commercial vessel
on the waters in this municipality:
      (1)   That is less than 40 feet in length and is not carrying persons for
hire without carrying aboard at least one wearable personal flotation device
for each person aboard;
      (2)   That is carrying persons for hire or is 40 feet in length or longer
and is not carrying persons for hire without carrying aboard at least one type
one wearable personal flotation device for each person aboard that complies
with all of the following:
         A.   It is designed to support the person wearing the wearable
personal flotation device in the water in an upright or slightly backward
position and provides support to the head so that the face of an unconscious or
exhausted person is held above the water.
         B.   It is capable of turning the person wearing the wearable personal
flotation device, upon entering the water, to a safe flotation position.
         C.   It is capable of being worn inside out.
         D.   It is capable of supporting a minimum of 22 pounds in fresh water
for 48 hours.
         E.   It is a highly visible color.
      (3)   That is 26 feet in length or longer without carrying aboard at
least one throwable personal flotation device in addition to the applicable
requirements of divisions (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section.
   (c)   Each personal flotation device carried aboard a vessel, including a
commercial vessel, pursuant to this section shall be Coast Guard approved and
in good and serviceable condition, of appropriate size for the wearer, and
readily accessible to each person aboard the vessel at all times, and used in
accordance with any requirements on its approval label or in accordance with
requirements in its owner’s manual if the approval label refers to such a
manual.
   (d)   A personal flotation device shall not be used in a manner that is
inconsistent with any limitations or restrictions related to federal approval
under 46 C.F.R. 160 or special instructions for use provided by the
manufacturer. Appropriate use shall be indicated on the label of an approved
personal flotation device.
   (e)   As used in this section, COMMERCIAL VESSEL means any vessel used in
the carriage of any person or property for a valuable consideration whether
flowing directly or indirectly from the owner, partner, or agent or any other
person interested in the vessel. The phrase does not include any vessel that is
manufactured or used primarily for noncommercial use or that is leased, rented,
or chartered to another for noncommercial use.
(R.C. § 1547.25)
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(F))
§ 448.24 DISTRESS SIGNAL OR FLAG REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall operate on the waters of Lake Erie or the immediately
connecting bays, harbors and anchorage areas at any time a vessel that is 16 or
more feet in length or any vessel carrying six or fewer passengers for hire
without carrying Coast Guard approved visual distress signals for both day and
night use.
   (b)   No person shall operate upon the waters of Lake Erie or the
immediately connecting bays, harbors and anchorage areas during the period from
sunset to sunrise according to local time any of the following without carrying
Coast Guard approved visual distress signals for night use:
      (1)   A vessel less than 16 feet in length;
      (2)   A vessel competing in an organized marine parade, race, regatta or
similar event;
      (3)   A manually propelled vessel;
      (4)   A sailboat less than 26 feet in length with completely open
construction and without propulsion machinery.
   (c)   No person shall operate a vessel on the waters in this state other
than Lake Erie or the immediately connecting bays, harbors and anchorage areas
unless the vessel carries either a distress flag at least two feet square and
international orange in color or a Coast Guard approved daytime distress
signal.
   (d)   No person shall display any distress signal unless a vessel or a
person is in distress and in need of help.
   (e)   Divisions (a) and (c) of this section do not apply to any of the
following:
      (1)   Vessels competing in an organized marine parade, race, regatta or
similar event;
      (2)   Manually propelled vessels;
      (3)   Sailboats less than 26 feet in length with completely open
construction and without propulsion machinery.
   (f)   The distress signals required by this section shall be in good and
serviceable condition, readily accessible, and of the type and quantities
required by regulations adopted under 46 U.S.C. 4302, as amended.
   (g)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.251)
   (h)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.25 ANCHOR REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   All watercraft, except sailboats less than 16 feet long having a
cockpit depth of less than 12 inches and except canoes, shall carry an anchor
and line of sufficient weight and length to anchor the watercraft securely. The
Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft, by rule, may exempt other types
of watercraft from this section after determining that carrying such an anchor
and line would constitute a hazard.
   (b)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any watercraft on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.26)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.26 SPECIFICATION FOR FIRE EXTINGUISHERS.
   (a)   Except those powercraft less than 26 feet in length designed for use
with an outboard motor, of open construction that is not capable of entrapping
explosive or flammable gases or vapors, and not carrying passengers for hire,
all powercraft shall carry fire extinguishers as prescribed in this section.
The fire extinguishers shall be capable of extinguishing a burning gasoline
fire, shall be in such condition as to be ready for immediate and effective
use, and shall comply with minimum or higher standards for such extinguishers
then prevailing as prescribed by the United States coast guard.
   (b)   Except for vessels subject to exemptions listed in 33 C.F.R. § 175.380
or § 175.390, any vessel not equipped with fixed fire extinguishing systems in
machinery spaces shall carry the following:
      (1)   Class A and Class 1 powercraft shall carry at least one 5-
B portable fire extinguisher.
      (2)   Class 2 powercraft shall carry at least two 5-B portable fire
extinguishers or at least one 20-B portable fire extinguisher.
      (3)   Class 3 powercraft shall carry at least three 5-B portable fire
extinguishers, or at least one 5-B portable and one 20-B portable fire
extinguishers.
      (4)   Class 4 powercraft shall carry the number and type of 20-B portable
fire extinguishers specified by gross tonnage as prescribed by 33 C.F.R. Part
175, Subpart E.
   (c)   All portable and semi-portable fire extinguishers for use on a vessel
shall:
      (1)   Be on board the vessel and be readily accessible;
      (2)   Be of an approved type;
      (3)   Not be expired or appear to have been previously used;
      (4)   Be maintained in good and serviceable working condition. As used in
division (c)(4) of this section, “good and serviceable working condition” means
all of the following:
         A.   If the fire extinguisher has a pressure gauge or indicator, the
reading or indicator is in the operable range or position;
         B.   The fire extinguisher’s lock pin is firmly in place;
         C.   The fire extinguisher’s discharge nozzle is clean and free of
obstruction;
         D.   The fire extinguisher does not show visible signs of significant
corrosion or damage.
   (d)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated on the waters in this
municipality any powercraft that does not comply with this section.
(R.C. 1547.27)
   (e)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. 1547.99(C))
§ 448.27 BACKFIRE FLAME CONTROL DEVICE REQUIRED.
   (a)   Every gasoline engine installed in a vessel after April 25, 1940,
except an outboard motor, shall be equipped with an acceptable device to
control backfire flame. The device shall comply with all of the following:
      (1)   Be securely attached to the air intake with a flame-tight
connection;
      (2)   Be in proper working order;
      (3)   Be Coast Guard approved or comply with either SAE J1928 or UL 1111;
      (4)   Be marked to indicate approval or compliance under division (a)(3)
of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.28)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.28 VENTILATION REQUIREMENT ON POWERCRAFT.
   (a)   All powercraft using gasoline or other liquid fuel having a flashpoint
of less than 110° F. shall be provided with ventilation as follows:
      (1)   At least two ventilators fitted with cowls or their equivalent for
the purpose of properly and efficiently ventilating the bilges of every engine
and fuel tank compartment in order to remove any inflammable or explosive
gases;
      (2)   Any type of ventilating system approved for use by the United
States Coast Guard;
      (3)   The ventilation of the boat is not required where the greater
portion of the bilges of the engine and fuel tank compartment is open to the
natural atmosphere.
(R.C. § 1547.29)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.29 ABANDONMENT OF JUNK VESSELS OR OUTBOARD MOTORS.
   (a)   Law enforcement official may order storage of vessel or outboard motor
left on private property; towing by private dock owner.
      (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Any organization or unit comprised of law
enforcement officers, as defined in R.C. § 2901.01.
         B.   VESSEL OR OUTBOARD MOTOR. Excludes an abandoned junk vessel or
outboard motor, as defined in division (d) of this section, or any vessel or
outboard motor under R.C. § 1547.305.
      (2)   A.   The County Sheriff, Chief of Police or other chief of a law
enforcement agency, within the Sheriff’s or Chief’s respective territorial
jurisdiction, upon complaint of any person adversely affected, may order into
storage any vessel or outboard motor that has been left on private property,
other than a private dock or mooring facility or structure, for at least 72
hours without the permission of the person having the right to the possession
of the property. The Sheriff or Chief, upon complaint of the owner of a marine
repair facility or place of storage, may order into storage any vessel or
outboard motor that has been left at the facility or place of storage for a
longer period than that agreed upon. The place of storage shall be designated
by the Sheriff or Chief. When ordering a vessel or motor into storage under
division (a)(2)A. of this section, a Sheriff or Chief, whenever possible, shall
arrange for the removal of the vessel or motor by a private tow truck operator
or towing company.
         B.   1.   Except as provided in division (a)(2)B.4. of this section,
no person, without the consent of the owner or other person authorized to give
consent, shall moor, anchor or tie a vessel or outboard motor at a private dock
or mooring facility or structure owned by another person if the owner has
posted, in a conspicuous manner, a prohibition against the mooring, anchoring
or tying of vessels or outboard motors at the dock, facility or structure by
any person not having the consent of the owner or other person authorized to
give consent.
            2.   If the owner of a private dock or mooring facility or
structure has posted at the dock, facility or structure, in a conspicuous
manner, conditions and regulations under which the mooring, anchoring or tying
of vessels or outboard motors is permitted at the dock, facility or structure,
no person, except as provided in division (a)(2)B.4. of this section, shall
moor, anchor or tie a vessel or outboard motor at the dock, facility or
structure in violation of the posted conditions and regulations.
            3.   The owner of a private dock or mooring facility or structure
may order towed into storage any vessel or outboard motor found moored,
anchored or tied in violation of division (a)(2)B.1. or (a)(2)B.2. of this
section, provided that the owner of the dock, facility or structure posts on it
a sign that states that the dock, facility or structure is private, is visible
from all entrances to the dock, facility or structure, and contains all of the
following information:
               a.   The information specified in division (a)(2)B.1. or (a)
(2)B.2. of this section, as applicable;
               b.   A notice that violators will be towed and that violators
are responsible for paying the cost of the towing;
               c.   The telephone number of the person from whom a towed vessel
or outboard motor may be recovered, and the address of the place to which the
vessel or outboard motor will be taken and the place from which it may be
recovered.
            4.   Divisions (a)(2)B.1. or (a)(2)B.2. of this section do not
prohibit a person from mooring, anchoring or tying a vessel or outboard motor
at a private dock or mooring facility or structure if either of the following
applies:
               a.   The vessel or outboard motor is disabled due to a
mechanical or structural malfunction, provided that the person immediately
removes the vessel or outboard motor from the dock, facility or structure when
the malfunction is corrected or when a reasonable attempt has been made to
correct it;
               b.   Weather conditions are creating an imminent threat to safe
operation of the vessel or outboard motor, provided that the person immediately
removes the vessel or outboard motor from the dock, facility or structure when
the weather conditions permit safe operation of the vessel or outboard motor.
            5.   A person whose vessel or outboard motor is towed into storage
under division (a)(2)B.3. of this section either shall pay the costs of the
towing of the vessel or outboard motor or shall reimburse the owner of the dock
or mooring facility or structure for the costs that the owner incurs in towing
the vessel or outboard motor.
         C.   Subject to division (a)(3) of this section, the owner of a vessel
or motor that has been removed under division (a)(2) of this section may
recover the vessel or motor only in accordance with division (a)(6) of this
section.
      (3)   If the owner or operator of a vessel or outboard motor that has
been ordered into storage under division (a)(2) of this section arrives after
the vessel or motor has been prepared for removal, but prior to its actual
removal from the property, the owner or operator shall be given the opportunity
to pay a fee of not more than one-half of the charge for the removal of vessels
or motors under division (a)(2) of this section that normally is assessed by
the person who has prepared the vessel or motor for removal, in order to obtain
release of the vessel or motor. Upon payment of that fee, the vessel or motor
shall be released to the owner or operator, and upon its release, the owner or
operator immediately shall move it so that it is not on the private property
without the permission of the person having the right to possession of the
property, or is not at the facility or place of storage without the permission
of the owner, whichever is applicable.
      (4)   The County Sheriff, Chief of Police and each other chief of a law
enforcement agency shall maintain a record of vessels or outboard motors that
are ordered into storage under division (a)(2)A. of this section. The record
shall include an entry for each such vessel or motor that identifies the
vessel’s hull identification number or serial number, if any, the vessel’s or
motor’s make, model and color, the location from which it was removed, the date
and time of its removal, the telephone number of the person from whom it may be
recovered, and the address of the place to which it has been taken and from
which it may be recovered. Any information in the record that pertains to a
particular vessel or motor shall be provided to any person who, pursuant to a
statement the person makes either in person or by telephone, is identified as
the owner or operator of the vessel or motor and requests information
pertaining to its location.
      (5)   Any person who registers a complaint that is the basis of a
Sheriff’s or Chief’s order for the removal and storage of a vessel or outboard
motor under division (a)(2)A. of this section shall provide the identity of the
law enforcement agency with which the complaint was registered to any person
who, pursuant to a statement the person makes, is identified as the owner or
operator of the vessel or motor and requests information pertaining to its
location.
      (6)   A.   The owner of a vessel or outboard motor that is ordered into
storage under division (a)(2) of this section may reclaim it upon payment of
any expenses or charges incurred in its removal, in an amount not to exceed
$200, and storage, in an amount not to exceed $5 per 24-hour period, and upon
presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a certificate of
title to the vessel or motor, certificate of United States Coast Guard
documentation, or certificate of registration if the vessel or motor is not
subject to titling under R.C. § 1548.01.
         B.   If a vessel or outboard motor that is ordered into storage under
division (a)(2)A. of this section remains unclaimed by the owner for 30 days,
the procedures established by divisions (b) and (c) of this section shall
apply.
         C.   If a vessel or outboard motor ordered into storage under division
(a)(2)B. of this section remains unclaimed for 72 hours after being stored, the
tow truck operator or towing company that removed the vessel or outboard motor
shall provide notice of the removal and storage to the County Sheriff, Chief of
Police or other chief of a law enforcement agency within whose territorial
jurisdiction the vessel or outboard motor had been moored, anchored or tied in
violation of division (a)(2)B. of this section. The notice shall be in writing
and include the vessel’s hull identification number or serial number, if any,
the vessel’s or outboard motor’s make, model and color, the location from which
it was removed, the date and time of its removal, the telephone number of the
person from whom it may be recovered, and the address of the place to which it
has been taken and from which it may be recovered.
            1.   Upon receipt of the notice, the Sheriff or Chief immediately
shall cause a search to be made of the records of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft to ascertain the owner and any lienholder of the vessel or outboard
motor, and, if known, shall send notice to the owner and lienholder, if any, at
the owner’s and lienholder’s last known address by certified mail, return
receipt requested, that the vessel or outboard motor will be declared a
nuisance and disposed of if not claimed not later than 30 days after the date
of the mailing of the notice.
            2.   If the owner or lienholder makes no claim to the vessel or
outboard motor within 30 days of the date of the mailing of the notice, the
Sheriff or Chief shall file with the Clerk of Courts of the county in which the
place of storage is located an affidavit showing compliance with the
requirements of division (a)(6)C. of this section, and the vessel or outboard
motor shall be disposed of in accordance with division (c) of this section.
      (7)   No person shall remove, or cause the removal of, any vessel or
outboard motor from private property other than in accordance with division (a)
(2) of this section or division (b) of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.30)
   (b)   Storage of vessel or motor left in sunken, beached, drifting or docked
condition; notice; affidavit; salvage certificate.
      (1)   The County Sheriff, Chief of Police or other chief of a law
enforcement agency, within his or her respective territorial jurisdiction, or a
State Highway Patrol trooper, upon notification to the Sheriff or Chief of that
action and of the location of the place of storage, may order into storage any
vessel or outboard motor that has been left in a sunken, beached or drifting
condition for any period of time, or in a docked condition, on a public street
or other property open to the public, or upon or within the right-of-way of any
waterway, road or highway, for 48 hours or longer without notification to the
Sheriff or Chief of the reasons for leaving the vessel or motor in any such
place or condition. The Sheriff or Chief shall designate the place of storage
of any vessel or motor ordered removed by him or her.
      (2)   The Sheriff or Chief shall immediately cause a search to be made of
the records of the Division of Parks and Watercraft to ascertain the owner and
any lienholder of a vessel or outboard motor ordered into storage by the
Sheriff or Chief, and, if known, shall send notice to the owner and lienholder,
if any, at his or her last known address by certified mail, return receipt
requested, that the vessel or motor will be declared a nuisance and disposed of
if not claimed within ten days of the date of mailing of the notice. The owner
or lienholder of the vessel or motor may reclaim it upon payment of any
expenses or charges incurred in its removal and storage, and presentation of
proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a certificate of title to the
vessel or motor, certificate of United States Coast Guard documentation, or
certificate of registration if the vessel or motor is not subject to titling
under R.C. § 1548.01.
      (3)   If the owner or lienholder makes no claim to the vessel or outboard
motor within ten days of the date of mailing of the notice, and if the vessel
or motor is to be disposed of at public auction as provided in division (c) of
this section, the Sheriff or Chief shall file with the Clerk of Courts of the
county in which the place of storage is located an affidavit showing compliance
with the requirements of this division (b). Upon presentation of the affidavit,
the Clerk of Courts shall without charge issue a salvage certificate of title,
free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, to the Sheriff or Chief and shall
send a copy of the affidavit to the Chief of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft. If the vessel or motor is to be disposed of to a marine salvage
dealer or other facility as provided in division (c) of this section, the
Sheriff or Chief shall execute in triplicate an affidavit, as prescribed by the
Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft, describing the vessel or motor
and the manner in which it was disposed of, and that all requirements of this
division (b) have been complied with. The Sheriff or Chief shall retain the
original of the affidavit for his or her records and shall furnish two copies
to the marine salvage dealer or other facility. Upon presentation of a copy of
the affidavit by the marine salvage dealer or other facility, the Clerk of
Courts shall issue to such owner a salvage certificate of title, free and clear
of all liens and encumbrances.
      (4)   Whenever the marine salvage dealer or other facility receives an
affidavit for the disposal of a vessel or outboard motor as provided in this
division (b), such owner shall not be required to obtain an Ohio certificate of
title to the vessel or motor in his or her own name if the vessel or motor is
dismantled or destroyed and both copies of the affidavit are delivered to the
Clerk of Courts. Upon receipt of such an affidavit, the Clerk of Courts shall
send one copy of it to the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft.
(R.C. § 1547.301)
   (c)   Disposal of unclaimed vessel or motor.
      (1)   Unclaimed vessels or outboard motors ordered into storage under
division (a)(2) of this section or division (b) of this section shall be
disposed of at the order of the County Sheriff, the Chief of Police or another
chief of a law enforcement agency, in any of the following ways:
         A.   To a marine salvage dealer;
         B.   To any other facility owned, operated or under contract with the
state or the county, municipality, township or other political subdivision;
         C.   To a charitable organization, religious organization or similar
organization not used and operated for profit;
         D.   By sale at public auction by the Sheriff, the Chief or an
auctioneer licensed under R.C. Chapter 4707, after giving notice of the auction
by advertisement, published once a week for two consecutive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in the county or as provided in R.C. § 7.16.
      (2)   Any moneys accruing from the disposition of an unclaimed vessel or
motor that are in excess of the expenses resulting from the removal and storage
of the vessel or motor shall be credited to the General Revenue Fund or to the
General Fund of the county, municipality, township or other political
subdivision, as appropriate.
      (3)   As used in this division (c), CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 1716.01.
(R.C. § 1547.302)
   (d)   Disposal of abandoned vessel or motor.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division and division (e) of this section,
the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
         A.   ABANDONED JUNK VESSEL OR OUTBOARD MOTOR. Any vessel or outboard
motor meeting all of the following requirements:
            1.   It has been left on private property for at least 72 hours
without the permission of the person having the right to the possession of the
property; left in a sunken, beached or drifting condition for any period of
time; or left in a docked condition, on a public street or other property open
to the public, or upon or within the right-of-way of any waterway, road or
highway, for 48 hours or longer without notification to the County Sheriff, the
Chief of Police, or other chief of a law enforcement agency having territorial
jurisdiction with respect to the location of the vessel or motor, of the
reasons for leaving the vessel or motor in any such place or condition;
            2.   It is three years old or older;
            3.   It is extensively damaged, such damage including but not
limited to any of the following: missing deck, hull, transom, gunwales, motor
or outdrive;
            4.   It is apparently inoperable;
            5.   It has a fair market value of $200 or less.
         B.   LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Any organization or unit comprised of law
enforcement officers, as defined in R.C. § 2901.01.
      (2)   The County Sheriff, Chief of Police or other chief of a law
enforcement agency, within the Sheriff’s or Chief’s respective territorial
jurisdiction, or a State Highway Patrol trooper, upon notification to the
Sheriff or Chief of such action, shall order any abandoned junk vessel or
outboard motor to be photographed by a law enforcement officer. The officer
shall record the make of vessel or motor, the hull identification number or
serial number when available, and shall also detail the damage or missing
equipment to substantiate the value of $200 or less. The Sheriff or Chief shall
thereupon immediately dispose of the abandoned junk vessel or outboard motor to
a marine salvage dealer or other facility owned, operated or under contract to
the state, the county, township or municipality for the destruction of such
vessels or motors. The records and photographs relating to the abandoned junk
vessel or outboard motor shall be retained by the law enforcement agency
ordering the disposition of the vessel or motor for a period of at least two
years. The law enforcement agency shall execute in quadruplicate an affidavit,
as prescribed by the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft, describing
the vessel or motor and the manner in which it was disposed of, and that all
requirements of this section have been complied with, and shall sign and file
the same with the Clerk of Courts of the county in which the vessel or motor
was abandoned. The Clerk of Courts shall retain the original of the affidavit
for the Clerk’s files, shall furnish one copy thereof to the Chief of the
Division of Parks and Watercraft, one copy to the marine salvage dealer or
other facility handling the disposal of the vessel or motor, and one copy to
the law enforcement agency ordering the disposal, who shall file the copy with
the records and photographs relating to the disposal. Any moneys arising from
the disposal of an abandoned junk vessel or outboard motor shall be credited to
the General Revenue Fund, or to the General Fund of the county, township,
municipality or other political subdivision, as appropriate.
      (3)   Notwithstanding division (b) of this section, any vessel or
outboard motor meeting the requirements of divisions (d)(1)A.3. to (d)(1)A.5.
of this section which has remained unclaimed by the owner or lienholder for a
period of ten days or longer following notification as provided in division (b)
of this section may be disposed of as provided in this division (d).
(R.C. § 1547.303)
   (e)   Abandonment of vessel or motor without notice to law enforcement
official prohibited.
      (1)   No person shall purposely leave an abandoned junk vessel or
outboard motor on private property for more than 72 hours without the
permission of the person having the right to the possession of the property; in
a sunken, beached or drifting condition for any period of time; or in a docked
condition, on a public street or other property open to the public, or upon or
within the right-of-way of any waterway, road or highway, for 48 hours or
longer without notification to the County Sheriff, Chief of Police or other
chief of a law enforcement agency having territorial jurisdiction with respect
to the location of the vessel or motor, of the reasons for leaving the vessel
or motor in any such place or condition.
      (2)   For purposes of this division (e), the fact that an abandoned junk
vessel or outboard motor has been so left without permission or notification is
prima facie evidence of abandonment.
      (3)   Nothing in this section or R.C. §§ 1547.30, 1547.301 and 1547.303
invalidates the provisions of any ordinance of the municipality regulating or
prohibiting the abandonment of vessels or outboard motors on waterways,
beaches, docks, streets, highways, public property or private property within
the boundaries of the municipality.
(R.C. § 1547.304)
   (f)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates any provision of this section for which no penalty
is otherwise provided is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(7) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(F))
      (3)   Whoever violates division (e) of this section guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree and also shall be assessed any costs incurred
by the state or a county, township, municipal corporation, or other political
subdivision in disposing of an abandoned junk vessel or outboard motor, less
any money accruing to the state, county, township, municipal corporation or
other political subdivision from that disposal.
(R.C. 1547.99(H))
Statutory reference:
   Alternate procedure to obtain certificate of title for unclaimed vessel or
outboard motor, see R.C. § 1547.305
§ 448.30 EXHAUST MUFFLER REQUIRED; NOISE LEVELS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   Every powercraft operated on the waters in this municipality shall be
equipped at all times with a muffler or a muffler system that is in good
working order, in constant operation, and effectively installed to prevent
excessive or unusual noise.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall operate or give permission for the operation of
a powercraft on the waters in this municipality in such a manner as to exceed a
noise level of 90 decibels on the “A” scale when subjected to a stationary
sound level test as prescribed by SAE J2005.
      (2)   No person shall operate or give permission for the operation of a
powercraft on the waters in this municipality in such a manner as to exceed a
noise level of 75 decibels on the “A” scale measured as specified by SAE J1970.
Measurement of a noise level of not more than 75 decibels on the “A” scale of a
powercraft in operation does not preclude the conducting of a stationary sound
level test as prescribed by SAE J2005.
   (c)   No person shall operate or give permission for the operation of a
powercraft on the waters in this municipality that is equipped with an altered
muffler or muffler cutout, or operate or give permission for the operation of a
powercraft on the waters in this municipality in any manner that bypasses or
otherwise reduces or eliminates the effectiveness of any muffler or muffler
system installed in accordance with this section, unless the applicable
mechanism has been permanently disconnected or made inoperable.
   (d)   No person shall remove, alter or otherwise modify in any way a muffler
or muffler system in a manner that will prevent it from being operated in
accordance with this section.
   (e)   No person shall manufacture, sell or offer for sale a powercraft that
is not equipped with a muffler or muffler system that prevents noise levels in
excess of those established in division (b)(1) of this section.
   (f)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   A powercraft that is designed, manufactured and sold for the sole
purpose of competing in racing events. The exception established under this
division (f)(1) shall be documented in each sale agreement and shall be
acknowledged formally by the signatures of the buyer and the seller. The buyer
and the seller shall maintain copies of the sale agreement. A copy of the sale
agreement shall be kept aboard the powercraft when it is operated. A powercraft
to which the exception established under this division (f)(1) applies shall be
operated on the waters in this municipality only in accordance with division
(f)(2) of this section.
      (2)   A powercraft that is actually participating in a sanctioned racing
event or in tune-up periods for a sanctioned racing event on the waters in this
municipality and that is being operated in accordance with this division (f)
(2). For the purposes of this division (f)(2), a “sanctioned racing event” is a
racing event that is conducted in accordance with §
448.18 or R.C. § 1547.20 or that is approved by the United States Coast Guard.
The operator of a powercraft that is operated on the waters in this
municipality for the purpose of a sanctioned racing event shall comply with §
448.18 and R.C. § 1547.20 and requirements established under it or with
requirements established by the Coast Guard, as appropriate. Failure to comply
subjects the operator to this section.
      (3)   A powercraft that is being operated on the waters in this
municipality by or for a boat or engine manufacturer for the purpose of
testing, development or both and that complies with this division (f)(3). The
operator of such a powercraft shall have aboard at all times and shall produce
on demand of a law enforcement officer a current, valid letter issued by the
Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft in accordance with rules adopted
under R.C. § 1547.31(I)(1). Failure to produce the letter subjects the operator
to this section.
   (g)   A law enforcement officer who is trained in accordance with rules
adopted under R.C. § 1547.31(I)(2) and who has reason to believe that a
powercraft is not in compliance with the noise levels established in this
section may direct the operator of the powercraft to submit it to an on-site
test to measure the level of the noise emitted by the powercraft. The operator
shall comply with that direction. The officer may remain aboard the powercraft
during the test at the officer’s discretion. If the level of the noise emitted
by the powercraft exceeds the noise levels established in this section, the
officer may direct the operator to take immediate and reasonable measures to
correct the violation, including returning the powercraft to a mooring and
keeping it at the mooring until the violation is corrected or ceases.
   (h)   A law enforcement officer who conducts powercraft noise level tests
pursuant to this section shall be trained to do so in accordance with rules
adopted under R.C. § 1547.31(I)(2).
(R.C. § 1547.31(A) - (H))
   (i)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree on a first offense. On each subsequent offense, the person is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(J))
§ 448.31 SAFETY EQUIPMENT ON RENTAL VESSELS.
   (a)   No person who lets vessels for hire, or the agent or employee thereof,
shall rent, lease, charter or otherwise permit the use of a vessel, unless the
person provides the vessel with the equipment required under R.C. §§ 1547.25,
1547.251, 1547.26, 1547.27, 1547.28, 1547.29 and 1547.31 and rules, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, regarding the equipment of
vessels, and complies with the requirements of R.C. §§ 1547.24, 1547.40,
1547.53, 1547.57, and either 1547.54 or 1547.542, and rules, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, to implement and enforce those
sections.
(R.C. § 1547.38)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(F))
§ 448.32 CAPACITY PLATE.
   (a)   Required; display.
      (1)   No person, after January 1, 1977, shall manufacture, sell or offer
for sale any watercraft propelled by machinery as its principal source of
power, or watercraft designed to be manually propelled, less than 20 feet in
length, and designed to carry two or more persons, manufactured after that
date, unless a capacity plate containing the correct information, as prescribed
by regulations adopted by the United States Coast Guard, is firmly attached to
the watercraft. The capacity plate shall be attached in such a location that it
is clearly legible from the position designed or intended to be occupied by the
operator when the watercraft is underway.
      (2)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated on the waters in
this municipality watercraft for which a capacity plate is required under this
section unless the capacity plate is attached.
      (3)   No person shall alter, remove or deface any information contained
on the capacity plate unless the manufacturer has altered the watercraft in
such a way that would require a change in the information contained on the
capacity plate.
      (4)   As used in this division (a), MANUFACTURE means to construct or
assemble a watercraft, or to alter a watercraft in such a manner as to affect
or change its weight capacity or occupant capacity.
(R.C. § 1547.39)
   (b)   Prohibitions.
      (1)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated on the waters in
this municipality a watercraft to which a capacity plate is attached if the
total load exceeds the weight capacity indicated on the capacity plate, if the
number of persons aboard exceeds the occupant capacity indicated on the
capacity plate, or if the horsepower of any attached outboard motor exceeds the
maximum horsepower indicated on the capacity plate.
      (2)   When no capacity plate exists, no person shall operate or permit to
be operated on the waters in this municipality a watercraft if a reasonably
prudent person would believe that either of the following circumstances
applies:
         A.   The total load aboard the watercraft has associated with it a
risk of physical harm to persons or property;
         B.   The total horsepower of any inboard engine or attached outboard
motor has associated with it a risk of physical harm to persons or property.
(R.C. § 1547.40)
   (c)   Penalty. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(F))
§ 448.33 DWELLINGS: SANITARY SYSTEMS.
   (a)   Watercraft dwelling unlawful if a nuisance; exception. No person shall
use any vessel for the purpose of establishing or maintaining a dwelling which
creates a nuisance of either permanent or temporary nature on any of the waters
in this state except Lake Erie, the Muskingum River, the Ohio River, and the
immediately connected harbors and anchorage facilities or in such other areas
as may be designated for the purpose.
(R.C. § 1547.32)
    (b)   Discharging sanitary systems prohibited; exception. Except on the
waters of Lake Erie, the Muskingum River or the Ohio River, no person shall
launch, moor, dock, use, operate or permit to be operated on any of the waters
in this state any vessel that contains a sink, toilet or sanitary system that
is capable of discharging urine, fecal matter, contents of a chemical commode,
kitchen wastes, laundry wastes, slop sink drainage or other household wastes
into the waters in this state. Such a sink, toilet or sanitary system shall be
removed, sealed or made to drain into a tank or reservoir that can be carried
or pumped ashore for disposal in a sewage treatment works approved by the
Director of Environmental Protection.
(R.C. § 1547.33)
   (c)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(F))
§ 448.34 PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF NEGLIGENCE.
   Violations of §§
448.02 to
448.33 and 448.39(a) and/or R.C. §§ 1547.02 to 1547.36 which result in injury
to persons or damage to property shall constitute prima facie evidence of
negligence in a civil action.
(R.C. § 1547.34)
§ 448.35 REQUIREMENTS FOR OPERATING PERSONAL WATERCRAFT.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall operate or permit the operation of a personal
watercraft unless each person on the watercraft is wearing a Coast Guard
approved wearable personal flotation device used in compliance with
manufacturer labeling.
      (2)   A person operating a personal watercraft that is equipped by the
manufacturer with a lanyard type engine cutoff switch shall attach the lanyard
to the person, the person’s clothing, or the personal flotation device as
appropriate for the specific watercraft.
      (3)   No person shall operate a personal watercraft at any time between
sunset and sunrise.
      (4)   No person who owns a personal watercraft or who has charge over or
control of a personal watercraft shall authorize or knowingly permit the
personal watercraft to be operated in violation of this chapter or R.C. Chapter
1547.
   (b)   This section does not apply to a person who is participating in a
regatta, race, marine parade, tournament or exhibition that is operated in
accordance with §
448.18 or R.C. § 1547.20 or that is United States Coast Guard approved.
(R.C. § 1547.41)
   (c)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.36 NUMBERING.
   (a)   Every watercraft operated on the waters in this municipality shall be
numbered by this state in accordance with federal law or a federally approved
numbering system of another state. A watercraft numbered by this state shall
display the number on the watercraft as provided in R.C. § 1547.57. Watercraft
exempt from numbering by the state are:
      (1)   Those currently documented by the United States Coast Guard or its
successor;
      (2)   Those whose principal use is not on the waters in this state and
that have not been used within this state for more than 60 days and have a
valid number assigned under a federally approved numbering system by another
state if the number is displayed in accordance with the requirements of that
system and the certificate of number is available for inspection whenever the
watercraft is on waters in this state;
      (3)   Those from a country other than the United States, temporarily
using the waters in this state;
      (4)   Those whose owner is the United States, a state or a political
subdivision of a state, that fit either of the following descriptions, and that
are clearly identifiable as such:
         A.   A powercraft that principally is used for governmental purposes
other than recreational purposes;
         B.   A watercraft other than a powercraft.
      (5)   A ship’s lifeboat. As used in this division, LIFEBOAT means a
watercraft that is held aboard another vessel and used exclusively for
emergency purposes.
      (6)   Those that have been exempted from numbering by the Chief of the
Division of Parks and Watercraft after the Chief of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft has found that the numbering of the watercraft will not materially
aid in their identification and, if an agency of the United States has a
numbering system applicable to the watercraft, after the Chief of the Division
of Parks and Watercraft has further found that they also would be exempt from
numbering by the United States government if they were subject to the federal
law;
      (7)   Those temporarily using the waters in this state under a waiver
issued by the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft to an organization
sponsoring a race, regatta or special event. The Chief of the Division of Parks
and Watercraft may issue a waiver upon application by the sponsoring
organization at least 15 days before the date of the proposed race, regatta or
special event. The waiver shall be effective for ten days including the day or
days of the proposed race, regatta or special event. Such a waiver does not
obviate the need for compliance with §
448.18 or R.C. § 1547.20;
      (8)   Canoes, rowboats, and inflatable watercraft that are registered
under R.C. § 1547.54 and that an owner, in accordance with this division,
chooses not to have numbered under this section. An owner of a canoe, rowboat
or inflatable watercraft may choose to do either of the following:
         A.   Have it numbered under this section, pay a lesser registration
fee under R.C. § 1547.54(A)(2)(a), and obtain square tags under R.C. § 1547.57
(A);
         B.   Not have it numbered under this section, pay a higher
registration fee under R.C. § 1547.54(A)(2)(b), and obtain a rectangular tag
under R.C. § 1547.57(C).
(R.C. § 1547.53)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.37 REGISTRATION.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2) or (b) of this section, no
person shall operate or give permission for the operation of any watercraft on
the waters in this municipality unless the watercraft is registered in the name
of the current owner in accordance with R.C. § 1547.54, and the registration is
valid and in effect.
      (2)   A.   On and after January 1, 1999, if a watercraft that is required
to be issued a certificate of title under R.C. Chapter 1548 is transferred to a
new owner, it need not be registered under R.C. § 1547.54 for 60 days following
the date of the transfer, provided that the new owner purchases a temporary
watercraft registration under division (a) of this section or holds a bill of
sale from a watercraft dealer.
         B.   For the purposes of division (a)(2) of this section, a temporary
watercraft registration or a bill of sale from a watercraft dealer shall
contain at least all of the following information:
            1.   The hull identification number or serial number of the
watercraft;
            2.   The make of the watercraft;
            3.   The length of the watercraft;
            4.   The type of propulsion, if any;
            5.   The state in which the watercraft principally is operated;
            6.   The name of the owner;
            7.   The address of the owner, including the zip code;
            8.   The signature of the owner;
            9.   The date of purchase;
            10.   A notice to the owner that the temporary watercraft
registration expires 60 days after the date of purchase of the watercraft or
that the watercraft cannot be operated on the waters in this state solely under
the bill of sale beginning 60 days after the date of purchase of the
watercraft, as applicable.
      (3)   A person may purchase a temporary watercraft registration from the
Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft or from an authorized agent
designated under R.C. § 1547.54. The Chief of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft shall furnish forms for temporary watercraft registrations to
authorized agents. In addition to completing the registration form with the
information specified in division (a)(2) of this section, the person shall pay
one of the applicable fees required under R.C. § 1547.54(A)(2)(a) to (g) as
provided in that section. Moneys received for the payment of temporary
watercraft registrations shall be deposited to the credit of the Waterways
Safety Fund created in R.C. § 1547.75.
      (4)   In addition to the applicable fee required under division (a)(3) of
this section, the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft or an
authorized agent shall charge an additional writing fee of $3 for a temporary
watercraft registration that the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft
or the authorized agent issues. When the temporary watercraft registration is
issued by an authorized agent, the agent may retain the additional writing fee.
When the temporary watercraft registration is issued by the Chief of the
Division of Parks and Watercraft, the additional writing fee shall be deposited
to the credit of the Waterways Safety Fund.
      (5)   A person who purchases a temporary watercraft registration for a
watercraft and who subsequently applies for a registration certificate under
R.C. § 1547.54 need not pay the fee required under R.C. § 1547.54(A)(2) for the
initial registration certificate issued for that watercraft, provided that at
the time of application for the registration certificate, the person furnishes
proof of payment for the temporary watercraft registration.
      (6)   A person who purchases a temporary watercraft registration, who
subsequently applies for a registration certificate under R.C. § 1547.54, and
who is exempt from payment for the registration certificate under R.C. §
1547.54(P), may apply to the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft for
a refund of the amount paid for the temporary watercraft registration at the
time that the person applies for a registration certificate. The Chief of the
Division of Parks and Watercraft shall refund that amount upon issuance to the
person of a registration certificate.
      (7)   All records of the Division of Parks and Watercraft made or
maintained for the purposes of divisions (a)(2) to (a)(8) of this section are
public records. The records shall be available for inspection at reasonable
hours and in a manner that is compatible with normal operations of the
division.
      (8)   Pursuant to R.C. § 1547.52(A)(1), the Chief of the Division of
Parks and Watercraft may adopt rules establishing all of the following:
         A.   Record-keeping requirements governing the issuance of temporary
watercraft registrations and the use of bills of sale from watercraft dealers
for the purposes of division (a)(2) of this section;
         B.   Procedures and requirements for the refund of fees under division
(a)(6) of this section;
         C.   Any other procedures and requirements necessary for the
administration and enforcement of divisions (a)(2) to (a)(8) of this section.
   (b)   All of the following watercraft are exempt from registration:
      (1)   Those that are exempt from numbering by the state under R.C. §
1547.53(B) to (G);
      (2)   Those that have been issued a commercial documentation by the
United States Coast Guard or its successor and are used exclusively for
commercial purposes;
      (3)   Those that have been documented by the United States Coast Guard or
its successor as temporarily transiting, whose principal use is not on the
waters in this state, and that have not been used within this state for more
than 60 days.
   (c)   No person shall operate a watercraft documented by the United States
Coast Guard or its successor unless the certificate of documentation is valid,
is on the watercraft for which it has been issued, and is available for
inspection whenever the watercraft is in operation. In accordance with 46
C.F.R. 67, as amended, the watercraft shall display the official number, the
vessel name and the home port listed on the certificate of documentation.
   (d)   (1)   For the purposes of this section and R.C. § 1547.53, a
watercraft is principally using the waters in this state if any of the
following applies:
         A.   The owner resides in this state and declares that the watercraft
principally is using the waters in this state;
         B.   The owner resides in another state but declares that the
watercraft principally is using the waters in this state;
         C.   The watercraft is registered in another state or documented by
the United States Coast Guard and is used within this state for more than 60
days regardless of whether it has been assigned a seasonal or permanent mooring
at any public or private docking facility in this state.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (d)(1)C. of this section, a person on
active duty in the armed forces of the United States may register a watercraft
in the person’s state of permanent residence in lieu of registering it in this
state regardless of the number of days that the watercraft is used in this
state.
(R.C. § 1547.531)
   (e)   No person shall operate a watercraft in this municipality if it
displays an identification number or registration decal that is any of the
following:
      (1)   Fictitious;
      (2)   A counterfeit or an unlawfully made copy of any identification
number or registration decal;
      (3)   An identification number or registration decal that belongs to
another watercraft.
(R.C. § 1547.533)
   (f)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.38 ALTERING OF SERIAL NUMBERS; FALSE INFORMATION PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall deface or alter any serial number, model designation
or other identifying mark on any watercraft or motor as placed thereon by the
manufacturer thereof, or remove, deface or alter the registration number of any
watercraft as the registration number appears on the bow thereof except by
specific order of the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft.
   (b)   No person shall give purposely false information concerning any
watercraft or motor when applying for registration of the watercraft. Any
certificate issued which is found to be based on such false information is
void.
(R.C. § 1547.66)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(B))
§ 448.39 ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   (a)   Operator to stop and furnish information upon accident or collision.
      (1)   In case of accident to or collision with persons or property on the
waters of this municipality, due to the operation of any vessel, the operator
having knowledge of the accident or collision shall immediately stop the vessel
at the scene of the accident or collision, to the extent that it is safe and
practical, and shall remain at the scene of the accident or collision until he
or she has given his or her name and address and, if he or she is not the
owner, the name and address of the owner of the vessel, together with the
registration number of the vessel, if any, to any person injured in the
accident or collision or to the operator, occupant, owner or attendant of any
vessel damaged in the accident or collision, or to any law enforcement officer
at the scene of the accident or collision.
      (2)   If the injured person is unable to comprehend and record the
information required to be given by this section, the other operator involved
in the accident or collision shall forthwith notify the nearest law enforcement
agency having authority concerning the location of the accident or collision,
and his or her name, address and the registration number, if any, of the vessel
he or she was operating, and then remain at the scene of the accident or
collision or at the nearest location from which notification is possible until
a law enforcement officer arrives, unless removed from the scene by an
emergency vehicle operated by the state or a political subdivision or by an
ambulance.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
vessel, the operator so colliding with the vessel shall securely attach the
information required to be given in this section, in writing, to a conspicuous
place in or on the unoccupied or unattended vessel.
(R.C. § 1547.10)
   (b)   Duties after collision or accident; accident reports.
      (1)   The operator of a vessel involved in a collision, accident or other
casualty, so far as the operator can do so without serious danger to the
operator’s own vessel, crew and passengers, shall render to other persons
affected by the collision, accident or other casualty such assistance as may be
practicable and as may be necessary in order to save them from or minimize any
danger caused by the collision, accident or other casualty. The operator also
shall give the operator’s name, address and identification of the operator’s
vessel in writing to any person injured and to the owner of any property
damaged in the collision, accident or other casualty.
      (2)   Any person who renders assistance at the scene of a collision,
accident or other casualty involving a vessel is not liable in a civil action
for damages or injury to persons or property resulting from any act or omission
in rendering assistance or in providing or arranging salvage, towage, medical
treatment or other assistance, except that the person is liable for willful or
wanton misconduct in rendering assistance. Nothing in this section precludes
recovery from any tortfeasor causing a collision, accident or other casualty of
damages caused or aggravated by the rendering of assistance.
      (3)   In the case of collision, accident or other casualty involving a
vessel, the operator thereof, if the collision, accident or other casualty
results in loss of life, personal injury requiring medical treatment beyond
first aid, or damage to property in excess of $1,000, or the total loss of a
vessel, shall file with the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft a
full description of the collision, accident or other casualty on a form
prescribed by the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft.
      (4)   If the operator of the vessel involved in a collision, accident or
other casualty is incapacitated, the investigating law enforcement officer
shall file the required form as prescribed by the Chief of the Division of
Parks and Watercraft.
(R.C. § 1547.59)
   (c)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(B))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.40 ENFORCEMENT.
   Every Sheriff, Deputy Sheriff, Marshal, Deputy Marshal, member of the
organized police department of any municipal corporation, police constable of
any township, wildlife officer, natural resources officer, conservancy district
police officer and other law enforcement officer, within the area of any such
law enforcement officer’s authority, may enforce this chapter, R.C. Chapter
1547 and rules and, in the exercise thereof, may stop and board any vessel
subject to this chapter and R.C. Chapter 1547, and rules.
(R.C. § 1547.63)
§ 448.41 CERTIFICATE OF TITLE; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   No person, except as provided in §
448.42, shall sell or otherwise dispose of a watercraft or outboard motor
without delivering to the purchaser or transferee a physical certificate of
title with an assignment on it as is necessary to show title in the purchaser
or transferee; nor shall any person purchase or otherwise acquire a watercraft
or outboard motor without obtaining a certificate of title for it in the
person’s name in accordance with R.C. Chapter 1548; however, a purchaser may
take possession of and operate a watercraft or outboard motor on the waters in
this state without a certificate of title for a period not exceeding 60 days if
the purchaser has been issued and has in the purchaser’s possession a dealer’s
dated bill of sale, or in the case of a casual sale, a notarized bill of sale.
(R.C. § 1548.03)
   (b)   Division (a) of this section and §§
448.42 and
448.43 do not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   A watercraft covered by a marine document in effect that has been
assigned to it by the United States government pursuant to federal law;
      (2)   A watercraft from a country other than the United States
temporarily using the waters in this state;
      (3)   A watercraft whose owner is the United States, a state or a
political subdivision of a state;
      (4)   A ship’s lifeboat. As used in this division (b)(4), LIFEBOAT means
a watercraft that is held aboard another vessel and used exclusively for
emergency purposes.
      (5)   A canoe;
      (6)   A watercraft less than 14 feet in length without a permanently
affixed mechanical means of propulsion;
      (7)   A watercraft less than 14 feet in length with a permanently fixed
mechanical means of propulsion of less than ten horsepower as determined by the
manufacturer’s rating;
      (8)   Outboard motors of less than ten horsepower as determined by the
manufacturer’s rating.
   (c)   The various certificates, applications and assignments necessary to
provide certificates of title for watercraft and outboard motors shall be made
on appropriate forms approved by the Chief of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft.
(R.C. § 1548.01(B), (C))
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
§ 448.42 MANUFACTURER’S OR IMPORTER’S CERTIFICATE.
   (a)   No manufacturer, importer, dealer or other person shall sell or
otherwise dispose of a new watercraft or outboard motor to a dealer to be used
by the dealer for purposes of display and resale without delivering to the
dealer a manufacturer’s or importer’s certificate executed in accordance with
this section and with such assignments on it as are necessary to show title in
the name of the purchaser. No dealer shall purchase or acquire a new watercraft
or outboard motor without obtaining from the seller the manufacturer’s or
importer’s certificate.
   (b)   A manufacturer’s or importer’s certificate of the origin of a
watercraft or outboard motor shall contain the following information in such
form and together with such further information as the Chief of the Division of
Parks and Watercraft may require:
      (1)   Description of the watercraft, including the make, year, length,
series or model, if any, body type, hull identification number or serial
number, and make, manufacturer’s serial number and horsepower of any inboard
motor or motors; or description of the outboard motor, including the make,
year, series or model, if any, manufacturer’s serial number, and horsepower;
      (2)   Certification of the date of transfer of the watercraft or outboard
motor to a distributor or dealer or other transferee, and the name and address
of the transferee;
      (3)   Certification that this was the first transfer of the new
watercraft or outboard motor in ordinary trade and commerce;
      (4)   Signature and address of a representative of the transferor.
   (c)   An assignment of a manufacturer’s or importer’s certificate before a
notary public or other officer empowered to administer oaths shall be printed
on the reverse side of the manufacturer’s or importer’s certificate in the form
to be prescribed by the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft. The
assignment form shall include the name and address of the transferee, a
certification that the watercraft or outboard motor is new, and a warranty that
the title at the time of delivery is subject only to such liens and
encumbrances as are set forth and described in full in the assignment.
(R.C. § 1548.05)
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
§ 448.43 PROHIBITIONS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in this municipality a watercraft for which a certificate
of title is required or a watercraft powered by an outboard motor for which a
certificate of title is required without having the certificate or a valid
temporary permit and number in accordance with R.C. Chapter 1548 or, if a
physical certificate of title has not been issued for it, operate the
watercraft or outboard motor in this state knowing that the ownership
information relating to the watercraft or outboard motor has not has not been
entered into the automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas;
      (2)   Operate in this municipality a watercraft for which a certificate
of title is required, or a watercraft powered by an outboard motor for which a
certificate of title is required, upon which the certificate of title has been
canceled;
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title upon cancellation of it
by the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft and notice of the
cancellation as prescribed in R.C. Chapter 1548;
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas as provided in R.C. Chapter 1548, in case of the destruction or
dismantling or change of a watercraft or outboard motor in such respect that it
is not the watercraft or outboard motor described in the certificate of title;
      (5)   Violate any provision of R.C. Chapter 1548 for which no penalty is
otherwise provided, or any lawful rules adopted pursuant to R.C. Chapter 1548;
      (6)   Operate in this municipality a watercraft or outboard motor knowing
that the certificate of title to or ownership of the watercraft or outboard
motor as otherwise reflected in the automated title processing system has been
canceled.
(R.C. § 1548.18)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 1548.99(A))
§ 448.44 PERMANENTLY DISPLAYED HULL IDENTIFICATION NUMBER.
   (a)   A watercraft constructed on or after November 1, 1972, shall have a
hull identification number permanently displayed and affixed to it in
accordance with federal law.
   (b)   A watercraft constructed before November 1, 1972, shall have a hull
identification number assigned to it by the Chief of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft at the time of registration, at the time of application for title,
after transfer of ownership, or at the time of a change to this state as the
principal location of operation. The number shall be permanently displayed and
affixed as prescribed by rules.
   (c)   A person who builds a watercraft or imports a watercraft from another
county for personal use and not for the purpose of sale shall request a hull
identification number from the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft
and permanently display and affix the number as prescribed by rules.
   (d)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any watercraft on the
waters in this state in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.65)
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(F))
§ 448.45 FIREARMS OFFENSES; SIGNALING DEVICES.
   (a)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   ACTIVE DUTY, CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE, FIREARM, HANDGUN, and VALID
CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2923.11.
      (2)   UNLOADED. Has the same meaning meanings as in R.C. § 2923.16(K)(5)
and (K)(6), except that all references in the definition in R.C. § 2923.16(K)
(5) to VEHICLE shall be construed for purposes of this section to be references
to VESSEL.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly discharge a firearm while in or on a vessel.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded firearm in a
vessel in a manner that the firearm is accessible to the operator or any
passenger.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a firearm in a vessel
unless it is unloaded and is carried in one of the following ways:
      (1)   In a closed package, box or case;
      (2)   In plain sight with the action opened or the weapon stripped, or,
if the firearm is of a type on which the action will not stay open or that
cannot easily be stripped, in plain sight.
   (e)   (1)   The affirmative defenses authorized in R.C. § 2923.12(D)(1) and
(D)(2) are affirmative defenses to a charge under division (c) or (d) of this
section that involves a firearm other than a handgun. It is an affirmative
defense to a charge under division (c) or (d) of this section of transporting
or having a firearm of any type, including a handgun, in a vessel that the
actor transported or had the firearm in the vessel for any lawful purpose and
while the vessel was on the actor’s own property, provided that this
affirmative defense is not available unless the actor, prior to arriving at the
vessel on the actor’s own property, did not transport or possess the firearm in
the vessel or in a motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by this section or R.C.
§ 2923.16(B) or (C) while the vessel was being operated on a waterway that was
not on the actor’s own property or while the motor vehicle was being operated
on a street, highway or other public or private property used by the public for
vehicular traffic.
      (2)   No person who is charged with a violation of division (c) or (d) of
this section shall be required to obtain a license or temporary emergency
license to carry a concealed handgun under R.C. § 2923.125 or 2923.1213 as a
condition for the dismissal of the charge.
   (f)   Divisions (b), (c) and (d) of this section do not apply to the
possession or discharge of a United States Coast Guard approved signaling
device required to be carried aboard a vessel under R.C. § 1547.251 when the
signaling device is possessed or used for the purpose of giving a visual
distress signal. No person shall knowingly transport or possess any signaling
device of that nature in or on a vessel in a loaded condition at any time other
than immediately prior to the discharge of the signaling device for the purpose
of giving a visual distress signal.
   (g)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
   (h)   (1)   This section does not apply to officers any of the following:
         A.   An officer, agent or employee of this or any other state or of
the United States, or to a law enforcement officer, when authorized to carry or
have loaded or accessible firearms in a vessel and acting within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s or employee’s duties;
         B.   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry or have loaded or accessible firearms in a vessel, and who is subject to
and in compliance with the requirements of R.C. § 109.801, unless the
appointing authority of the person has expressly specified that the exemption
provided in this division (h)(1)B. does not apply to the person;
         C.   Any person legally engaged in hunting.
      (2)   Divisions (c) and (d) of this section do not apply to a person who
transports or possesses a handgun in a vessel and who has been issued a
concealed handgun license that is valid at the time of that transportation or
possession or who, at the time of that transportation or possession, is an
active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is carrying a
valid military identification card and documentation of successful completion
of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements described
in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), unless the person knowingly is in a place on the
vessel described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
   (i)   If a law enforcement officer stops a vessel for a violation of this
section or any other law enforcement purpose, if any person on the vessel
surrenders a firearm to the officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a
request or demand of the officer, and if the officer does not charge the person
with a violation of this section or arrest the person for any offense, the
person is not otherwise prohibited by law from possessing the firearm, and the
firearm is not contraband, the officer shall return the firearm to the person
at the termination of the stop.
   (j)   The provisions of R.C. § 2923.16(L) applies with respect to division
(a)(2) of this section, except that all references in R.C. § 2923.16(L) to
“vehicle”, to “this chapter”, or to “division (K)(5)(a) or (b) of this section”
shall be construed for purposes of this section to be, respectively, references
to “vessel”, to “this section”, and to R.C. § 2923.16(K)(5)(a) and (K)(5)(b) as
incorporated under the definition of “firearm” adopted under division (a) of
this section.
(R.C. § 1547.69)
   (k)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(F))
§ 448.46 TAMPERING WITH NAVIGATION AID OR VESSEL PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly:
      (1)   Damage, remove or tamper with any signal, buoy or other aid to
navigation;
      (2)   Sever the mooring lines of, set adrift or tamper with any vessel
that is moored or tied up on the waters in this municipality.
(R.C. § 1547.92)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(F))
§ 448.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates a provision of this chapter for which no penalty is
otherwise provided, is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
   (b)   The sentencing court, in addition to the penalty provided under this
chapter for a violation of this chapter that involves a powercraft powered by
more than ten horsepower and that, in the opinion of the court, involves a
threat to the safety of persons or property, shall order the offender to
complete successfully a boating course approved by the National Association of
State Boating Law Administrators before the offender is allowed to operate a
powercraft powered by more than ten horsepower on the waters in this state.
Violation of a court order entered under this division is punishable as
contempt under R.C. Chapter 2705.
(R.C. § 1547.99(L))
TITLE EIGHT – PARKING
      
CHAP. 452.   PARKING GENERALLY
CHAPTER 452: PARKING GENERALLY
Section
   
452.01   Prohibition against parking on streets or highways
   
452.02   Police may remove illegally parked vehicle
   
452.03   Prohibited standing or parking places
   
452.04   Manner of parallel and angle parking; privileges for persons with
disabilities
   
452.05   Willfully leaving vehicles on private or public property
   
452.06   Parking prohibitions on private property; private tow-away zones
   
452.07   Unattended vehicles; duty to lock ignition, remove key, set brake and
the like
   
452.08   Opening doors on side available to traffic
   
452.09   Selling, washing or repairing vehicle upon roadway
   
452.10   Truck loading zones
   
452.11   Bus stops and taxicab stands
   
452.12   Parking in alleys and narrow streets; exceptions
   
452.13   Registered owner prima facie liable for unlawful parking
   
452.14   Waiver
   
452.15   Parking on street lawns under certain conditions
   
452.16   Snow removal emergency; banning parking during emergency
   
452.99   Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
   Lights on parked or stopped vehicles, see §
438.09
   Parking defined, see §
402.01
   Parking Enforcement Unit, see §
244.04
   Parking near stopped fire apparatus, see §
432.28
   Parking of bicycles; locks, see §
444.08
   Police may remove ignition key from unattended vehicle, see §
404.01
   Stop defined, see §
402.01
   Stopping and standing defined, see §
402.01
   Storage of junk vehicles, see §
660.07
§ 452.01 PROHIBITION AGAINST PARKING ON STREETS OR HIGHWAYS.
   (a)   (1)   Upon any highway, no person shall stop, park or leave standing
any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main traveled
part of the highway if it is practicable to stop, park or so leave the vehicle
off the paved or main traveled part of the highway. In every event, a clear and
unobstructed portion of the highway opposite the standing vehicle shall be left
for the free passage of other vehicles, and a clear view of the stopped vehicle
shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in each direction upon the
highway.
      (2)   This section does not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is
disabled while on the paved or improved or main traveled portion of a highway
in such manner and to the extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and
temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in that position.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.66)
§ 452.02 POLICE MAY REMOVE ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE.
   (a)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a highway in
violation of R.C. § 4511.66 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
the officer may move the vehicle, or require the driver or other person in
charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the paved or improved
or main traveled part of the highway.
   (b)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any
highway, bridge or causeway, or in any tunnel, where the vehicle constitutes an
obstruction to traffic, the officer may provide for the removal of the vehicle
to the nearest garage or other place of safety.
(R.C. § 4511.67)
§ 452.03 PROHIBITED STANDING OR PARKING PLACES.
   (a)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with the provisions of this
title, or while obeying the directions of a police officer or a traffic-control
device, in any of the following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk, except as provided in division (b) of this section;
      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;
      (3)   Within an intersection;
      (4)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;
      (5)   On a crosswalk;
      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      (7)   Within 30 feet of, and upon the approach to, any flashing beacon,
stop sign or traffic-control device;
      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by a traffic-control device;
      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      (10)   Within 20 feet of a driveway entrance to any fire station and, on
the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within 75
feet of the entrance when it is properly posted with signs;
      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
the standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      (12)   Alongside any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a
street;
      (13)   Upon any bridge or elevated structure upon a highway, or within a
highway tunnel;
      (14)   At any place where signs prohibit stopping;
      (15)   Within one foot of another parked vehicle; and/or
      (16)   On the roadway portion of a freeway, expressway or thruway.
   (b)   A person is permitted, without charge or restriction, to stand or park
on a sidewalk a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter that has an engine not
larger than 150 cubic centimeters, a low-speed micromobility device, or a
bicycle or electric bicycle, provided that the motor-driven cycle, motor
scooter, low-speed micromobility device, bicycle, or electric bicycle does not
impede the normal flow of pedestrian traffic. This division does not authorize
any person to operate a vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4511.711, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.68)
   (d)   It shall be illegal to park a vehicle beside a curb that is painted
yellow within the village limits.
(Ord. 732, passed 6-22-2004)
§ 452.04 MANNER OF PARALLEL AND ANGLE PARKING; PRIVILEGES FOR PERSONS WITH
DISABILITIES.
   (a)   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there is an
adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of the
vehicle parallel with and not more than 12 inches from the right-hand curb,
unless it is impossible to approach so close to the curb; in this case the stop
shall be made as close to the curb as possible and only for the time necessary
to discharge and receive passengers or to load or unload merchandise. Local
authorities by ordinance may permit angle parking on any roadway under their
jurisdiction, except that angle parking shall not be permitted on a state route
within the municipality unless an unoccupied roadway width of not less than 25
feet is available for free- moving traffic.
   (b)   Local authorities by ordinance may permit parking of vehicles with the
left-hand wheels adjacent to and within 12 inches of the left-hand curb of a
one-way roadway.
   (c)   (1)   A.   Except as provided in division (c)(1)B. of this section, no
vehicle shall be stopped or parked on a road or highway with the vehicle facing
in a direction other than the direction of travel on that side of the road or
highway.
         B.   The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into an
angled parking space so that when the motorcycle is parked it is facing in a
direction other than the direction of travel on the side of the road or
highway.
      (2)   The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into a parking
space that is located on the side of, and parallel to, a road or highway. The
motorcycle may face any direction when so parked. Not more than two motorcycles
at a time shall be parked in a parking space as described in this division (c)
(2) of this section irrespective of whether or not the space is metered.
   (d)   Notwithstanding any statute or any rule, regulation, resolution or
ordinance, air compressors, tractors, trucks and other equipment, while being
used in the construction, reconstruction, installation, repair or removal of
facilities near, on, over or under a street or highway, may stop, stand or park
where necessary in order to perform the work, provided a flagperson is on duty
or warning signs or lights are displayed as may be prescribed by the Director
of Transportation.
   (e)   Accessible parking locations and privileges for persons with
disabilities that limit or impair the ability to walk shall be provided and
designated by all political subdivisions and by the state and all agencies and
instrumentalities thereof at all offices and facilities where parking is
provided, whether owned, rented or leased, and at all publicly owned parking
garages. The locations shall be designated through the posting of an elevated
sign, whether permanently affixed or movable, imprinted with the international
symbol of access and shall be reasonably close to exits, entrances, elevators
and ramps. All elevated signs posted in accordance with this division and R.C.
§ 3781.111(C) shall be mounted on a fixed or movable post, and the distance
from the ground to the bottom edge of the sign shall measure not less than five
feet. If a new sign or a replacement sign designating an accessible parking
location is posted on or after October 14, 1999, there also shall be affixed
upon the surface of that sign or affixed next to the designating sign a notice
that states the fine applicable for the offense of parking a motor vehicle in
the designated accessible parking location if the motor vehicle is not legally
entitled to be parked in that location.
   (f)   (1)   A.   No person shall stop, stand or park any motor vehicle at
accessible parking locations provided under division (e) of this section, or at
accessible clearly marked parking locations provided in or on privately owned
parking lots, parking garages or other parking areas and designated in
accordance with that division, unless one of the following applies:
            1.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of
a person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is
displaying a valid removable windshield placard or accessible license plates;
or
            2.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of
a person with a disability and is displaying a parking card or accessible
license plates.
         B.   Any motor vehicle that is parked in an accessible marked parking
location in violation of division (f)(1)A.1. or (f)(1)A.2. of this section may
be towed or otherwise removed from the parking location by the law enforcement
agency of the municipality. A motor vehicle that is so towed or removed shall
not be released to its owner until the owner presents proof of ownership of the
motor vehicle and pays all towing and storage fees normally imposed by the
municipality for towing and storing motor vehicles. If the motor vehicle is a
leased vehicle, it shall not be released to the lessee until the lessee
presents proof that that person is the lessee of the motor vehicle and pays all
towing and storage fees normally imposed by the municipality for towing and
storing motor vehicles.
         C.   If a person is charged with a violation of division (f)(1)A.1. or
(f)(1)A.2. of this section, it is an affirmative defense to the charge that the
person suffered an injury not more than 72 hours prior to the time the person
was issued the ticket or citation and that, because of the injury, the person
meets at least one of the criteria contained in R.C. § 4503.44(A)(1).
      (2)   No person shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle in an area
that is commonly known as an access aisle, which area is marked by diagonal
stripes and is located immediately adjacent to an accessible parking location
provided under division (e) of this section or at an accessible clearly marked
parking location provided in or on a privately owned parking lot, parking
garage, or other parking area and designated in accordance with that division.
   (g)   When a motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a
person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is
displaying a removable windshield placard or accessible license plates, or when
a motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a person with a
disability and is displaying a parking card or accessible license plates, the
motor vehicle is permitted to park for a period of two hours in excess of the
legal parking period permitted by local authorities, except where local
ordinances or police rules provide otherwise or where the vehicle is parked in
such a manner as to be clearly a traffic hazard.
   (h)   No owner of an office, facility or parking garage where accessible
parking locations are required to be designated in accordance with division (e)
of this section shall fail to properly mark the accessible parking locations in
accordance with that division or fail to maintain the markings of the
accessible locations, including the erection and maintenance of the fixed or
movable signs.
   (i)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a person or
organization to apply for a removable windshield placard or accessible license
plates if the parking card or accessible license plates issued to the person or
organization under prior law have not expired or been surrendered or revoked.
   (j)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   ACCESSIBLE LICENSE PLATES and REMOVABLE WINDSHIELD PLACARD. Any
license plates, standard removable windshield placard, permanent removable
windshield placard, or temporary removable windshield placard issued under R.C.
§ 4503.41 or 4503.44, and also mean any substantially similar license plates or
removable windshield placard issued by a state, district, country, or
sovereignty.
      (2)   PERSON WITH A DISABILITY. Any person who has lost the use of one or
both legs or one or both arms, who is blind, deaf or unable to move without the
aid of crutches or a wheelchair, or whose mobility is restricted by a permanent
cardiovascular, pulmonary or other disabling condition.
      (3)   PERSON WITH A DISABILITY THAT LIMITS OR IMPAIRS THE ABILITY TO
WALK. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4503.44.
   (k)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (a) or (c) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (f)(1)A.1. or (f)(1)A.2. of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in
division (k)(2)A. and (k)(2)B. of this section. Except as otherwise provided in
division (k)(2)A. of this section, an offender who violates division (f)(1)A.1.
or (f)(1)A.2. of this section shall be fined not less than $250 nor more than
$500. An offender who violates division (f)(1)A.1. or (f)(1)A.2. of this
section shall be fined not more than $100 if the offender, prior to sentencing,
proves either of the following to the satisfaction of the court:
            1.   At the time of the violation of division (f)(1)A.1. of this
section, the offender or the person for whose transport the motor vehicle was
being operated had been issued a removable windshield placard that then was
valid or accessible license plates that then were valid but the offender or the
person neglected to display the placard or license plates as described in
division (f)(1)A.1. of this section.
            2.   At the time of the violation of division (f)(1)A.2. of this
section, the offender or the person for whose transport the motor vehicle was
being operated had been issued a parking card that then was valid or accessible
license plates that then were valid but the offender or the person neglected to
display the card or license plates as described in division (f)(1)A.2. of this
section.
         B.   In no case shall an offender who violates division (f)(1)A.1. or
(f)(1)A.2. be sentenced to any term of imprisonment.
         C.   An arrest or conviction for a violation of division (f)(1)A.1. or
(f)(1)A.2. of this section does not constitute a criminal record and need not
be reported by the person so arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries
contained in any application for employment, license or other right or
privilege, or made in connection with the person’s appearance as a witness.
         D.   The Clerk of the Court shall pay every fine collected under
divisions (k)(2) and (k)(3) of this section to the municipality. Except as
provided in division (k)(2) of this section, the municipality shall use the
fine moneys it receives under divisions (k)(2) and (k)(3) of this section to
pay the expenses it incurs in complying with the signage and notice
requirements contained in division (e) of this section. The municipality may
use up to 50% of each fine it receives under divisions (k)(2) and (k)(3) of
this section to pay the costs of educational, advocacy, support and assistive
technology programs for persons with disabilities, and for public improvements
within the municipality that benefit or assist persons with disabilities, if
governmental agencies or nonprofit organizations offer the programs.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (f)(2) of this section shall be fined not
less than $250 nor more than $500. In no case shall an offender who violates
division (f)(2) of this section be sentenced to any term of imprisonment. An
arrest or conviction for a violation of division (f)(2) of this section does
not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries contained in any application
for employment, license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection
with the person’s appearance as a witness.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (h) of this section shall be punished as
follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (k)(4) of this section,
the offender shall be issued a warning.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (h) of this section or of a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that division, the offender shall
not be issued a warning but shall be fined not more than $25 for each parking
location that is not properly marked or whose markings are not properly
maintained.
(R.C. § 4511.69)
§ 452.05 WILLFULLY LEAVING VEHICLES ON PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (a)   The Police Chief, upon notification to the Police Chief of such action
and of the location of the place of storage, may order into storage any motor
vehicle, including an abandoned junk motor vehicle as defined in R.C. §
4513.63, that:
      (1)   Has come into the possession of the Police Chief as a result of the
performance of the Police Chief's duties; or
      (2)   Has been left on a public street or other property open to the
public for purposes of vehicular travel, or upon or within the right-of-way of
any road or highway, for 48 hours or longer without notification to the Police
Chief of the reasons for leaving the motor vehicle in such place. However, when
such a motor vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic it may be ordered
into storage immediately unless either of the following applies:
         A.   The vehicle was involved in an accident and is subject to R.C. §
4513.66, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
         B.   The vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle. If the vehicle is a
commercial motor vehicle, the Police Chief shall allow the owner or operator of
the vehicle the opportunity to arrange for the removal of the motor vehicle
within a period of time specified by the Police Chief. If the Police Chief
determines that the vehicle cannot be removed within the specified period of
time, the Police Chief shall order the removal of the vehicle.
      (3)   Subject to division (c) of this section, the Police Chief shall
designate the place of storage of any motor vehicle so ordered removed.
   (b)   If the Police Chief issues an order under division (a) of this section
and arranges for the removal of a motor vehicle by a towing service, the towing
service shall deliver the motor vehicle to the location designated by the
Police Chief not more than two hours after the time it is removed.
   (c)   (1)   The Police Chief shall cause a search to be made of the records
of an applicable entity listed in R.C. § 4513.601(F)(1) to ascertain the
identity of the owner and any lienholder of a motor vehicle ordered into
storage by the Police Chief within five business days of the removal of the
vehicle. Upon obtaining such identity, the Police Chief shall send or cause to
be sent to the owner and any lienholder at the owner's and any lienholder's
last known address by certified or express mail with return receipt requested,
by certified mail with electronic tracking, or by a commercial carrier service
utilizing any form of delivery requiring a signed receipt. The notice shall
inform the owner and any lienholder that the motor vehicle will be declared a
nuisance and disposed of if not claimed within ten days of the date of the
sending of the notice.
      (2)   A.   The owner or lienholder of the motor vehicle is responsible
for payment of any expenses or charges incurred in its removal and storage and
may reclaim the motor vehicle upon payment of those expenses or charges, and
presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a certificate of
title or memorandum certificate of title to the motor vehicle, a certificate of
registration for the motor vehicle, or a lease agreement. Upon presentation of
proof of ownership evidenced as provided above, the owner of the motor vehicle
also may retrieve any personal items from the vehicle without retrieving the
vehicle and without paying any fee. However, a towing service or storage
facility may charge an after-hours retrieval fee established by the Public
Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25 if the owner
retrieves the personal items after hours, unless the towing service or storage
facility fails to provide the notice required under R.C. § 4513.69(B)(3), if
applicable. However, the owner shall not do either of the following:
            1.   Retrieve any personal item that has been determined by the
Police Chief to be necessary to a criminal investigation;
            2.   Retrieve any personal item from a vehicle if it would endanger
the safety of the owner, unless the owner agrees to sign a waiver of liability.
         B.   For purposes of division (c)(2) of this section, PERSONAL ITEMS
do not include any items that are attached to the vehicle.
      (3)   If the owner or lienholder of the motor vehicle reclaims it after a
search of the applicable records has been conducted and after notice has been
sent to the owner and any lienholder as described in this section, and the
search was conducted by the place of storage, and the notice was sent to the
motor vehicle owner by the place of storage, the owner or lienholder shall pay
to the place of storage a processing fee of $25, in addition to any expenses or
charges incurred in the removal and storage of the vehicle.
   (d)   If the owner or lienholder makes no claim to the motor vehicle within
ten days of the date of sending the notice, and if the vehicle is to be
disposed of at public auction as provided in R.C. § 4513.62 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the Police Chief, without charge
to any party, shall file with the clerk of courts of the county in which the
place of storage is located an affidavit showing compliance with the
requirements of this section. Upon presentation of the affidavit, the clerk,
without charge, shall issue a salvage certificate of title, free and clear of
all liens and encumbrances, to the Police Chief. If the vehicle is to be
disposed of to a motor vehicle salvage dealer or other facility as provided in
R.C. § 4513.62 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the Police
Chief shall execute in triplicate an affidavit, as prescribed by the Registrar
of Motor Vehicles, describing the motor vehicle and the manner in which it was
disposed of, and that all requirements of this section have been complied with.
The Police Chief shall retain the original of the affidavit for the Police
Chief's records, and shall furnish two copies to the motor vehicle salvage
dealer or other facility. Upon presentation of a copy of the affidavit by the
motor vehicle salvage dealer, the clerk of courts, within 30 days of the
presentation, shall issue a salvage certificate of title, free and clear of all
liens and encumbrances.
   (e)   Whenever a motor vehicle salvage dealer or other facility receives an
affidavit for the disposal of a motor vehicle as provided in this section, the
dealer or facility shall not be required to obtain an Ohio certificate of title
to the motor vehicle in the dealer’s or facility’s own name if the vehicle is
dismantled or destroyed and both copies of the affidavit are delivered to the
clerk of courts.
   (f)   No towing service or storage facility shall fail to comply with this
section.
(R.C. § 4513.61)
   (g)   Abandonment of Junk Motor Vehicle Prohibited.
      (1)   A.   No person shall willfully leave an abandoned junk motor
vehicle, as defined in R.C. § 4513.63, on private property for more than 72
hours without the permission of the person having the right to the possession
of the property, or on a public street or other property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking, or upon or within the right-of-way of
any road or highway for 48 hours or longer without notification to the Police
Chief of the reason for leaving the motor vehicle in that place.
         B.   For purposes of this division (g)(1), the fact that a motor
vehicle has been so left without permission or notification is prima facie
evidence of abandonment.
         C.   Nothing contained in this section and R.C. §§ 4513.60, 4513.61
and 4513.63 shall invalidate or prevent the enactment of further provisions of
municipal ordinances regulating or prohibiting the abandonment of motor
vehicles on streets, highways, public property or private property within the
municipality.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (g) is guilty of a minor misdemeanor
and shall also be assessed any costs incurred by the municipality in disposing
of the abandoned junk motor vehicle, less any money accruing to the
municipality from the disposal.
(R.C. § 4513.64)
§ 452.06 PARKING PROHIBITIONS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; PRIVATE TOW-AWAY ZONES.
   (a)   (1)   The chief of a law enforcement agency of the municipal
corporation, upon complaint of any person adversely affected, may order into
storage any motor vehicle, other than an abandoned junk motor vehicle as
defined in R.C. § 4513.63, that has been left on private residential or private
agricultural property for at least four hours without the permission of the
person having the right to the possession of the property. The chief, upon
complaint of a repair garage or place of storage, may order into storage any
motor vehicle, other than an abandoned junk motor vehicle, that has been left
at the garage or place of storage for a longer period than that agreed upon.
When ordering a motor vehicle into storage pursuant to this division, the chief
may arrange for the removal of the motor vehicle by a towing service and shall
designate a storage facility.
      (2)   A towing service towing a motor vehicle under division (a)(1) of
this section shall remove the motor vehicle in accordance with that division.
The towing service shall deliver the motor vehicle to the location designated
by the chief not more than two hours after the time it is removed from the
private property, unless the towing service is unable to deliver the motor
vehicle within two hours due to an uncontrollable force, natural disaster, or
other event that is not within the power of the towing service.
      (3)   Subject to division (b) of this section, the owner of a motor
vehicle that has been removed pursuant to this division may recover the vehicle
only in accordance with division (d) of this section.
      (4)   As used in this section, PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY means private
property on which is located one or more structures that are used as a home,
residence, or sleeping place by one or more persons, if no more than three
separate households are maintained in the structure or structures. The phrase
does not include any private property on which is located one or more
structures that are used as a home, residence, or sleeping place by two or more
persons, if more than three separate households are maintained in the structure
or structures.
   (b)   (1)   If the owner or operator of a motor vehicle that has been
ordered into storage pursuant to division (a)(1) of this section arrives after
the motor vehicle has been prepared for removal, but prior to its actual
removal from the property, the towing service shall give the owner or operator
oral or written notification at the time of such arrival that the vehicle owner
or operator may pay a fee of not more than one-half of the fee for the removal
of the motor vehicle established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules
adopted under R.C. § 4921.25, in order to obtain release of the motor vehicle.
However, if the vehicle is within a municipal corporation and the municipal
corporation has established a vehicle removal fee, the towing service shall
give the owner or operator oral or written notification that the owner or
operator may pay not more than one-half of that fee to obtain release of the
motor vehicle. That fee may be paid by use of a major credit card unless the
towing service uses a mobile credit card processor and mobile service is not
available at the time of the transaction.
      (2)   Upon payment of the applicable fee, the towing service shall give
the vehicle owner or operator a receipt showing both the full amount normally
assessed and the actual amount received and shall release the motor vehicle to
the owner or operator. Upon its release, the owner or operator immediately
shall move it so that it is not on the private residential or private
agricultural property without the permission of the person having the right to
possession of the property, or is not at the garage or place of storage without
the permission of the owner, whichever is applicable.
   (c)   (1)   The chief of a law enforcement agency in the municipal
corporation shall maintain a record of motor vehicles that the chief orders
into storage pursuant to division (a)(1) of this section. The record shall
include an entry for each such motor vehicle that identifies the motor
vehicle’s license number, make, model, and color, the location from which it
was removed, the date and time of its removal, the telephone number of the
person from whom it may be recovered, and the address of the place to which it
has been taken and from which it may be recovered. The chief shall provide any
information in the record that pertains to a particular motor vehicle to any
person who, either in person or pursuant to a telephone call, identifies self
as the owner or operator of the motor vehicle and requests information
pertaining to its location.
      (2)   Any person who registers a complaint that is the basis of the
chief’s order for the removal and storage of a motor vehicle under division (a)
(1) of this section shall provide the identity of the law enforcement agency
with which the complaint was registered to any person who identifies self as
the owner or operator of the motor vehicle and requests information pertaining
to its location.
   (d)   (1)   The owner or lienholder of a motor vehicle that is ordered into
storage pursuant to division (a)(1) of this section may reclaim it upon both of
the following:
         A.   Payment of all applicable fees established by the Public
Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25 or, if the vehicle
was towed within a municipal corporation that has established fees for vehicle
removal and storage, payment of all applicable fees established by the
municipal corporation.
         B.   Presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a
certificate of title to the motor vehicle, a certificate of registration for
the motor vehicle, or a lease agreement.
      (2)   When the owner of a vehicle towed under this section retrieves the
vehicle, the towing service or storage facility in possession of the vehicle
shall give the owner written notice that if the owner disputes that the motor
vehicle was lawfully towed, the owner may be able to file a civil action under
R.C. § 4513.611.
      (3)   Upon presentation of proof of ownership as required under division
(d)(1)B. of this section, the owner of a motor vehicle that is ordered into
storage under division (a)(1) of this section may retrieve any personal items
from the motor vehicle without retrieving the vehicle and without paying any
fee. However, a towing service or storage facility may charge an after-hours
retrieval fee established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted
under R.C. § 4921.25 if the owner retrieves the personal items after hours,
unless the towing service or storage facility fails to provide the notice
required under R.C. § 4513.69(B)(3), if applicable. The owner of a motor
vehicle shall not do either of the following:
         A.   Retrieve any personal item that has been determined by the chief
to be necessary to a criminal investigation;
         B.   Retrieve any personal item from a vehicle if it would endanger
the safety of the owner, unless the owner agrees to sign a waiver of liability.
      (4)   For purposes of division (d)(3) of this section, “personal items”
do not include any items that are attached to the motor vehicle.
      (5)   If a motor vehicle that is ordered into storage pursuant to
division (a)(1) of this section remains unclaimed by the owner for 30 days, the
procedures established by R.C. §§ 4513.61 and 4513.62 apply.
   (e)   (1)   No person shall remove, or cause the removal of, any motor
vehicle from any private residential or private agricultural property other
than in accordance with division (a)(1) of this section or R.C. §§ 4513.61 to
4513.65.
      (2)   No towing service or storage facility shall fail to comply with the
requirements of this section.
   (f)   This section does not apply to any private residential or private
agricultural property that is established as a private tow-away zone in
accordance with division (h) of this section or R.C. § 4513.601.
   (g)   Whoever violates division (e) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.60)
   (h)   Private Tow-away Zones.
      (1)   The owner of a private property may establish a private tow-away
zone, but may do so only if all of the following conditions are satisfied:
         A.   The owner of the private property posts on the property a sign,
that is at least 18 inches by 24 inches in size, that is visible from all
entrances to the property, and that includes all of the following information:
            1.   A statement that the property is a tow-away zone;
            2.   A description of persons authorized to park on the property.
If the property is a residential property, the owner of the private property
may include on the sign a statement that only tenants and guests may park in
the private tow-away zone, subject to the terms of the property owner. If the
property is a commercial property, the owner of the private property may
include on the sign a statement that only customers may park in the private
tow-away zone. In all cases, if it is not apparent which persons may park in
the private tow-away zone, the owner of the private property shall include on
the sign the address of the property on which the private tow-away zone is
located or the name of the business that is located on the property designated
as a private tow-away zone.
            3.   If the private tow-away zone is not enforceable at all times,
the times during which the parking restrictions are enforced;
            4.   The telephone number and the address of the place from which a
towed vehicle may be recovered at any time during the day or night;
            5.   A statement that the failure to recover a towed vehicle may
result in the loss of title to the vehicle as provided in R.C. § 4505.101(B).
            6.   In order to comply with the requirements of division (h)(1)A.
of this section, the owner of a private property may modify an existing sign by
affixing to the existing sign stickers or an addendum in lieu of replacing the
sign.
         B.   A towing service ensures that a vehicle towed under this division
(h) is taken to a location from which it may be recovered that complies with
all of the following:
            1.   It is located within 25 linear miles of the location of the
private tow-away zone, unless it is not practicable to take the vehicle to a
place of storage within 25 linear miles.
            2.   It is well-lighted.
            3.   It is on or within a reasonable distance of a regularly
scheduled route of one or more modes of public transportation, if any public
transportation is available in the municipal corporation or township in which
the private tow-away zone is located.
      (2)   A.   If a vehicle is parked on private property that is established
as a private tow-away zone in accordance with division (h)(1) of this section,
without the consent of the owner of the private property or in violation of any
posted parking condition or regulation, the owner of the private property may
cause the removal of the vehicle by a towing service. The towing service shall
remove the vehicle in accordance with this division (h). The vehicle owner and
the operator of the vehicle are considered to have consented to the removal and
storage of the vehicle, to the payment of the applicable fees established by
the Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25, and to
the right of a towing service to obtain title to the vehicle if it remains
unclaimed as provided in R.C. § 4505.101. The owner or lienholder of a vehicle
that has been removed under this division (h), subject to division (h)(3) of
this section, may recover the vehicle in accordance with division (h)(7) of
this section.
         B.   If a municipal corporation requires tow trucks and tow truck
operators to be licensed, no owner of a private property located within the
municipal corporation shall cause the removal and storage of any vehicle
pursuant to division (h)(2) of this section by an unlicensed tow truck or
unlicensed tow truck operator.
         C.   No towing service shall remove a vehicle from a private tow-away
zone except pursuant to a written contract for the removal of vehicles entered
into with the owner of the private property on which the private tow-away zone
is located.
      (3)   If the owner or operator of a vehicle that is being removed under
authority of division (h)(2) of this section arrives after the vehicle has been
prepared for removal, but prior to its actual removal from the property, the
towing service shall give the vehicle owner or operator oral or written
notification at the time of such arrival that the vehicle owner or operator may
pay a fee of not more than one-half of the fee for the removal of the vehicle
established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. §
4921.25 in order to obtain release of the vehicle. That fee may be paid by use
of a major credit card unless the towing service uses a mobile credit card
processor and mobile service is not available at the time of the transaction.
Upon payment of that fee, the towing service shall give the vehicle owner or
operator a receipt showing both the full amount normally assessed and the
actual amount received and shall release the vehicle to the owner or operator.
Upon its release, the owner or operator immediately shall move the vehicle so
that the vehicle is not parked on the private property established as a private
tow-away zone without the consent of the owner of the private property or in
violation of any posted parking condition or regulation.
      (4)   A.   Prior to towing a vehicle under division (h)(2) of this
section, a towing service shall make all reasonable efforts to take as many
photographs as necessary to evidence that the vehicle is clearly parked on
private property in violation of a private tow-away zone established under
division (h)(1) of this section. The towing service shall record the time and
date of the photographs taken under this division (h). The towing service shall
retain the photographs and the record of the time and date, in electronic or
printed form, for at least 30 days after the date on which the vehicle is
recovered by the owner or lienholder or at least two years after the date on
which the vehicle was towed, whichever is earlier.
         B.   A towing service shall deliver a vehicle towed under division (h)
(2) of this section to the location from which it may be recovered not more
than two hours after the time it was removed from the private tow-away zone,
unless the towing service is unable to deliver the motor vehicle within two
hours due to an uncontrollable force, natural disaster, or other event that is
not within the power of the towing service.
      (5)   A.   If an owner of a private property that is established as a
private tow-away zone in accordance with division (H)(1) of this section causes
the removal of a vehicle from that property by a towing service under division
(H)(2) of this section, the towing service, within two hours of removing the
vehicle, shall provide notice to the law enforcement agency of the municipal
corporation concerning all of the following:
            1.   The vehicle’s license number, make, model, and color;
            2.   The location from which the vehicle was removed;
            3.   The date and time the vehicle was removed;
            4.   The telephone number of the person from whom the vehicle may
be recovered;
            5.   The address of the place from which the vehicle may be
recovered.
         B.   The chief of a law enforcement agency of the municipal
corporation shall maintain a record of any vehicle removed from private
property in the chief’s jurisdiction that is established as a private tow-away
zone of which the chief has received notice under this division (h). The record
shall include all information submitted by the towing service. The chief shall
provide any information in the record that pertains to a particular vehicle to
a person who, either in person or pursuant to a telephone call, identifies self
as the owner, operator, or lienholder of the vehicle and requests information
pertaining to the vehicle.
      (6)   A.   When a vehicle is removed from private property in accordance
with this section, within three business days of the removal, the towing
service or storage facility from which the vehicle may be recovered shall cause
a search to be made of either of the following to ascertain the identity of the
owner and any lienholder of the vehicle:
            1.   The records of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles;
            2.   The records of any vendor or vendors, approved by the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles, that are capable of providing real-time access to
owner and lienholder information.
         B.   The towing service or storage facility may search the National
Motor Vehicle Title Information System in order to determine the state in which
the vehicle is titled. The entity that provides the record of the owner and any
lienholder under this division shall ensure that such information is provided
in a timely manner.
         C.   Subject to division (h)(6)F. of this section, the towing service
or storage facility shall send notice to the vehicle owner and any known
lienholder as follows:
            1.   Within five business days after the applicable entity provides
the identity of the owner and any lienholder of the motor vehicle, if the
vehicle remains unclaimed, to the owner’s and lienholder’s last known address
by certified or express mail with return receipt requested, by certified mail
with electronic tracking, or by a commercial carrier service utilizing any form
of delivery requiring a signed receipt;
            2.   If the vehicle remains unclaimed 30 days after the first
notice is sent, in the manner required under division (h)(6)C.1. of this
section.
         D.   Sixty days after any notice sent pursuant to division (h)(6)C. of
this section is received, as evidenced by a receipt signed by any person, or
the towing service or storage facility has been notified that delivery was not
possible, the towing service or storage facility, if authorized under R.C. §
4505.101(B), may initiate the process for obtaining a certificate of title to
the motor vehicle as provided in that section.
         E.   A towing service or storage facility that does not receive a
signed receipt of notice, or a notification that delivery was not possible,
shall not obtain, and shall not attempt to obtain, a certificate of title to
the motor vehicle under R.C. § 4505.101(B).
         F.   With respect to a vehicle concerning which a towing service or
storage facility is not eligible to obtain title under R.C. § 4505.101, the
towing service or storage facility need only comply with the initial notice
required under division (h)(6)C.1. of this section.
      (7)   A.   The owner or lienholder of a vehicle that is removed under
division (h)(2) of this section may reclaim it upon both of the following:
            1.   Presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by
a certificate of title to the vehicle, a certificate of registration for the
motor vehicle, or a lease agreement;
            2.   Payment of the following fees:
               a.   All applicable fees established by the Public Utilities
Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25, except that the lienholder of
a vehicle may retrieve the vehicle without paying any storage fee for the
period of time that the vehicle was in the possession of the towing service or
storage facility prior to the date the lienholder received the notice sent
under division (h)(6)A.1. of this section;
               b.   If notice has been sent to the owner and lienholder as
described in division (h)(6) of this section, a processing fee of $25.
         B.   A towing service or storage facility in possession of a vehicle
that is removed under authority of division (h)(2) of this section shall show
the vehicle owner, operator, or lienholder who contests the removal of the
vehicle all photographs taken under division (h)(4) of this section. Upon
request, the towing service or storage facility shall provide a copy of all
photographs in the medium in which the photographs are stored, whether paper,
electronic, or otherwise.
         C.   When the owner of a vehicle towed under this section retrieves
the vehicle, the towing service or storage facility in possession of the
vehicle shall give the owner written notice that if the owner disputes that the
motor vehicle was lawfully towed, the owner may be able to file a civil action
under R.C. § 4513.611.
         D.   Upon presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced
by a certificate of title to the vehicle, a certificate of registration for the
motor vehicle, or a lease agreement, the owner of a vehicle that is removed
under authority of division (h)(2) of this section may retrieve any personal
items from the vehicle without retrieving the vehicle and without paying any
fee. The owner of the vehicle shall not retrieve any personal items from a
vehicle if it would endanger the safety of the owner, unless the owner agrees
to sign a waiver of liability. For purposes of division (h)(7)D. of this
section, “personal items” do not include any items that are attached to the
vehicle.
      (8)   No person shall remove, or cause the removal of, any vehicle from
private property that is established as a private tow-away zone under this
division (h) or store such a vehicle other than in accordance with this
division (h), or otherwise fail to comply with any applicable requirement of
this division (h).
      (9)   This section does not affect or limit the operation of divisions
(a) through (g) of this section, R.C. § 4513.60 or R.C. §§ 4513.61 to 4613.65
as they relate to property other than private property that is established as a
private tow-away zone under division (h)(1) of this section.
      (10)   Whoever violates division (h)(8) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
      (11)   As used in this section, “owner of a private property” or “owner
of the private property” includes, with respect to a private property, any of
the following:
         A.   Any person who holds title to the property;
         B.   Any person who is a lessee or sublessee with respect to a lease
or sublease agreement for the property;
         C.   A person who is authorized to manage the property;
         D.   A duly authorized agent of any person listed in divisions (h)
(11)A. to (h)(11)C. of this section.
(R.C. § 4513.601)
   (i)   If an owner of private property posts on the property in a conspicuous
manner a prohibition against parking on the property or conditions and
regulations under which parking is permitted, no person shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   Park a vehicle on the property without the owner’s consent;
      (2)   Park a vehicle on the property in violation of any condition or
regulation posted by the owner.
   (j)   Whoever violates division (i) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.681)
§ 452.07 UNATTENDED VEHICLES; DUTY TO LOCK IGNITION, REMOVE KEY, SET BRAKE AND
THE LIKE.
   (a)   (1)   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit
it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition,
removing the key from the ignition, effectively setting the parking brake, and,
when the motor vehicle is standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to
the curb or side of the highway.
      (2)   The requirements of this section relating to the stopping of the
engine, locking of the ignition, and removing the key from the ignition of a
motor vehicle do not apply to any of the following:
         A.   A motor vehicle that is parked on residential property;
         B.   A motor vehicle that is locked, regardless of where it is parked;
         C.   An emergency vehicle;
         D.   A public safety vehicle.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.661)
§ 452.08 OPENING DOORS ON SIDE AVAILABLE TO TRAFFIC.
   (a)   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.70)
§ 452.09 SELLING, WASHING OR REPAIRING VEHICLE UPON ROADWAY.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the
principal purpose of:
   (a)   Displaying the vehicle for sale; or
   (b)   Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle except repairs necessitated
by an emergency.
§ 452.10 TRUCK LOADING ZONES.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of
time, other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and
loading of materials, in any place marked as a truck loading zone during hours
when the provisions applicable to those zones are in effect. In no case shall
the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes.
§ 452.11 BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS.
   (a)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a
bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or
stand has been officially designated and appropriately posted, except that the
driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of,
and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers when the
stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about
to enter the zone, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes, if
the stopping is not prohibited therein by posted signs.
   (b)   No operator of a bus shall stop, stand or park the vehicle upon any
street or other public way at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading
passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop so designated and posted
as such, except in case of an emergency.
   (c)   No operator of a bus shall fail to enter a bus stop on a street or
other public way in such a manner that the bus when stopped to load or unload
passengers or baggage is in a position with the right front wheel of the
vehicle not further than 18 inches from the curb and the bus approximately
parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular
traffic.
   (d)   No operator of a taxicab shall stand or park the vehicle upon any
street or other public way at any place other than in a taxicab stand so
designated and posted as such. This provision shall not prevent the operator of
a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or
parking provisions at any place for the purpose of, and while actually engaged
in, the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.
§ 452.12 PARKING IN ALLEYS AND NARROW STREETS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street, other
than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available
less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular
traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or
unloading of passengers or when directed to by a police officer or traffic-
control signal.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided by law, no person shall stop, stand or
park a vehicle within an alley except while actually loading and unloading, and
then only for a period not to exceed 30 minutes.
§ 452.13 REGISTERED OWNER PRIMA FACIE LIABLE FOR UNLAWFUL PARKING.
   In any hearing on a charge of illegally parking a motor vehicle, testimony
that a vehicle bearing a certain license plate was found unlawfully parked as
prohibited by the provisions of this traffic code, and further testimony that
the record of the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles shows that the license plate
was issued to the defendant, shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle
which was unlawfully parked, was so parked by the defendant. A certified
registration copy, showing that fact, from the Registrar shall be proof of
ownership.
§ 452.14 WAIVER.
   Any person charged with a violation of any provision of this chapter for
which payment of a prescribed fine may be made, may pay the sum in the manner
prescribed on the issued traffic ticket. This payment shall be deemed a plea of
guilty, waiver of court appearance and acknowledgment of conviction of the
alleged offense and may be accepted in full satisfaction of the prescribed
penalty for the alleged violation. Payment of the prescribed fine need not be
accepted when laws prescribe that a certain number of such offenses shall
require court appearance.
§ 452.15 PARKING ON STREET LAWNS UNDER CERTAIN CONDITIONS.
   (a)   Parking on street lawn areas shall be permitted under the conditions
noted in division (b) below. For purposes of definition, STREET LAWN shall be
defined as the area along village streets between the asphalt or paved or
stoned portion of the roadway, and the legal street width as recorded in the
County Recorder’s office. This area is also sometimes referred to as a
BOULEVARD.
   (b)   Two conditions must exist for street lawn parking to be allowed in a
given area. Specifically, the following.
      (1)   The owner of the lot and/or land abutting the proposed parking area
must have given his or her permission. If the abutting property is a rental
property, permission of the tenant leasing said property is necessary.
      (2)   The proposed area must be suitable and appropriately maintained as
a parking area, that is with stone, asphalt, paving, brimstone or the like. No
parking on grass.
   (c)   Any existing parking ordinances are still in full force and effect,
such as snow emergency and existing street lawn parking ordinances.
(Ord. 856, passed - -2016)
§ 452.16 SNOW REMOVAL EMERGENCY; BANNING PARKING DURING EMERGENCY.
   (a)   Whenever two or more inches of snow have fallen or accumulated on the
streets of the village, a “snow removal emergency” shall remain in effect for
five days after the snow has ceased to fall, or earlier if the Mayor declares
an end of the “snow removal emergency”.
   (b)   Whenever a “snow removal emergency” is in effect, all parking within
the right-of-way of or on the public street known as Main Street shall be
banned. Vehicles parked on Main Street prior to a “snow removal emergency”
shall immediately be removed upon a “snow removal emergency” becoming
effective.
(Ord. 535, passed 2-20-1978)
§ 452.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   Violation of §
452.03(d) will result in a parking citation and a court ordered fine.
   (b)   Whoever violates §
452.16 shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor, and any vehicle found parked in
violation of §
452.16 shall authorize police officers to provide for the removal and
impounding of such vehicle pursuant to §
452.02 of the Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. 535, passed 2-20-1978; Ord. 732, passed 6-22-2004)
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
TITLE TEN – TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      Chap.
453.   Traffic Schedules
CHAPTER 453: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Section
   
I.   Parking prohibited
   
II.   Truck operation and parking
SCHEDULE I. PARKING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to park on the east side of Vine
Street from the south lot line of lot 296, thence north to the end of said Vine
Street.
   (b)   It is hereby directed that no parking signs be erected to notify the
public of this action.
   (c)   Whoever violates divisions (b)(1) and (b)(2) above shall guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined in accordance with existing laws and ordinances.
(Ord. 521, passed 6-7-1976)
SCHEDULE II. TRUCK OPERATION AND PARKING.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to transport or operate a truck
over the streets or alleys of the village, other than Main Street, unless said
truck is being operated for the sole purpose of making deliveries to or pick-
ups from premises within the village not located on Main Street.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a truck or trailer on Main
Street of the village, unless said truck or trailer is being used for the
purpose of making deliveries to or pick-ups from premises located on Main
Street.
   (c)   The prohibitions contained in division (a) and (b) above do not apply
to emergency vehicles or tow trucks while on emergency or service calls, or to
a truck designated by the manufacturer as a three-quarter ton pickup truck or
smaller.
   (d)   Any person who violates this schedule shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100.
(Ord. 437, passed 6-18-1962; Ord. 827, passed 8-27-2013)
PART SIX – GENERAL OFFENSES CODE
      
Chap. 606.   General Provisions
      
Chap. 612.   Alcoholic Beverages
      
Chap. 618.   Animals
      
Chap. 624.   Drugs
      
Chap. 630.   Gambling
      
Chap. 636.   Offenses Relating to Persons
      
Chap. 642.   Offenses Relating to Property
      
Chap. 648.   Peace Disturbances
      
Chap. 654.   Public Service, Administration and Enforcement
      
Chap. 660.   Safety, Sanitation and Health
      
Chap. 666.   Sex Related Offenses
      
Chap. 672.   Theft and Fraud
      
Chap. 678.   Weapons and Explosives
      
Chap. 698.   Penalties and Sentencing
CHAPTER 606: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
606.01   Definitions
   
606.02   Classification of offenses
   
606.03   Offenses defined
   
606.04   Rules of construction
   
606.05   Criminal law jurisdiction
   
606.06   Limitation on criminal prosecutions
   
606.07   Requirements for criminal liability; voluntary intoxication
   
606.08   Culpable mental states
   
606.09   Organizational criminal liability
   
606.10   Personal accountability for organizational conduct
   
606.11   Attempts
   
606.12   Complicity
   
606.13   Self defense; limitations on duty to retreat prior to using force
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Burden and degree of proof, see R.C. § 2901.05
   Definition of “imprisoned”, see R.C. § 1.05
   Statute of limitations for income tax violations, see R.C. § 718.06
   Venue, see R.C. §§ 2901.12, 2931.29 et seq.
§ 606.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE, CONTRIBUTION, LEGISLATIVE CAMPAIGN FUND, POLITICAL
ACTION COMMITTEE, POLITICAL CONTRIBUTING ENTITY and POLITICAL PARTY. Have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 3517.01.
   (b)   CONTRABAND. Any property that is illegal for a person to acquire or
possess under a statute, ordinance or rule, or that a trier of fact lawfully
determines to be illegal to possess by reason of the property’s involvement in
an offense. CONTRABAND includes but is not limited to all of the following:
      (1)   Any controlled substance, as defined in R.C. § 3719.01, or any
device or paraphernalia related thereto;
      (2)   Any unlawful gambling device or paraphernalia;
      (3)   Any dangerous ordnance or obscene material.
   (c)   DEADLY FORCE. Any force that carries a substantial risk that it will
proximately result in the death of any person.
   (d)   DETENTION. Arrest; confinement in any vehicle subsequent to an arrest;
confinement in any public or private facility for custody of persons charged
with or convicted of crime in this state or another state or under the laws of
the United States or alleged or found to be a delinquent child or unruly child
in this state or another state or under the laws of the United States;
hospitalization, institutionalization or confinement in any public or private
facility that is ordered pursuant to or under the authority of R.C. § 2945.37,
2945.371, 2945.38, 2945.39, 2945.40, 2945.401 or 2945.402; confinement in any
vehicle for transportation to or from any facility of any of those natures;
detention for extradition or deportation; except as provided in this division,
supervision by any employee of any facility of any of those natures that is
incidental to hospitalization, institutionalization or confinement in the
facility but that occurs outside the facility; supervision by an employee of
the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction of a person on any type of
release from a state correctional institution; or confinement in any vehicle,
airplane or place while being returned from outside of this state into this
state by a private person or entity pursuant to a contract entered into under
R.C. § 311.29(E) or 5149.03(B). For a person confined in a county jail who
participates in a county jail industry program pursuant to R.C. § 5147.30,
DETENTION includes time spent at an assigned work site and going to and from
the work site.
   (e)   DETENTION FACILITY. Any public or private place used for the
confinement of a person charged with or convicted of any crime in this state or
another state or under the laws of the United States or alleged or found to be
a delinquent child or an unruly child in this state or another state or under
the laws of the United States.
   (f)   FORCE. Any violence, compulsion or constraint physically exerted by
any means upon or against a person or thing.
   (g)   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any of the following:
      (1)   A Sheriff, Deputy Sheriff, constable, police officer of a township
or joint police district, Marshal, Deputy Marshal, municipal police officer,
member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under
R.C. § 3735.31(D) or State Highway Patrol trooper.
      (2)   An officer, agent or employee of the state or any of its agencies,
instrumentalities or political subdivisions, upon whom, by statute, a duty to
conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is imposed and the
authority to arrest violators is conferred, within the limits of such statutory
duty and authority.
      (3)   The Mayor, in a capacity as chief conservator of the peace within
the municipality.
      (4)   A member of an auxiliary police force organized by the county,
township or municipal law enforcement authorities, within the scope of the
member’s appointment or commission.
      (5)   A person lawfully called pursuant to R.C. § 311.07 to aid a sheriff
in keeping the peace, for the purposes and during the time when the person is
called.
      (6)   A person appointed by a Mayor pursuant to R.C.§ 737.10 as a special
patrolling officer during a riot or emergency, for the purposes and during the
time when the person is appointed.
      (7)   A member of the organized militia of this state or the Armed Forces
of the United States, lawfully called to duty to aid civil authorities in
keeping the peace or protect against domestic violence.
      (8)   A prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, secret
service officer or municipal prosecutor.
      (9)   A veterans’ home police officer appointed under R.C. § 5907.02.
      (10)   A member of a police force employed by a regional transit
authority under R.C. § 306.35(Y).
      (11)   A special police officer employed by a port authority under R.C. §
4582.04 or 4582.28.
      (12)   The House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms if the House of
Representatives Sergeant at Arms has arrest authority pursuant to R.C. §
101.311(E)(1) and an Assistant House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms.
      (13)   The Senate Sergeant at Arms and an Assistant Senate Sergeant at
Arms.
      (14)   A special police officer employed by a municipal corporation at a
municipal airport, or other municipal air navigation facility, that has
scheduled operations, as defined in 14 C.F.R. 119.3, as amended, and that is
required to be under a security program and is governed by aviation security
rules of the Transportation Security Administration of the United States
Department of Transportation as provided in 49 C.F.R. Parts 1542 and 1544, as
amended.
   (h)   NOT GUILTY BY REASON OF INSANITY. A person is NOT GUILTY BY REASON OF
INSANITY relative to a charge of an offense only if the person proves, in the
manner specified in R.C. § 2901.05, that at the time of the commission of the
offense, he or she did not know, as a result of a severe mental disease or
defect, the wrongfulness of his or her acts.
   (i)   OFFENSE OF VIOLENCE.
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.11,
2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.15, 2903.18, 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22, 2905.01,
2905.02, 2905.11, 2905.32, 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.05, 2909.02, 2909.03,
2909.24, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2917.01, 2917.02, 2917.03, 2917.31,
2917.321, 2919.25, 2921.03, 2921.04, 2921.34 or 2923.161, of division (A)(1) of
R.C. § 2903.34, of division (A)(1), (A)(2) or (A)(3) of R.C. § 2911.12, or of
division (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3) or (B)(4) of R.C. § 2919.22, or felonious
sexual penetration in violation of former R.C. § 2907.12;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States, substantially equivalent to
any section, division or offense listed in division (1) of this definition;
      (3)   An offense, other than a traffic offense, under an existing or
former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or of the United
States, committed purposely or knowingly, and involving physical harm to
persons or a risk of serious physical harm to persons;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing, any
offense under division (1), (2) or (3) of this definition;
      (5)   A violation of division (C) of R.C. § 959.131.
   (j)   OFFICIAL PROCEEDING. Any proceeding before a legislative, judicial,
administrative or other governmental agency or official authorized to take
evidence under oath, and includes any proceeding before a referee, hearing
examiner, commissioner, notary or other person taking testimony or a deposition
in connection with an official proceeding.
   (k)   PARTY OFFICIAL. Any person who holds an elective or appointive post in
a political party in the United States or this state, by virtue of which he or
she directs, conducts or participates in directing or conducting party affairs
at any level of responsibility.
   (l)   PERSON.
      (1)   A.   Subject to division (2) of this definition, as used in any
section contained in this general offenses code that sets forth a criminal
offense, PERSON includes all of the following:
            1.   An individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership and association.
            2.   An unborn human who is viable.
         B.   As used in any section contained in this general offenses code
that does not set forth a criminal offense, PERSON includes an individual,
corporation, business trust, estate, partnership and association.
         C.   As used in division (1)A.2. of this definition, UNBORN HUMAN
means an individual organism of the species homo sapiens from fertilization
until live birth. VIABLE means the stage of development of a human fetus at
which there is a realistic probability of maintaining and nourishing of a life
outside the womb with or without temporary artificial life-sustaining support.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (1)A. of this definition, in no case shall
the portion of the definition of the term PERSON that is set forth in division
(1)A.2. of this definition be applied or construed in any section contained in
this general offenses code that sets forth a criminal offense in any of the
following manners:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (2)A. of this
definition, in a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as
prohibiting any pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion
with the consent of the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant woman
implied by law in a medical emergency, or with the approval of one otherwise
authorized by law to consent to medical treatment on behalf of the pregnant
woman. An abortion that violates the conditions described in the immediately
preceding sentence may be punished as a violation of R.C. § 2903.01, 2903.02,
2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13,
2903.14, 2903.21 or 2903.22, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, as applicable. An abortion that does not violate the conditions
described in the second immediately preceding sentence but that does violate
R.C. § 2919.12, 2919.13(B), 2919.15, 2919.151, 2919.17 or 2919.18, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, may be punished as a violation of
that section, as applicable. Consent is sufficient under this division if it is
of the type otherwise adequate to permit medical treatment to the pregnant
woman, even if it does not comply with R.C. § 2919.12.
         B.   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as
applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman that occurs while
she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the following:
            1.   Her delivery of a stillborn baby.
            2.   Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a
viable, unborn human that she is carrying.
            3.   Her causing the death of her child who is born alive but who
dies from one or more injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable,
unborn human.
            4.   Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more
injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human.
            5.   Her causing, threatening to cause, or attempting to cause, in
any other manner, an injury, illness, or other psychological illness or
condition, regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable, unborn human
that she is carrying.
   (m)   PHYSICAL HARM TO PERSONS. Any injury, illness or other physiological
impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.
   (n)   PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY. Any tangible or intangible damage to
property that, in any degree, results in loss to its value or interferes with
its use or enjoyment. PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY does not include wear and tear
occasioned by normal use.
   (o)   PRIVILEGE. An immunity, license or right conferred by law, or bestowed
by express or implied grant, or arising out of status, position, office or
relationship, or growing out of necessity.
   (p)   PROPERTY.
      (1)   Any property, real or personal, tangible or intangible, and any
interest or license in that property. PROPERTY includes but is not limited to
cable television service, other telecommunications service, telecommunications
devices, information service, computers, data, computer software, financial
instruments associated with computers, other documents associated with
computers, or copies of the documents, whether in machine or human-readable
form, trade secrets, trademarks, copyrights, patents, and property protected by
a trademark, copyright or patent. FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS ASSOCIATED WITH
COMPUTERS include but are not limited to checks, drafts, warrants, money
orders, notes of indebtedness, certificates of deposit, letters of credit,
bills of credit or debit cards, financial transaction authorization mechanisms,
marketable securities or any computer system representations of any of them.
      (2)   As used in this definition, TRADE SECRET has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 1333.61, and TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE and INFORMATION SERVICE have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (3)   As used in this definition and in the definition of CONTRABAND in
this section, CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE, COMPUTER, COMPUTER NETWORK, COMPUTER
SOFTWARE, COMPUTER SYSTEM, DATA, and TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   (q)   PROVIDER AGREEMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
   (r)   PUBLIC OFFICIAL. Any elected or appointed officer, employee or agent
of the state or any political subdivision thereof, whether in a temporary or
permanent capacity, and includes but is not limited to legislators, judges and
law enforcement officers. The term does not include an employee, officer, or
governor-appointed member of the board of directors of the nonprofit
corporation formed under R.C. § 187.01.
   (s)   PUBLIC SERVANT.
      (1)   Any of the following:
         A.   Any public official.
         B.   Any person performing ad hoc a governmental function, including
but not limited to a juror, member of a temporary commission, master,
arbitrator, advisor or consultant.
         C.   A person who is a candidate for public office, whether or not he
or she is elected or appointed to the office for which he or she is a
candidate. A person is a candidate for purposes of this division if he or she
has been nominated according to law for election or appointment to public
office, or if he or she has filed a petition or petitions as required by law to
have his or her name placed on the ballot in a primary, general or special
election, or if he or she campaigns as a write-in candidate in any primary,
general or special election.
      (2)   The term does not include an employee, officer, or governor-
appointed member of the board of directors of the nonprofit corporation formed
under R.C. § 187.01.
   (t)   RISK. A significant possibility, as contrasted with a remote
possibility, that a certain result may occur or that certain circumstances may
exist.
   (u)   SCHOOL, SCHOOL BUILDING and SCHOOL PREMISES. Have the same meanings as
in R.C. § 2925.01.
   (v)   SCHOOL ACTIVITY. Any activity held under the auspices of a board of
education of a city, local, exempted village, joint vocational or cooperative
education school district; a governing authority of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314; a governing board of an educational
service center; or the governing body of a nonpublic school for which the
Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum standards under R.C. §
3301.07.
   (w)   SCHOOL BUS. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   (x)   SCHOOL SAFETY ZONE. Consists of a school, school building, school
premises, school activity and school bus.
   (y)   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO PERSONS. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any mental illness or condition of such gravity as would normally
require hospitalization or prolonged psychiatric treatment;
      (2)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death;
      (3)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent incapacity, whether
partial or total, or that involves some temporary, substantial incapacity;
      (4)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent disfigurement, or
that involves some temporary, serious disfigurement;
      (5)   Any physical harm that involves acute pain of such duration as to
result in substantial suffering, or that involves any degree of prolonged or
intractable pain.
   (z)   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY. Any physical harm to property that
does either of the following:
      (1)   Results in substantial loss to the value of the property, or
requires a substantial amount of time, effort or money to repair or replace;
      (2)   Temporarily prevents the use or enjoyment of the property, or
substantially interferes with its use or enjoyment for an extended period of
time.
   (aa)   SUBSTANTIAL RISK. A strong possibility, as contrasted with a remote
or significant possibility, that a certain result may occur or that certain
circumstances may exist.
   (bb)   VALUABLE THING or VALUABLE BENEFIT. Includes but is not limited to a
contribution. This inclusion does not indicate or imply that a contribution was
not included in those terms before September 17, 1986.
(R.C. §§ 2901.01, 2921.01)
§ 606.02 CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENSES.
   As used in this general offenses code:
   (a)   Offenses include misdemeanors of the first, second, third and fourth
degree, minor misdemeanors and offenses not specifically classified.
   (b)   Regardless of the penalty that may be imposed, any offense
specifically classified as a misdemeanor is a misdemeanor.
   (c)   Any offense not specifically classified is a misdemeanor if
imprisonment for not more than one year may be imposed as a penalty.
   (d)   Any offense not specifically classified is a minor misdemeanor if the
only penalty that may be imposed is one of the following:
      (1)   For an offense committed prior to January 1, 2004, a fine not
exceeding $100;
      (2)   For an offense committed on or after January 1, 2004, a fine not
exceeding $150, community service under R.C. § 2929.27(D), or a financial
sanction other than a fine under R.C. § 2929.28.
(R.C. § 2901.02)
§ 606.03 OFFENSES DEFINED.
   (a)   No conduct constitutes a criminal offense against the municipality
unless it is defined as an offense in this general offenses code.
   (b)   An OFFENSE is defined when one or more sections of this general
offenses code state a positive prohibition or enjoin a specific duty, and
provide a penalty for violation of the prohibition or failure to meet that
duty.
   (c)   This section does not affect the power of a court to punish for
contempt or to employ any sanction authorized by law to enforce an order, civil
judgment or decree.
(R.C. § 2901.03)
§ 606.04 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c) or (d) of this section,
sections of this general offenses code defining offenses or penalties shall be
strictly construed against the municipality and liberally construed in favor of
the accused.
   (b)   Rules of criminal procedure and sections of this general offenses code
providing for criminal procedure shall be construed so as to effect the fair,
impartial, speedy and sure administration of justice.
   (c)   Any provision of a section of this general offenses code that refers
to a previous conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of a section of
this general offenses code, the Ohio Revised Code or a division of a section of
this general offenses code or the Ohio Revised Code shall be construed to also
refer to a previous conviction of or plea of guilty to a substantially
equivalent offense under an existing or former law of this municipality, state,
another state or the United States or under an existing or former municipal
ordinance.
   (d)   Any provision of this code that refers to a section, or to a division
of a section, of this code that defines or specifies a criminal offense shall
be construed to also refer to an existing or former law of this state, another
state or the United States, to an existing or former municipal ordinance, or to
an existing or former division of any such existing or former law or ordinance
that defines or specifies, or that defined or specified, a substantially
equivalent offense.
(R.C. § 2901.04)
§ 606.05 CRIMINAL LAW JURISDICTION.
   (a)   A person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in this
municipality if any of the following occur:
      (1)   The person commits an offense under the laws of this municipality,
any element of which takes place in this municipality;
      (2)   While in this municipality, the person attempts to commit, or is
guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in another jurisdiction,
which offense is an offense under both the laws of this municipality and the
other jurisdiction, or, while in this municipality, the person conspires to
commit an offense in another jurisdiction, which offense is an offense under
both the laws of this municipality and the other jurisdiction, and a
substantial overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy is undertaken in this
municipality by the person or another person involved in the conspiracy,
subsequent to the person’s entrance into the conspiracy. In any case in which a
person attempts to commit, is guilty of complicity in the commission of, or
conspires to commit an offense in another jurisdiction as described in this
division, the person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in this
municipality for the attempt, complicity or conspiracy, and for any resulting
offense that is committed or completed in the other jurisdiction;
      (3)   While out of this municipality, the person conspires or attempts to
commit, or is guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in this
municipality;
      (4)   While out of this municipality, the person omits to perform a legal
duty imposed by the laws of this municipality, which omission affects a
legitimate interest of the municipality in protecting, governing or regulating
any person, property, thing, transaction or activity in this municipality;
      (5)   While out of this municipality, the person unlawfully takes or
retains property and subsequently brings any of the unlawfully taken or
retained property into this municipality;
      (6)   While out of this municipality, the person unlawfully takes or
entices another person and subsequently brings the other person into this
municipality;
      (7)   The person, by means of a computer, computer system, computer
network, telecommunication, telecommunications device, telecommunications
service or information service, causes or knowingly permits any writing, data,
image or other telecommunication to be disseminated or transmitted into this
municipality in violation of the law of this state or municipality.
   (b)   In homicide, the element referred to in division (a)(1) of this
section includes the act that causes death, the physical contact that causes
death, the death itself, or any other element that is set forth in the offense
in question. If any part of the body of a homicide victim is found in this
municipality, the death is presumed to have occurred within this municipality.
   (c)   (1)   This municipality includes the land and water within its
boundaries and the air space above that land and water, with respect to which
this municipality has either exclusive or concurrent legislative jurisdiction.
Where the boundary between this municipality and another jurisdiction is
disputed, the disputed territory is conclusively presumed to be within this
municipality for purposes of this section.
      (2)   The Courts of Common Pleas of Adams, Athens, Belmont, Brown,
Clermont, Columbiana, Gallia, Hamilton, Jefferson, Lawrence, Meigs, Monroe,
Scioto and Washington counties have jurisdiction beyond the north or northwest
shore of the Ohio River extending to the opposite shore line, between the
extended boundary lines of any adjacent counties or adjacent state. Each of
those Courts of Common Pleas has concurrent jurisdiction on the Ohio River with
any adjacent Court of Common Pleas that borders on that river and with any
court of Kentucky or of West Virginia that borders on the Ohio River and that
has jurisdiction on the Ohio River under the law of Kentucky or the law of West
Virginia, whichever is applicable, or under federal law.
   (d)   When an offense is committed under the laws of this municipality, and
it appears beyond a reasonable doubt that the offense or any element of the
offense took place either in this municipality or in another jurisdiction or
jurisdictions, but it cannot reasonably be determined in which it took place,
the offense or element is conclusively presumed to have taken place in this
municipality for purposes of this section.
   (e)   When a person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in
this municipality for an offense committed or completed outside this
municipality, the person is subject to all specifications for that offense that
would be applicable if the offense had been committed within this municipality.
   (f)   Any act, conduct or element that is a basis of a person being subject
under this section to criminal prosecution and punishment in this municipality
need not be committed personally by the person as long as it is committed by
another person who is in complicity or conspiracy with the person.
   (g)   This section shall be liberally construed, consistent with
constitutional limitations, to allow this municipality the broadest possible
jurisdiction over offenses and persons committing offenses in, or affecting,
this municipality.
   (h)   For purposes of division (a)(2) of this section, an overt act is
substantial when it is of a character that manifests a purpose on the part of
the actor that the object of the conspiracy should be completed.
   (i)   As used in this section, COMPUTER, COMPUTER SYSTEM, COMPUTER NETWORK,
INFORMATION SERVICE, TELECOMMUNICATION, TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE,
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE, DATA and WRITING have the same meanings as in R.C.
§ 2913.01.
(R.C. § 2901.11)
§ 606.06 LIMITATION ON CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), (a)(5),
or (a)(6) of this section or as otherwise provided in this section, a
prosecution shall be barred unless it is commenced within the following periods
after an offense is committed:
         A.   For a felony, six years;
         B.   For a misdemeanor other than a minor misdemeanor, two years;
         C.   For a minor misdemeanor, six months.
      (2)   There is no period of limitation for the prosecution of a violation
of R.C. § 2903.01 or 2903.02 or for the prosecution of a conspiracy to commit,
attempt to commit, or complicity in committing a violation of R.C. § 2903.01 or
R.C. § 2903.02.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (b) to (j) of this
section, a prosecution of any of the following offenses shall be barred unless
it is commenced within 20 years after the offense is committed:
         A.   A violation of R.C. § 2903.03, 2903.04, 2905.01, 2905.32,
2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.21, 2909.02, 2909.22, 2909.23, 2909.24, 2909.26,
2909.27, 2909.28, 2909.29, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2911.12 or 2917.02, a
violation of R.C. § 2903.11 or 2903.12 if the victim is a peace officer, a
violation of R.C. § 2903.13 that is a felony, or a violation of former R.C. §
2907.12.
         B.   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing a violation set forth in division (a)(3)A. of this section.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (d) to (l) of this
section, a prosecution of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 or a
conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in committing a
violation of either section shall be barred unless it is commenced within 25
years after the offense is committed.
      (5)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (a)(5)B. and (e) to
(i) of this section, a prosecution of a violation of R.C. § 2907.13 shall be
barred unless it is commenced within five years after the offense is committed.
         B.   Prosecution that would otherwise be barred under division (a)
(5)A. of this section may be commenced within five years after the date of the
discovery of the offense by either an aggrieved person or the aggrieved
person’s legal representative who is not a party to the offense.
         C.   As used in division (a)(5)B. of this section, “aggrieved person”
includes any of the following individuals with regard to a violation of R.C. §
2907.13:
            1.   A patient who was the victim of the violation;
            2.   The spouse or surviving spouse of a patient who was the victim
of the violation;
            3.   Any child born as a result of the violation.
      (6)   A prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 2151.421(A)(1) or (A)(4),
which is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, or a misdemeanor of the first
degree under circumstances specified in R.C. § 2151.99, is barred unless it is
commenced within four years after the violation is committed.
   (b)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(2) of this section,
if the period of limitation provided in division (a)(1) or (a)(3) of this
section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for an offense of which an
element is fraud or breach of fiduciary duty within one year after discovery of
the offense either by an aggrieved person or by the aggrieved person’s legal
representative who is not a party to the offense.
      (2)   If the period of limitation provided in division (a)(1) or (a)(3)
of this section has expired, prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 2913.49
shall be commenced within five years after discovery of the offense either by
an aggrieved person or the aggrieved person’s legal representative who is not a
party to the offense.
   (c)   (1)   If the period of limitation provided in division (a)(1) or (a)
(3) of this section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for the
following offenses during the following specified periods of time:
         A.   For an offense involving misconduct in office by a public servant
at any time while the accused remains a public servant, or within two years
thereafter;
         B.   For an offense by a person who is not a public servant but whose
offense is directly related to the misconduct in office of a public servant, at
any time while that public servant remains a public servant, or within two
years thereafter.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   OFFENSE IS DIRECTLY RELATED TO THE MISCONDUCT IN OFFICE OF A
PUBLIC SERVANT. The phrase includes but is not limited to a violation of R.C. §
101.71, 101.91, 121.61 or 2921.13, 102.03(F) or (H), 2921.02(A), 2921.43(A) or
(B), or 3517.13(F) or (G), that is directly related to an offense involving
misconduct in office of a public servant, or a violation of any municipal
ordinance substantially equivalent to those Ohio Revised Code sections listed
in this division (c)(2)A.
         B.   PUBLIC SERVANT has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.01.
   (d)   (1)   If a DNA record made in connection with the criminal
investigation of the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 is
determined to match another DNA record that is of an identifiable person and if
the time of the determination is later than 25 years after the offense is
committed, prosecution of that person for a violation of the section may be
commenced within five years after the determination is complete.
      (2)   If a DNA record made in connection with the criminal investigation
of the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 is determined to
match another DNA record that is of an identifiable person and if the time of
the determination is within 25 years after the offense is committed,
prosecution of that person for a violation of the section may be commenced
within the longer of 25 years after the offense is committed or five years
after the determination is complete.
      (3)   As used in this division, DNA RECORD has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 109.573.
   (e)   An offense is committed when every element of the offense occurs. In
the case of an offense of which an element is a continuing course of conduct,
the period of limitation does not begin to run until the course of conduct or
the accused’s accountability for it terminates, whichever occurs first.
   (f)   A prosecution is commenced on the date an indictment is returned or an
information filed, or on the date a lawful arrest without a warrant is made, or
on the date a warrant, summons, citation or other process is issued, whichever
occurs first. A prosecution is not commenced by the return of an indictment or
the filing of an information unless reasonable diligence is exercised to issue
and execute process on the same. A prosecution is not commenced upon issuance
of a warrant, summons, citation or other process unless reasonable diligence is
exercised to execute the same.
   (g)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the corpus
delicti remains undiscovered.
   (h)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the
accused purposely avoids prosecution. Proof that the accused departed this
municipality or conceals the accused’s identity or whereabouts is prima facie
evidence of the accused’s purpose to avoid prosecution.
   (i)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time a prosecution
against the accused based on the same conduct is pending in this state, even
though the indictment, information or process that commenced the prosecution is
quashed or the proceedings on the indictment, information or process are set
aside or reversed on appeal.
   (j)   The period of limitation for a violation of this Part 6 or Title XXIX
of the Ohio Revised Code that involves a physical or mental wound, injury,
disability or condition of a nature that reasonably indicates abuse or neglect
of a child under 18 years of age or of a child with a developmental disability
or physical impairment under 21 years of age shall not begin to run until
either of the following occurs:
      (1)   The victim of the offense reaches the age of majority.
      (2)   A public children services agency, or a municipal or county peace
officer that is not the parent or guardian of the child, in the county in which
the child resides or in which the abuse or neglect is occurring or has occurred
has been notified that abuse or neglect is known, suspected or believed to have
occurred.
   (k)   As used in this section, PEACE OFFICER has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2935.01.
   (l)   (1)   The amendments to divisions (a) and (d) of this section that
took effect on July 16, 2015, apply to a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03
committed on and after July 16, 2015, and apply to a violation of either of
those sections committed prior to July 16, 2015, if prosecution for that
violation was not barred under this section as it existed on July 16, 2015.
      (2)   The amendment to division (a)(2) of this section that took effect
on April 4, 2023, applies to a conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or
complicity in committing a violation of R.C. § 2903.01 or R.C. § 2903.02 if the
conspiracy, attempt, or complicity is committed on or after April 4, 2023, and
applies to a conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing a violation of either of those sections if the conspiracy, attempt,
or complicity was committed prior to April 4, 2023, and prosecution for that
conspiracy, attempt, or complicity was not barred under this section as it
existed on the day prior to April 4, 2023.
(R.C. § 2901.13)
§ 606.07 REQUIREMENTS FOR CRIMINAL LIABILITY; VOLUNTARY INTOXICATION.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, a person is not
guilty of an offense unless both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person’s liability is based on conduct that includes either a
voluntary act, or an omission to perform an act or duty that the person is
capable of performing;
      (2)   The person has the requisite degree of culpability for each element
as to which a culpable mental state is specified by the language defining the
offense.
   (b)   When the language defining an offense does not specify any degree of
culpability, and plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict criminal
liability for the conduct described in the section, then culpability is not
required for a person to be guilty of the offense. The fact that one division
of a section plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict liability for an
offense defined in that division does not by itself plainly indicate a purpose
to impose strict criminal liability for an offense defined in other divisions
of the section that do not specify a degree of culpability.
   (c)   (1)   When language defining an element of an offense that is related
to knowledge or intent or to which mens rea could fairly be applied neither
specifies culpability nor plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict
liability, the element of the offense is established only if a person acts
recklessly.
      (2)   Division (c)(1) of this section does not apply to offenses defined
in R.C. Title XLV.
      (3)   Division (c)(1) of this section does not relieve the prosecution of
the burden of proving the culpable mental state required by any definition
incorporated into the offense.
   (d)   Voluntary intoxication may not be taken into consideration in
determining the existence of a mental state that is an element of a criminal
offense. Voluntary intoxication does not relieve a person of a duty to act if
failure to act constitutes a criminal offense. Evidence that a person was
voluntarily intoxicated may be admissible to show whether or not the person was
physically capable of performing the act with which the person is charged.
   (e)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CULPABILITY. Purpose, knowledge, recklessness or negligence, as
defined in R.C. § 2901.22.
      (2)   INTOXICATION. Includes but is not limited to intoxication resulting
from the ingestion of alcohol, a drug, or alcohol and a drug.
      (3)   INVOLUNTARY ACTS. Reflexes, convulsions, body movements during
unconsciousness or sleep, and body movements that are not otherwise a product
of the actor’s volition are INVOLUNTARY ACTS.
      (4)   POSSESSION. A voluntary act if the possessor knowingly procured or
received the thing possessed, or was aware of the possessor’s control of the
thing possessed for a sufficient time to have ended possession.
(R.C. § 2901.21)
§ 606.08 CULPABLE MENTAL STATES.
   (a)   A person acts purposely when it is the person’s specific intention to
cause a certain result, or, when the gist of the offense is a prohibition
against conduct of a certain nature, regardless of what the offender intends to
accomplish thereby, it is the offender’s specific intention to engage in
conduct of that nature.
   (b)   A person acts knowingly, regardless of purpose, when the person is
aware that the person’s conduct will probably cause a certain result or will
probably be of a certain nature. A person has knowledge of circumstances when
the person is aware that such circumstances probably exist. When knowledge of
the existence of a particular fact is an element of an offense, such knowledge
is established if a person subjectively believes that there is a high
probability of its existence and fails to make inquiry or acts with a conscious
purpose to avoid learning the fact.
   (c)   A person acts recklessly when, with heedless indifference to the
consequences, the person disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that
the person’s conduct is likely to cause a certain result or is likely to be of
a certain nature. A person is reckless with respect to circumstances when, with
heedless indifference to the consequences, the person disregards a substantial
and unjustifiable risk that such circumstances are likely to exist.
   (d)   A person acts negligently when, because of a substantial lapse from
due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that the person’s
conduct may cause a certain result or may be of a certain nature. A person is
negligent with respect to circumstances when, because of a substantial lapse
from due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that such
circumstances may exist.
   (e)   When the section defining an offense provides that negligence suffices
to establish an element thereof, then recklessness, knowledge or purpose is
also sufficient culpability for that element. When recklessness suffices to
establish an element of an offense, then knowledge or purpose is also
sufficient culpability for that element. When knowledge suffices to establish
an element of an offense, then purpose is also sufficient culpability for that
element.
(R.C. § 2901.22)
§ 606.09 ORGANIZATIONAL CRIMINAL LIABILITY.
   (a)   An organization may be convicted of an offense under any of the
following circumstances:
      (1)   The offense is a minor misdemeanor committed by an officer, agent
or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s office or employment, except that if the
section defining the offense designates the officers, agents or employees for
whose conduct the organization is accountable or the circumstances under which
it is accountable, those provisions shall apply.
      (2)   A purpose to impose organizational liability plainly appears in the
section defining the offense, and the offense is committed by an officer, agent
or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s office or employment, except that if the
section defining the offense designates the officers, agents or employees for
whose conduct the organization is accountable or the circumstances under which
it is accountable, those provisions shall apply.
      (3)   The offense consists of an omission to discharge a specific duty
imposed by law on the organization.
      (4)   If, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise required for the
commission of the offense, its commission was authorized, requested, commanded,
tolerated or performed by the board of directors, trustees, partners, or by a
high managerial officer, agent or employee acting in behalf of the organization
and within the scope of such a board’s or person’s office or employment.
   (b)   If strict liability is imposed for the commission of an offense, a
purpose to impose organizational liability shall be presumed, unless the
contrary plainly appears.
   (c)   In a prosecution of an organization for an offense other than one for
which strict liability is imposed, it is a defense that the high managerial
officer, agent or employee having supervisory responsibility over the subject
matter of the offense exercised due diligence to prevent its commission. This
defense is not available if it plainly appears inconsistent with the purpose of
the section defining the offense.
   (d)   As used in this section, ORGANIZATION means a corporation for profit
or not for profit, partnership, limited partnership, joint venture,
unincorporated nonprofit association, estate, trust or other commercial or
legal entity. ORGANIZATION does not include an entity organized as or by a
governmental agency for the execution of a governmental program.
(R.C. § 2901.23)
§ 606.10 PERSONAL ACCOUNTABILITY FOR ORGANIZATIONAL CONDUCT.
   (a)   An officer, agent or employee of an organization, as defined in R.C. §
2901.23, may be prosecuted for an offense committed by the organization, if he
or she acts with the kind of culpability required for the commission of the
offense, and any of the following apply:
      (1)   In the name of the organization or in its behalf, he or she engages
in conduct constituting the offense, or causes another to engage in that
conduct, or tolerates that conduct when it is of a type for which he or she has
direct responsibility;
      (2)   He or she has primary responsibility to discharge a duty imposed on
the organization by law, and the duty is not discharged.
   (b)   When a person is convicted of an offense by reason of this section, he
or she is subject to the same penalty as if he or she had acted in his or her
own behalf.
(R.C. § 2901.24)
§ 606.11 ATTEMPTS.
   (a)   No person, purposely or knowingly, and when purpose or knowledge is
sufficient culpability for the commission of an offense, shall engage in
conduct that, if successful, would constitute or result in the offense.
   (b)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that, in retrospect,
commission of the offense that was the object of the attempt was either
factually or legally impossible under the attendant circumstances, if that
offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been as the
actor believed them to be.
   (c)   No person who is convicted of committing a specific offense, of
complicity in the commission of an offense or of conspiracy to commit an
offense, shall be convicted of an attempt to commit the same offense in
violation of this section.
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
actor abandoned his or her effort to commit the offense or otherwise prevented
its commission, under circumstances manifesting a complete and voluntary
renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an attempt to commit an
offense. An attempt to commit aggravated murder, murder or an offense for which
the maximum penalty is imprisonment for life is a felony of the first degree,
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. An attempt to commit a drug abuse
offense for which the penalty is determined by the amount or number of unit
doses of the controlled substance involved in the drug abuse offense is an
offense of the same degree as the drug abuse offense attempted would be if that
drug abuse offense had been committed and had involved an amount or number of
unit doses of the controlled substance that is within the next lower range of
controlled substance amounts than was involved in the attempt. An attempt to
commit any other offense is an offense of the next lesser degree than the
offense attempted. In the case of an attempt to commit an offense other than a
violation of R.C. Chapter 3734 that is not specifically classified, an attempt
is a misdemeanor of the first degree if the offense attempted is a felony, and
a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the offense attempted is a misdemeanor.
In the case of an attempt to commit a violation of any provision of R.C.
Chapter 3734, other than R.C. § 3734.18, that relates to hazardous wastes, an
attempt is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. An attempt to
commit a minor misdemeanor, or to engage in conspiracy, is not an offense under
this section.
   (f)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
      (2)   MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
(R.C. § 2923.02)
§ 606.12 COMPLICITY.
   (a)   No person, acting with the kind of culpability required for the
commission of an offense, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Solicit or procure another to commit the offense;
      (2)   Aid or abet another in committing the offense;
      (3)   Conspire with another to commit the offense in violation of R.C. §
2923.01;
      (4)   Cause an innocent or irresponsible person to commit the offense.
   (b)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that no person with
whom the accused was in complicity has been convicted as a principal offender.
   (c)   No person shall be convicted of complicity under this section unless
an offense is actually committed, but a person may be convicted of complicity
in an attempt to commit an offense in violation of R.C. § 2923.02 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (d)   If an alleged accomplice of the defendant testifies against the
defendant in a case in which the defendant is charged with complicity in the
commission of or an attempt to commit an offense, an attempt to commit an
offense, or an offense, the court shall charge the jury in accordance with R.C.
§ 2923.03(D).
   (e)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that,
prior to the commission of or attempt to commit the offense, the actor
terminated his or her complicity, under circumstances manifesting a complete
and voluntary renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of complicity in the
commission of an offense, and shall be prosecuted and punished as if he or she
were a principal offender. A charge of complicity may be stated in terms of
this section, or in terms of the principal offense.
(R.C. § 2923.03)
§ 606.13 SELF DEFENSE; LIMITATIONS ON DUTY TO RETREAT PRIOR TO USING FORCE.
   (a)   As used in this section, RESIDENCE has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2901.05.
   (b)   For purposes of any section of this code that sets forth a criminal
offense, a person has no duty to retreat before using force in self-defense,
defense of another, or defense of that person’s residence if that person is in
a place in which the person lawfully has a right to be.
   (c)   A trier of fact shall not consider the possibility of retreat as a
factor in determining whether or not a person who used force in self-defense,
defense of another, or defense of that person’s residence reasonably believed
that the force was necessary to prevent injury, loss, or risk to life or
safety.
(R.C. § 2901.09)
CHAPTER 612: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
   
612.01   Definitions
   
612.02   Sales to underage persons; prohibitions and misrepresentations
   
612.03   Sales to intoxicated persons
   
612.04   Consumption in motor vehicle
   
612.05   Permit required
   
612.06   Posting age and firearm warning signs
   
612.07   Open container prohibited
   
612.08   Hours of sale or consumption
   
612.09   Conveying intoxicating liquor or cash onto grounds of detention
facilities or other specified governmental facilities
   
612.10   Sales of low-alcohol beverages to underage persons; prohibitions and
misrepresentations
   
612.11   Alcohol vaporizing devices prohibited
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Disorderly conduct while voluntarily intoxicated, see §
648.04
   Driving or physical control while intoxicated, see §
434.01
   Effect of voluntary intoxication on criminal liability, see §
606.07
   Liquor Control Law, see R.C. Ch. 4301
   Liquor permits, see R.C. Ch. 4303
   Local option, see R.C. § 4303.29   
   Suspension of alcohol sales during emergency, see R.C. § 4301.251
   Using weapons while intoxicated, see §
678.04
§ 612.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, whether rectified or diluted with water or
not, whatever its origin may be, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol. The term
does not include denatured alcohol and wood alcohol.
   (b)   AT RETAIL. For use or consumption by the purchaser and not for resale.
   (c)   BEER.
      (1)   Includes all beverages brewed or fermented wholly or in part from
malt products and containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume.
      (2)   BEER, regardless of the percent of alcohol by volume, is not
intoxicating liquor for purposes of this code, the Ohio Revised Code, or any
rules adopted under it.
   (d)   CIDER. All liquids that are fit to use for beverage purposes that
contain 0.5% of alcohol by volume, but not more than 6% of alcohol by weight
that are made through the normal alcoholic fermentation of the juice of sound,
ripe apples, including without limitation flavored, sparkling or carbonated
cider and cider made from pure condensed apple must.
   (e)   CLUB. A corporation or association of individuals organized in good
faith for social, recreational, benevolent, charitable, fraternal, political,
patriotic or athletic purposes, which is the owner, lessor or occupant of a
permanent building or part of a permanent building operated solely for those
purposes, membership in which entails the prepayment of regular dues, and
includes the place so operated.
   (f)   COMMUNITY FACILITY. Either of the following:
      (1)   Any convention, sports or entertainment facility or complex, or any
combination of these, that is used by or accessible to the general public and
that is owned or operated in whole or in part by the state, a state agency or a
political subdivision of the state or that is leased from, or located on
property owned by or leased from, the state, a state agency, a political
subdivision of the state or a convention facilities authority created pursuant
to R.C. § 351.02;
      (2)   An area designated as a community entertainment district pursuant
to R.C. § 4301.80.
   (g)   CONTROLLED ACCESS ALCOHOL AND BEVERAGE CABINET. A closed container,
either refrigerated, in whole or in part, or nonrefrigerated, access to the
interior of which is restricted by means of a device that requires the use of a
key, magnetic card or similar device and from which beer, intoxicating liquor,
other beverages or food may be sold.
   (h)   HOTEL. The same meaning as in R.C. § 3731.01, subject to the
exceptions mentioned in R.C. § 3731.03.
   (i)   INTOXICATING LIQUOR and LIQUOR. All liquids and compounds, other than
beer, containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume which are fit to use for
beverage purposes, from whatever source and by whatever process produced, by
whatever name called, and whether they are medicated, proprietary or patented.
INTOXICATING LIQUOR and LIQUOR include cider and alcohol, and all solids and
confections which contain 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume.
   (j)   LOW-ALCOHOL BEVERAGE. Any brewed or fermented malt product or any
product made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits or other agricultural
products that contains either no alcohol or less than 0.5% of alcohol by
volume. The beverages described in this definition do not include a soft drink
such as root beer, birch beer or ginger beer.
   (k)   MANUFACTURE. All processes by which beer or intoxicating liquor is
produced, whether by distillation, rectifying, fortifying, blending,
fermentation, brewing, or in any other manner.
   (l)   MANUFACTURER. Any person engaged in the business of manufacturing beer
or intoxicating liquor.
   (m)   MIXED BEVERAGES. Includes bottled and prepared cordials, cocktails,
highballs, and solids and confections that are obtained by mixing any type of
whiskey, neutral spirits, brandy, gin or other distilled spirits with, or over,
carbonated or plain water, pure juices from flowers and plants, and other
flavoring materials. The completed product shall contain not less than 0.5% of
alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume. The phrase
includes the contents of a pod.
   (n)   NIGHTCLUB. A place habitually operated for profit, where food is
served for consumption on the premises, and one or more forms of amusement are
provided or permitted for a consideration that may be in the form of a cover
charge or may be included in the price of the food and beverages, or both,
purchased by patrons.
   (o)   PERSON. Includes firms and corporations.
   (p)   PHARMACY. An establishment as defined in R.C. § 4729.01, that is under
the management or control of a licensed pharmacist in accordance with R.C. §
4729.27.
   (q)   POD. Means a sealed capsule made from plastic, glass, aluminum, or a
combination thereof to which all of the following apply:
      (1)   The capsule contains intoxicating liquor of more than 21% of
alcohol by volume.
      (2)   The capsule also contains a concentrated flavoring mixture.
      (3)   The contents of the capsule are not readily accessible or intended
for consumption unless certain manufacturer’s processing instructions are
followed.
      (4)   The instructions include releasing the contents of the capsule
through a machine specifically designed to process the contents.
      (5)   After being properly processed according to the manufacturer’s
instructions, the final product produced from the capsule contains not less
than 0.5% of alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume.
   (r)   RESTAURANT. A place located in a permanent building provided with
space and accommodations wherein, in consideration of the payment of money, hot
meals are habitually prepared, sold and served at noon and evening, as the
principal business of the place. The term does not include pharmacies,
confectionery stores, lunch stands, nightclubs and filling stations.
   (s)   SALE and SELL. The exchange, barter, gift, offer for sale, sale,
distribution and delivery of any kind, and the transfer of title or possession
of beer and intoxicating liquor either by constructive or actual delivery by
any means or devices whatever, including the sale of beer or intoxicating
liquor by means of a controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet pursuant to
R.C. § 4301.21. These terms do not include the mere solicitation of orders for
beer or intoxicating liquor from the holders of permits issued by the Division
of Liquor Control authorizing the sale of the beer or intoxicating liquor, but
no solicitor shall solicit any orders until the solicitor has been registered
with the Division pursuant to R.C. § 4303.25.
   (t)   SALES AREA OR TERRITORY. An exclusive geographic area or territory
that is assigned to a particular A or B permit holder and that either has one
or more political subdivisions as its boundaries or consists of an area of land
with readily identifiable geographic boundaries. SALES AREA OR TERRITORY does
not include, however, any particular retail location in an exclusive geographic
area or territory that had been assigned to another A or B permit holder before
April 9, 2001.
   (u)   SEALED CONTAINER. Any container having a capacity of not more than 128
fluid ounces, the opening of which is closed to prevent the entrance of air.
   (v)   SPIRITUOUS LIQUOR. All intoxicating liquors containing more than 21%
of alcohol by volume. The phrase does not include the contents of a pod.
   (w)   VEHICLE. All means of transportation by land, by water or by air, and
everything made use of in any way for the transportation.
   (x)   WHOLESALE DISTRIBUTOR and DISTRIBUTOR. A person engaged in the
business of selling to retail dealers for purposes of resale.
   (y)   WINE. All liquids fit to use for beverage purposes containing not less
than 0.5% of alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume, that
is made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits, or other agricultural
products. The term includes cider, except as used in R.C. §§ 4301.13, 4301.421,
4301.422, 4301.432, and 4301.44, and, for purposes of determining the rate of
the tax that applies, R.C. § 4301.43(B), the term does not include cider.
(R.C. §§ 4301.01, 4301.244)
§ 612.02 SALES TO UNDERAGE PERSONS; PROHIBITIONS AND MISREPRESENTATIONS.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301,
no person shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor to an underage person, shall
buy beer or intoxicating liquor for an underage person, or shall furnish it to
an underage person unless given by a physician in the regular line of the
physician’s practice or given for established religious purposes or unless the
underage person is supervised by a parent, spouse who is not an underage
person, or legal guardian. In proceedings before the Liquor Control Commission,
no permit holder, or no employee or agent of a permit holder, charged with a
violation of this division shall be charged, for the same offense, with a
violation of R.C. § 4301.22(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (b)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private place
shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the place while
possessing or consuming beer or intoxicating liquor, unless the intoxicating
liquor or beer is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that
person’s parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian and
the parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian is present
at the time of the person’s possession or consumption of the beer or
intoxicating liquor. An owner of a public or private place is not liable for
acts or omissions in violation of this division that are committed by a lessee
of that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee’s acts
or omissions.
   (c)   No person shall engage or use accommodations at a hotel, inn, cabin,
campground or restaurant when the person knows or has reason to know either of
the following:
      (1)   That beer or intoxicating liquor will be consumed by an underage
person on the premises of the accommodations that the person engages or uses,
unless the person engaging or using the accommodations is the spouse of the
underage person and who is not an underage person, or is the parent or legal
guardian of all of the underage persons, who consume beer or intoxicating
liquor on the premises and that person is on the premises at all times when
beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by an underage person.
      (2)   That a drug of abuse will be consumed on the premises of the
accommodations by any person, except a person who obtained the drug of abuse
pursuant to a prescription issued by a licensed health professionals authorized
to prescribe drugs and has the drug of abuse in the original container in which
it was dispensed to the person.
   (d)   (1)   No person is required to permit the engagement of accommodations
at any hotel, inn, cabin or campground by an underage person or for an underage
person, if the person engaging the accommodations knows or has reason to know
that the underage person is intoxicated, or that the underage person possesses
any beer or intoxicating liquor and is not supervised by a parent, spouse who
is not an underage person, or legal guardian who is or will be present at all
times when the beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by the underage
person.
      (2)   No underage person shall knowingly engage or attempt to engage
accommodations at any hotel, inn, cabin or campground by presenting
identification that falsely indicates that the underage person is 21 years of
age or older for the purpose of violating this section.
   (e)   (1)   No underage person shall knowingly order, pay for, share the
cost of, attempt to purchase, possess or consume any beer or intoxicating
liquor in any public or private place. No underage person shall knowingly be
under the influence of any beer or intoxicating liquor in any public place. The
prohibitions set forth in this division against an underage person knowingly
possessing, consuming or being under the influence of any beer or intoxicating
liquor shall not apply if the underage person is supervised by a parent, spouse
who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, or the beer or intoxicating
liquor is given by a physician in the regular line of the physician’s practice
or given for established religious purposes.
      (2)   A.   If a person is charged with violating division (e)(1) of this
section in a complaint filed under R.C. § 2151.27, the court may order the
child into a diversion program specified by the court and hold the complaint in
abeyance pending successful completion of the diversion program. A child is
ineligible to enter into a diversion program under this division if the child
previously has been diverted pursuant to this division. If the child completes
the diversion program to the satisfaction of the court, the court shall dismiss
the complaint and order the child’s record in the case sealed under R.C. §§
2151.356 through 2151.358. If the child fails to satisfactorily complete the
diversion program, the court shall proceed with the complaint.
         B.   If a person is charged in a criminal complaint with violating
division (e)(1) of this section, R.C. § 2935.36 shall apply to the offense,
except that a person is ineligible for diversion under that section if the
person previously has been diverted pursuant to divisions (e)(2)A. or (e)(2)B.
of this section. If the person completes the diversion program to the
satisfaction of the court, the court shall dismiss the complaint and order the
record in the case sealed under R.C. § 2953.33. If the person fails to
satisfactorily complete the diversion program, the court shall proceed with the
complaint.
   (f)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian of
a minor shall knowingly permit the minor to violate this section or R.C. §
4301.63, 4301.633 or 4301.634, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (g)   The operator of any hotel, inn, cabin or campground shall make the
provisions of this section available in writing to any person engaging or using
accommodations at the hotel, inn, cabin or campground.
   (h)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   DRUG OF ABUSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.
      (2)   HOTEL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3731.01.
      (3)   LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS and
PRESCRIPTION. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
      (4)   MINOR. A person under the age of 18 years.
      (5)   UNDERAGE PERSON. A person under the age of 21 years.
(R.C. § 4301.69)
   (i)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301,
no person under the age of 21 years shall purchase beer or intoxicating liquor.
(R.C. § 4301.63)
   (j)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301,
no person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the name, age or
other identification of any person under 21 years of age, for the purpose of
obtaining, or with the intent to obtain, beer or intoxicating liquor for a
person under 21 years of age, by purchase or as a gift.
(R.C. § 4301.633)
   (k)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301,
no person under the age of 21 years shall knowingly show or give false
information concerning his or her name, age or other identification for the
purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining beer or intoxicating liquor in any
place in this municipality where beer or intoxicating liquor is sold under a
permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control, or sold by the Division of
Liquor Control.
(R.C. § 4301.634)
   (l)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor, shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, and in
addition to the fine, may be imprisoned for a definite term of not more than
six months.
(R.C. § 4301.99(I))
   (m)   Whoever violates division (b), (c), (d),(f), (g) or (j) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(C))
   (n)   Whoever violates division (e)(1) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If an offender who violates division (e)(1) of
this section was under the age of 18 years at the time of the offense and the
offense occurred while the offender was the operator of or a passenger in a
motor vehicle, the court, in addition to any other penalties it imposes upon
the offender, shall suspend the offender’s temporary instruction permit or
probationary driver’s license for a period of not less than six months and not
more than one year. If the offender is 15 years and six months of age or older
and has not been issued a temporary instruction permit or probationary driver’s
license, the offender shall not be eligible to be issued such a license or
permit for a period of six months. If the offender has not attained the age of
15 years and six months, the offender shall not be eligible to be issued a
temporary instruction permit until the offender attains the age of 16 years.
(R.C. § 4301.99(D))
   (o)   Whoever violates division (i) of this section shall be fined not less
than $25 nor more than $100. The court imposing a fine for a violation of this
section may order that the fine be paid by the performance of public work at a
reasonable hour rate established by the court. The court shall designate the
time within which the public work shall be completed.
(R.C. § 4301.99(E))
   (p)   (1)   Whoever violates division (k) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If, in committing a first violation of
division (k), the offender presented to the permit holder or his or her
employee or agent a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $250 and not
more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more
than six months.
      (2)   On a second violation in which, for the second time, the offender
presented to the permit holder or his or her employee or agent a false,
fictitious or altered identification card, a false or fictitious driver’s
license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s license issued by any
state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree and shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, and
may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months. The
court also may impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operation privilege from
the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
      (3)   On a third or subsequent violation in which, for the third or
subsequent time, the offender presented to the permit holder or his or her
employee or agent a false, fictitious or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $500 nor more
than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than
six months. Except as provided in this division, the court also may impose a
class six suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. §
4510.02(A)(6), and the court may order that the suspension or denial remain in
effect until the offender attains the age of 21 years. The court, in lieu of
suspending the offender’s temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s
license, or driver’s license, instead may order the offender to perform a
determinate number of hours of community service, with the court determining
the actual number of hours and the nature of the community service the offender
shall perform.
(R.C. § 4301.99(F))
§ 612.03 SALES TO INTOXICATED PERSONS.
   (a)   No permit holder and no agent or employee of a permit holder shall
sell or furnish beer or intoxicating liquor to an intoxicated person.
(R.C. § 4301.22(B))
   (b)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(D), (H))
§ 612.04 CONSUMPTION IN MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (a)   No person shall consume any beer or intoxicating liquor in a motor
vehicle. This section does not apply to persons described in R.C. § 4301.62(D)
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 4301.64)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If an offender who violates this section was under the age of 18 years
at the time of the offense, the court, in addition to any other penalties it
imposes upon the offender, may suspend the offender’s temporary instruction
permit, probationary driver’s license or driver’s license for a period of not
less than six months and not more than one year. In lieu of suspending the
offender’s temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license, or
driver’s license, the court instead may require the offender to perform
community service for a number of hours determined by the court. If the
offender is 15 years and six months of age or older and has not been issued a
temporary instruction permit or probationary driver’s license, the offender
shall not be eligible to be issued such a license or permit for a period of six
months. If the offender has not attained the age of 15 years and six months,
the offender shall not be eligible to be issued a temporary instruction permit
until the offender attains the age of 16 years.
(R.C. § 4301.99(B))
§ 612.05 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   (1)   No person personally or by the person’s clerk, agent or
employee, shall manufacture, manufacture for sale, offer, keep or possess for
sale, furnish or sell, or solicit the purchase or sale of any beer or
intoxicating liquor in this state, or transport, import or cause to be
transported or imported any beer, intoxicating liquor or alcohol in or into
this municipality for delivery, use or sale, unless the person has fully
complied with R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303 or is the holder of a permit issued
by the Division of Liquor Control and in force at the time.
      (2)   No manufacturer, supplier, wholesale distributor, broker or
retailer of beer or intoxicating liquor, or other person shall employ, retain
or otherwise utilize any person in this state to act as an employee, agent,
solicitor or salesperson, or act in any other representative capacity to sell,
solicit, take orders or receive offers to purchase or expressions of interest
to purchase beer or intoxicating liquor from any person, at any location other
than a liquor permit premises, except as specifically authorized by R.C.
Chapter 4301 or Chapter 4303 or rules adopted thereunder. No function, event or
party shall take place at any location other than a liquor permit premises
where any person acts in any manner to sell, solicit, take orders or receive
offers to purchase or expressions of intent to purchase beer or intoxicating
liquor to or from any person, except as specifically authorized by R.C. Chapter
4301 or Chapter 4303 or rules adopted thereunder.
(R.C. § 4303.25)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
§ 612.06 POSTING AGE AND FIREARM WARNING SIGNS.
   (a)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4301.691, every place in
this municipality where beer, intoxicating liquor or any low-alcohol beverage
is sold for beverage purposes shall display at all times, in a prominent place
on the premises thereof, a printed card, which shall be furnished by the
Division of Liquor Control and which shall read substantially as follows:
   WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER AGE
   If you are under the age of 21
   Under the statutes of the State of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share the
cost of or attempt to purchase, or possess or consume beer or intoxicating
liquor in any public place, or furnish false information as to name, age or
other identification, you are subject to a fine of up to $1,000, or
imprisonment up to 6 months, or both.
   If you are under the age of 18
   Under the statutes of the State of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share the
cost of or attempt to purchase, or possess or consume, any type of beer or wine
that contains either no alcohol or less than one-half of one percent of alcohol
by volume in any public place, or furnish false information as to the name,
age, or other identification, you are subject to a fine of up to $250 or to
imprisonment up to 30 days, or both.
      (2)   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution or any
proceedings before the Department or the Liquor Control Commission for failing
to display this card. No permit issued by the Department shall be suspended,
revoked or canceled because of the failure of the permit holder to display this
card.
   (b)   (1)   Every place in this municipality for which a D permit has been
issued under R.C. Chapter 4303 shall be issued a printed card by the Division
of Liquor Control that shall read substantially as follows:
   WARNING
   If you are carrying a firearm
   Under the statutes of Ohio, if you possess a firearm in any room in which
liquor is being dispensed in premises for which a D permit has been issued
under Chapter 4303 of the Revised Code, you may be guilty of a felony and may
be subjected to a prison term of up to one year.
      (2)   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution or any
proceedings before the Division of Liquor Control or the Liquor Control
Commission for failing to display this card. No permit issued by the Department
shall be suspended, revoked or canceled because of the failure of the permit
holder to display this card.
(R.C. § 4301.637)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4301.70, 4301.99(A))
§ 612.07 OPEN CONTAINER PROHIBITED.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE. A vehicle registered under R.C. § 4503.24.
      (2)   STREET, HIGHWAY, and MOTOR VEHICLE. Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 4511.01.
   (b)   No person shall have in the person’s possession an opened container of
beer or intoxicating liquor in any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(1)E. of this section, in a State
liquor store;
      (2)   Except as provided in division (c) or (j) of this section, on the
premises of the holder of any permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control;
      (3)   In any other public place;
      (4)   Except as provided in division (d) or (e) of this section while
operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on any street, highway
or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking;
      (5)   Except as provided in division (d) or (e) of this section while
being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on any street, highway or other
public or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking.
   (c)   (1)   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened container
of any of the following:
         A.   Beer or intoxicating liquor that has been lawfully purchased for
consumption on the premises where bought from the holder of an A-1-A, A-2, A-
2f, A-3a, D-1, D-2, D-3, D-3a, D-4, D-4a, D-5, D-5a, D-5b, D-5c, D-5d, D-5e, D-
5f, D-5g, D-5h, D-5i, D-5j, D-5k, D-5l, D-5m, D-5n, D-5o, D-7, D-8, D-9, E, F,
F-2, F-5, F-7, F-8, or F-9 permit;
         B.   Beer, wine, or mixed beverages served for consumption on the
premises by the holder of an F-3 permit, wine served as a tasting sample by an
A-2, A-2f, S-1, or S-2 permit holder for consumption on the premises of a
farmers market for which an F-10 permit has been issued, or wine served for
consumption on the premises by the holder of an F-4 or F-6 permit;
         C.   Beer or intoxicating liquor consumed on the premises of a
convention facility as provided in R.C. § 4303.201;
         D.   Beer or intoxicating liquor to be consumed during tastings and
samplings approved by rule of the Liquor Control Commission;
         E.   Spiritous liquor to be consumed for purposes of a tasting sample,
as defined in R.C. § 4301.171;
         F.   Beer or intoxicating liquor to be consumed in an outdoor area
described in R.C. § 4303.188(B)(1).
      (2)   A person may have in the person’s possession on an F liquor permit
premises an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor that was not
purchased from the holder of the F permit if the premises for which the F
permit is issued is a music festival and the holder of the F permit grants
permission for that possession on the premises during the period for which the
F permit is issued. As used in this division (c)(2), MUSIC FESTIVAL means a
series of outdoor live musical performances extending for a period of at least
three consecutive days and located on an area of land of at least 40 acres.
      (3)   A.   A person may have in the person’s possession on a D-2 liquor
permit premises an opened or unopened container of wine that was not purchased
from the holder of the D-2 permit if the premises for which the D-2 permit is
issued is an outdoor performing arts center, the person is attending an
orchestral performance, and the holder of the D-2 permit grants permission for
the possession and consumption of wine in certain predesignated areas of the
premises during the period for which the D-2 permit is issued.
         B.   As used in division (c)(3)A. of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
            1.   ORCHESTRAL PERFORMANCE. A concert comprised of a group of not
fewer than 40 musicians playing various musical instruments.
            2.   OUTDOOR PERFORMING ARTS CENTER. An outdoor performing arts
center that is located on not less than 150 acres of land and that is open for
performances from the first day of April to the last day of October of each
year.
      (4)   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened or unopened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location at which the
person is attending an orchestral performance as defined in division (c)(3)B.
of this section if the person with supervision and control over the performance
grants permission for the possession and consumption of beer or intoxicating
liquor in certain predesignated areas of that outdoor location.
      (5)   A person may have in the person's possession on an F-9 liquor
permit premises an opened or unopened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
that was not purchased from the holder of the F-9 permit if the F-9 permit
holder grants permission for the possession and consumption of beer or
intoxicating liquor in certain predesignated areas of the premises during the
period for which the F-9 permit is issued.
      (6)   A.   A person may have in the person’s possession on the property
of an outdoor motorsports facility an opened or unopened container of beer or
intoxicating liquor that was not purchased from the owner of the facility if
both of the following apply:
            1.   The person is attending a racing event at the facility; and
            2.   The owner of the facility grants permission for the possession
and consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor on the property of the facility.
         B.   As used in division (c)(6)A. of this section:
            1.   OUTDOOR MOTORSPORTS FACILITY. An outdoor racetrack to which
all of the following apply:
               a.   It is 2.4 miles or more in length.
               b.   It is located on 200 acres or more of land.
               c.   The primary business of the owner of the facility is the
hosting and promoting of racing events.
               d.   The holder of a D-1, D-2, or D-3 permit is located on the
property of the facility.
            2.   RACING EVENT. A motor vehicle racing event sanctioned by one
or more motor racing sanctioning organizations.
      (7)   A.   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location within an
outdoor refreshment area created under R.C. § 4301.82 if the opened container
of beer or intoxicating liquor was purchased from an A-1, A-1-A, A-1c, A-2, A-
2f, D class, or F class permit holder to which both of the following apply:
            1.   The permit holder’s premises is located within the outdoor
refreshment area.
            2.   The permit held by the permit holder has an outdoor
refreshment area designation.
         B.   Division (c)(7) of this section does not authorize a person to do
either of the following:
            1.   Enter the premises of an establishment within an outdoor
refreshment area while possessing an opened container of beer or intoxicating
liquor acquired elsewhere;
            2.   Possess an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
while being in or on a motor vehicle within an outdoor refreshment area, unless
the possession is otherwise authorized under division (d) or (e) of this
section.
         C.   As used in division (c)(7) of this section, D CLASS PERMIT HOLDER
does not include a D-6 or D-8 permit holder.
      (8)   A.   A person may have in the person’s possession on the property
of a market, within a defined F-8 permit premises, an opened container of beer
or intoxicating liquor that was purchased from a D permit premises that is
located immediately adjacent to the market if both of the following apply:
            1.   The market grants permission for the possession and
consumption of beer and intoxicating liquor within the defined F-8 permit
premises;
            2.   The market is hosting an event pursuant to an F-8 permit and
the market has notified the division of liquor control about the event in
accordance with R.C. § 4303.208(A)(3).
         B.   As used in division (c)(8) of this section, MARKET means a
market, for which an F-8 permit is held, that has been in operation since 1860.
   (d)   This section does not apply to a person who pays all or a portion of
the fee imposed for use of a chauffeured limousine pursuant to a prearranged
contract or the guest of the person, when all of the following apply:
      (1)   The person or guest is a passenger in the limousine.
      (2)   The person or guest is located in the limousine, but is not
occupying a seat in the front compartment of the limousine where the operator
of the limousine is located.
      (3)   The limousine is located on any street, highway or other public or
private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking.
   (e)   An opened bottle of wine that was purchased from the holder of a
permit that authorizes the sale of wine for consumption on the premises where
sold is not an opened container for the purposes of this section if both of the
following apply:
      (1)   The opened bottle of wine is securely resealed by the permit holder
or an employee of the permit holder before the bottle is removed from the
premises. The bottle shall be secured in such a manner that it is visibly
apparent if the bottle has been subsequently opened or tampered with.
      (2)   The opened bottle of wine that is resealed in accordance with
division (e)(1) of this section is stored in the trunk of a motor vehicle or,
if the motor vehicle does not have a trunk, behind the last upright seat or in
an area not normally occupied by the driver or passengers and not easily
accessible by the driver.
   (f)   (1)   Except if an ordinance or resolution is enacted or adopted under
division (f)(2) of this section, this section does not apply to a person who,
pursuant to a prearranged contract, is a passenger riding on a commercial
quadricycle when all of the following apply:
         A.   The person is not occupying a seat in the front of the commercial
quadricycle where the operator is steering or braking.
         B.   The commercial quadricycle is being operated on a street,
highway, or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking.
         C.   The person has in their possession on the commercial quadricycle
an opened container of beer or wine.
         D.   The person has in their possession on the commercial quadricycle
not more than either 36 ounces of beer or 18 ounces of wine.
      (2)   The Legislative Authority may enact an ordinance or adopt a
resolution, as applicable, that prohibits a passenger riding on a commercial
quadricycle from possessing an opened container of beer or wine.
      (3)   As used in this section, COMMERCIAL QUADRICYCLE means a vehicle
that has fully-operative pedals for propulsion entirely by human power and that
meets all of the following requirements:
         A.   It has four wheels and is operated in a manner similar to a
bicycle.
         B.   It has at least five seats for passengers.
         C.   It is designed to be powered by the pedaling of the operator and
the passengers.
         D.   It is used for commercial purposes.
         E.   It is operated by the vehicle owner or an employee of the owner.
   (g)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person that has in the person’s
possession an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor on the premises
of a market if the beer or intoxicating liquor has been purchased from a D
liquor permit holder that is located in the market.
      (2)   As used in division (g) of this section, MARKET means an
establishment that:
         A.   Leases space in the market to individual vendors, not less than
50% of which are retail food establishments or food service operations licensed
under R.C. Chapter 3717;
         B.   Has an indoor sales floor area of not less than 22,000 square
feet;
         C.   Hosts a farmer’s market on each Saturday from April through
December.
   (h)   (1)   As used in this section, ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE has the same meaning
as in R.C. § 4303.185.
      (2)   An alcoholic beverage in a closed container being transported under
R.C. § 4303.185 to its final destination is not an opened container for the
purposes of this section if the closed container is securely sealed in such a
manner that it is visibly apparent if the closed container has been
subsequently opened or tampered with after sealing.
   (i)   This section does not apply to a person who has in the person’s
possession an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor in a public-use
airport, as described in R.C. § 4303.181(D)(2)(a)(iii), when both of the
following apply:
      (1)   Consumption of the opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
occurs in the area of the airport terminal that is restricted to persons taking
flights to and from the airport; and
      (2)   The consumption is authorized under R.C. § 4303.181(D)(2)(a).
   (j)   This section does not apply to a person that has in the person’s
possession an opened container of homemade beer or wine that is served in
accordance with R.C. § 4301.201(E).
(R.C. § 4301.62)
   (k)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4301.99(A))
§ 612.08 HOURS OF SALE OR CONSUMPTION.
   (a)   This section shall apply to the retail sale of beer, wine, mixed
beverages or spirituous liquor.
   (b)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor shall be sold or
delivered by an A-1, A-1C, A-2, B-1, B-2, B-4, B-5, C-1, C-2, C-2X, D-1, D-2,
D-2X, D-3 when issued without a D-3A, D-3X, D-4, D-5H, D-5K, D-8, F, F-1, F-2,
F-3, F-4, F-5, F-6, F-7, F-8, F-9, G, or I permit holder:
      (1)   From Monday to Saturday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:30
a.m.
      (2)   On Sunday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and Sunday midnight,
unless statutorily authorized otherwise.
      (3)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages or spirituous liquor is
also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises of the above permit
holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages
or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.
   (c)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages or spirituous liquor shall be sold or
delivered by an A-1A, D-3 when issued with a D-3A, D-4A, D-5, D-5A, D-5B, D-5C,
D-5D, D-5E, D-5F, D-5G, D-5I, D-5J, D-5L, D-5M, D-5N, D-5O, or D-7 permit
holder:
      (1)   From Monday to Saturday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 5:30
a.m.
      (2)   On Sunday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and Sunday midnight,
unless statutorily authorized otherwise.
      (3)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages or spirituous liquor is
also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises of the above permit
holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages
or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.
   (d)   Permit holders authorized to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages or
spirituous liquor at retail who are not specifically identified in divisions
(b) or (c) above shall be subject to the provisions of division (b), unless
statutorily authorized otherwise.
   (e)   The hours on Sunday during which sales, delivery or consumption of
alcoholic beverages may take place are established by statute, but in no event
shall they begin prior to 5:30 a.m.
(O.A.C. 4301:1-1-49)
   (f)   No association, corporation, local unit of an association or
corporation or D permit holder who holds an F-2 permit shall sell beer or
intoxicating liquor beyond the hours of sale allowed by the permit. This
division imposes strict liability on the holder of the permit and on any
officer, agent or employee of the permit holder.
(R.C. § 4303.202(D)(2))
   (g)   No F-8 permit holder shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor beyond the
hours of sale allowed by the permit. This division imposes strict liability on
the holder of an F-8 permit and on any officer, agent or employee of that
permit holder.
(R.C. § 4303.208(C))
   (h)   Whoever violates divisions (f) or (g) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4303.99(D))
§ 612.09 CONVEYING INTOXICATING LIQUOR OR CASH ONTO GROUNDS OF DETENTION
FACILITIES OR OTHER SPECIFIED GOVERNMENTAL FACILITIES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly convey, or attempt to convey, onto the
grounds of a detention facility or of an institution, office building or other
place that is under the control of the Department of Mental Health and
Addiction Services, the Department of Developmental Disabilities, the
Department of Youth Services or the Department of Rehabilitation and
Correction, any of the following items:
      (1)   Any deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance, as defined in R.C. §
2923.11, or any part of or ammunition for use in the deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance.
      (2)   Any drug of abuse, as defined in R.C. § 3719.011.
      (3)   Any intoxicating liquor, as defined in R.C. § 4301.01, except for
small amounts of wine for sacramental purposes when the person engaging in the
specified conduct is a cleric, as defined in R.C. § 2317.02.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any person who conveys
or attempts to convey an item onto the grounds of a detention facility or of an
institution, office building or other place under the control of the Department
of Mental Health and Addiction Services, the Department of Developmental
Disabilities, the Department of Youth Services or the Department of
Rehabilitation and Correction, with written authorization of the person in
charge of the detention facility or the institution and in accordance with the
written rules of the detention facility or the institution, office building or
other place.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, to a prisoner who is temporarily released from confinement
for a work assignment, or to any patient in an institution under the control of
the Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services, or the Department of
Developmental Disabilities, any item listed in division (a).
   (d)   No person shall knowingly deliver or attempt to deliver cash to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, or to a prisoner who is temporarily released from
confinement for a work assignment.
   (e)   No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, or to a prisoner who is temporarily released from
confinement for a work assignment a cellular telephone, two-way radio or other
electronic communications device.
   (f)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (a)(1)
of this section that the weapon or dangerous ordnance in question was being
transported in a motor vehicle for any lawful purpose, that it was not on the
actor’s person, and if the weapon or dangerous ordnance was a firearm, that it
was unloaded and was being carried in a closed package, box or case or in a
compartment that can be reached only by leaving the vehicle.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (c) of this
section that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by law from delivering the
item to the confined person, the child, the prisoner or the patient and that
either of the following applies:
         A.   The actor was permitted by the written rules of the detention
facility or the institution, office building or other place to deliver the item
to the confined person or the patient.
         B.   The actor was given written authorization by the person in charge
of the detention facility or the institution, office building or other place to
deliver the item to the confined person or the patient.
   (g)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) of this section or commits a
violation of division (c) of this section involving any item listed in division
(a)(1) of this section is guilty of illegal conveyance of weapons onto the
grounds of a specified governmental facility, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(2) of this section or commits a
violation of division (c) of this section involving any drug of abuse is guilty
of illegal conveyance of drugs of abuse onto the grounds of a specified
governmental facility, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (a)(3) of this section or commits a
violation of division (c) of this section involving any intoxicating liquor is
guilty of illegal conveyance of intoxicating liquor onto the grounds of a
specified governmental facility, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of illegal
conveyance of cash onto the grounds of a detention facility, a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (d) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, illegal conveyance of cash onto
the grounds of a detention facility is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (e) of this section is guilty of illegal
conveyance of a communications device onto the grounds of a specified
governmental facility, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (e)
of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
illegal conveyance of a communications device onto the grounds of a detention
facility is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.36)
§ 612.10 SALES OF LOW-ALCOHOL BEVERAGES TO UNDERAGE PERSONS; PROHIBITIONS AND
MISREPRESENTATIONS.
   (a)   As used in this section, UNDERAGE PERSON means a person under 18 years
of age.
   (b)   No underage person shall purchase any low-alcohol beverage.
   (c)   No underage person shall order, pay for, share the cost of or attempt
to purchase any low-alcohol beverage.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the
name, age or other identification of any underage person for the purpose of
obtaining or with the intent to obtain any low- alcohol beverage for an
underage person, by purchase or as a gift.
   (e)   No underage person shall knowingly show or give false information
concerning his or her name, age or other identification for the purpose of
purchasing or otherwise obtaining any low-alcohol beverage in any place in this
municipality.
   (f)   No person shall sell or furnish any low-alcohol beverage to, or buy
any low-alcohol beverage for, an underage person, unless given by a physician
in the regular line of his or her practice or given for established religious
purposes, or unless the underage person is accompanied by a parent, spouse who
is not an underage person, or legal guardian.
   (g)   (1)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private
place shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the place
while possessing or consuming any low-alcohol beverage, unless the low-alcohol
beverage is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that person’s
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, and the
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian is present when
the person possesses or consumes the low-alcohol beverage.
      (2)   An owner of a public or private place is not liable for acts or
omissions in violation of division (g)(1) that are committed by a lessee of
that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee’s acts or
omissions.
   (h)   No permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control shall be suspended,
revoked or cancelled because of a violation of either division (f) or (g).
   (i)   No underage person shall knowingly possess or consume any low-alcohol
beverage in any public or private place, unless he or she is accompanied by a
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, or unless the
low-alcohol beverage is given by a physician in the regular line of his or her
practice or given for established religious purposes.
   (j)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian of
an underage person shall knowingly permit the underage person to violate this
section.
(R.C. § 4301.631)
   (k)   No low-alcohol beverage shall be sold to any person under 18 years of
age.
(R.C. § 4301.22(A)(2))
   (l)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section shall be fined not less
than $25 nor more than $100. The court imposing a fine for a violation of
division (b) of this section may order that the fine be paid by the performance
of public work at a reasonable hour rate established by the court. The court
shall designate the time within which the public work shall be completed.
(R.C. § 4301.99(E))
   (m)   Whoever violates divisions (c) through (k) hereof is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(B))
§ 612.11 ALCOHOL VAPORIZING DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   (a)   As used in this section, ALCOHOL VAPORIZING DEVICE means a machine or
other device that mixes beer or intoxicating liquor with pure oxygen or any
other gas to produce a vaporized product for the purpose of consumption by
inhalation.
   (b)   No person shall sell or offer for sale an alcohol vaporizing device.
   (c)   No person shall purchase or use an alcohol vaporizing device.
(R.C. § 4301.65)
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
misdemeanor of the third degree. For a second or subsequent violation occurring
within a period of five consecutive years after the first violation, a person
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(J))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4301.99(A))
CHAPTER 618: ANIMALS
Section
   
618.01   Dogs and other animals running at large; nuisance, dangerous and
vicious dogs; hearings
   
618.02   Abandoning animals
   
618.03   Killing or injuring animals
   
618.04   Poisoning animals
   
618.05   Cruelty to animals; cruelty to companion animals
   
618.06   Coloring rabbits and baby poultry; sale or display of poultry
   
618.07   Barking or howling dogs
   
618.08   Registration of dogs required
   
618.09   Hindering capture of unregistered dog
   
618.10   Dogs required to wear tags
   
618.11   Unlawful tags
   
618.12   Rabies quarantine
   
618.13   Hunting prohibited
   
618.14   Nuisance conditions prohibited
   
618.15   Impounding and disposition; records
   
618.16   Restrictions on dog ownership for certain convicted felons
   
618.17   Sexual conduct with an animal
   
618.18   Prohibiting the keeping of certain animals
   
618.19   Prohibiting animal defecation on public or private property
   
618.20   Operating or establishment of a dog kennel
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Assaulting police dog or horse or assistance dog, see §
642.12
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Driving animals upon roadway, see §§
404.05,
412.05
   Offensive odors from places where animals are kept or fed, see §
660.04
   Possession of dangerous wild animals and restricted snakes, requirements and
licensing, see R.C. Chapter 935
   Power to restrain and impound animals, see R.C. § 715.23
§ 618.01 DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE; NUISANCE, DANGEROUS AND
VICIOUS DOGS; HEARINGS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   DANGEROUS DOG.
         A.   A dog that, without provocation, and subject to division B. of
this definition, has done any of the following:
            1.   Caused injury, other than killing or serious injury, to any
person;
            2.   Killed another dog;
            3.   Been the subject of a third or subsequent violation of R.C. §
955.22(C) or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
         B.   DANGEROUS DOG does not include a police dog that has caused
injury, other than killing or serious injury, to any person or has killed
another dog while the police dog is being used to assist one or more law
enforcement officers in the performance of their official duties.
      (2)   MENACING FASHION. A dog that would cause any person being chased or
approached to reasonably believe that the dog will cause physical injury to
that person.
      (3)   NUISANCE DOG.
         A.   Subject to division B. of this definition, NUISANCE DOG means a
dog that without provocation and while off the premises of its owner, keeper,
or harborer has chased or approached a person in either a menacing fashion or
an apparent attitude of attack or has attempted to bite or otherwise endanger
any person.
         B.   NUISANCE DOG does not include a police dog that, while being used
to assist one or more law enforcement officers in the performance of official
duties, has chased or approached a person in either a menacing fashion or an
apparent attitude of attack or has attempted to bite or otherwise endanger any
person.
      (4)   POLICE DOG. A dog that has been trained and may be used to assist
one or more law enforcement officers in the performance of their official
duties.
      (5)   SERIOUS INJURY. Any of the following:
         A.   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death;
         B.   Any physical harm that involves a permanent incapacity, whether
partial or total, or a temporary, substantial incapacity;
         C.   Any physical harm that involves a permanent disfigurement or a
temporary, serious disfigurement;
         D.   Any physical harm that involves acute pain of a duration that
results in substantial suffering or any degree of prolonged or intractable
pain.
      (6)   VICIOUS DOG.
         A.   A dog that, without provocation and subject to division B. of
this definition, has killed or caused serious injury to any person.
         B.   VICIOUS DOG does not include either of the following:
            1.   A police dog that has killed or caused serious injury to any
person while the police dog is being used to assist one or more law enforcement
officers in the performance of their official duties;
            2.   A dog that has killed or caused serious injury to any person
while a person was committing or attempting to commit a trespass or other
criminal offense on the property of the owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog.
      (7)   WITHOUT PROVOCATION. A dog acts WITHOUT PROVOCATION when it was not
teased, tormented or abused by a person, or it was not coming to the aid or the
defense of a person who was not engaged in illegal or criminal activity and who
was not using the dog as a means of carrying out the activity.
(R.C. § 955.11(A))
   (b)   No person, who is the owner or keeper of horses, mules, cattle, bison,
sheep, goats, swine, llamas, alpacas, or poultry, shall permit them to run at
large in the public road, highway, street, lane, or alley, or upon unenclosed
land, or cause the animals to be herded, kept, or detained for the purpose of
grazing on premises other than those owned or lawfully occupied by the owner or
keeper of the animals.
(R.C. § 951.02)
   (c)   No owner, keeper or harborer of any female dog shall permit it to go
beyond the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer at any time the dog is in
heat unless the dog is properly in leash.
   (d)   Except when a dog is lawfully engaged in hunting and accompanied by
the owner, keeper, harborer, or handler of the dog, no owner, keeper or
harborer of any dog shall fail at any time to do either of the following:
      (1)   Keep the dog physically confined or restrained upon the premises of
the owner, keeper or harborer by a leash, tether, adequate fence, supervision
or secure enclosure to prevent escape;
      (2)   Keep the dog under the reasonable control of some person.
   (e)   Except when a dangerous dog is lawfully engaged in hunting or training
for the purpose of hunting and is accompanied by the owner, keeper, harborer,
or handler of the dog, no owner, keeper or harborer of a dangerous dog shall
fail to do either of the following:
      (1)   While the dog is on the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer,
securely confine it at all times in a locked pen that has a top.
      (2)   While the dog is off the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer,
keep that dog on a chain-link leash or tether that is not more than six feet in
length and additionally do at least one of the following: keep the dog in a
locked pen that has a top, locked fenced yard or other locked enclosure that
has a top; have the leash or tether controlled by a person who is of suitable
age and discretion or securely attach, tie or affix the leash or tether to the
ground or a stationary object or fixture so that the dog is adequately
restrained and station a person in close enough proximity to that dog so as to
prevent it from causing injury to any person; or muzzle that dog.
   (f)   No person who has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more
violations of division (d) of this section involving the same dog and no owner,
keeper, or harborer of a dangerous dog shall fail to do the following:
      (1)   Obtain liability insurance with an insurer authorized to write
liability insurance in this state providing coverage in each occurrence because
of damage or bodily injury to or death of a person caused by the dangerous dog
if so ordered by a court and provide proof of that liability insurance upon
request to any law enforcement officer, county dog warden, or public health
official charged with enforcing this section;
      (2)   Obtain a dangerous dog registration certificate from the County
Auditor pursuant to division (j) of this section, affix a tag that identifies
the dog as a dangerous dog to the dog’s collar, and ensure that the dog wears
the collar and tag at all times;
      (3)   Notify the local dog warden immediately if any of the following
occurs:
         A.   The dog is loose or unconfined.
         B.   The dog bites a person, unless the dog is on the property of the
owner of the dog, and the person who is bitten is unlawfully trespassing or
committing a criminal act within the boundaries of that property.
         C.   The dog attacks another animal while the dog is off the property
of the owner of the dog.
      (4)   If the dog is sold, given to another person, or dies, notify the
County Auditor within ten days of the sale, transfer, or death.
   (g)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Debark or surgically silence a dog that the person knows or has
reason to believe is a dangerous dog;
      (2)   Possess a dangerous dog if the person knows or has reason to
believe that the dog has been debarked or surgically silenced;
      (3)   Falsely attest on a waiver form provided by the veterinarian under
division (h) of this section that the person’s dog is not a dangerous dog or
otherwise provide false information on that written waiver form.
   (h)   Before a veterinarian debarks or surgically silences a dog, the
veterinarian may give the owner of the dog a written waiver form that attests
that the dog is not a dangerous dog. The written waiver form shall include all
of the following:
      (1)   The veterinarian’s license number and current business address;
      (2)   The number of the license of the dog if the dog is licensed;
      (3)   A reasonable description of the age, coloring and gender of the dog
as well as any notable markings on the dog;
      (4)   The signature of the owner of the dog attesting that the owner’s
dog is not a dangerous dog;
      (5)   A statement that R.C. § 955.22(F) prohibits any person from doing
any of the following:
         A.   Debarking or surgically silencing a dog that the person knows or
has reason to believe is a dangerous dog;
         B.   Possessing a dangerous dog if the person knows or has reason to
believe that the dog has been debarked or surgically silenced;
         C.   Falsely attesting on a waiver form provided by the veterinarian
under R.C. § 955.22(G) that the person’s dog is not a dangerous dog or
otherwise provide false information on that written waiver form.
   (i)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of a violation of division
(g) of this section that the veterinarian who is charged with the violation
obtained, prior to debarking or surgically silencing the dog, a written waiver
form that complies with division (h) of this section and that attests that the
dog is not a dangerous dog.
   (j)   (1)   The County Auditor shall issue a dangerous dog registration
certificate to a person who is the owner of a dog, who is 18 years of age or
older, and who provides the following to the County Auditor:
         A.   A fee of $50;
         B.   The person’s address, phone number, and other appropriate means
for the local dog warden or County Auditor to contact the person;
         C.   With respect to the person and the dog for which the registration
is sought, all of the following:
            1.   Either satisfactory evidence of the dog’s current rabies
vaccination or a statement from a licensed veterinarian that a rabies
vaccination is medically contraindicated for the dog;
            2.   Either satisfactory evidence of the fact that the dog has been
neutered or spayed or a statement from a licensed veterinarian that neutering
or spaying of the dog is medically contraindicated;
            3.   Satisfactory evidence of the fact that the person has posted
and will continue to post clearly visible signs at the person’s residence
warning both minors and adults of the presence of a dangerous dog on the
property;
            4.   Satisfactory evidence of the fact that the dog has been
permanently identified by means of a microchip and the dog’s microchip number.
      (2)   Upon the issuance of a dangerous dog registration certificate to
the owner of a dog, the County Auditor shall provide the owner with a uniformly
designed tag that identifies the animal as a dangerous dog. The owner shall
renew the certificate annually for the same fee and in the same manner as the
initial certificate was obtained. If a certificate holder relocates to a new
county, the certificate holder shall follow the procedure in division (j)(3)B.
of this section and, upon the expiration of the certificate issued in the
original county, shall renew the certificate in the new county.
      (3)   A.   If the owner of a dangerous dog for whom a registration
certificate has previously been obtained relocates to a new address within the
same county, the owner shall provide notice of the new address to the County
Auditor within ten days of relocating to the new address.
         B.   If the owner of a dangerous dog for whom a registration
certificate has previously been obtained relocates to a new address within
another county, the owner shall do both of the following within ten days of
relocating to the new address:
            1.   Provide written notice of the new address and a copy of the
original dangerous dog registration certificate to the County Auditor of the
new county;
            2.   Provide written notice of the new address to the County
Auditor of the county where the owner previously resided.
      (4)   The owner of a dangerous dog shall present the dangerous dog
registration certificate upon being requested to do so by any law enforcement
officer, dog warden, or public health official charged with enforcing this
section.
(R.C. § 955.22)
   (k)   Hearing.
      (1)   The municipal court or county court that has territorial
jurisdiction over the residence of the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog
shall conduct any hearing concerning the designation of the dog as a nuisance
dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog.
      (2)   If a person who is authorized to enforce this chapter has
reasonable cause to believe that a dog in the person’s jurisdiction is a
nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog, the person shall notify the owner,
keeper, or harborer of that dog, by certified mail or in person, of both of the
following:
         A.   That the person has designated the dog a nuisance dog, dangerous
dog, or vicious dog, as applicable;
         B.   That the owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog may request a
hearing regarding the designation in accordance with this division (k). The
notice shall include instructions for filing a request for a hearing in the
county in which the dog’s owner, keeper, or harborer resides.
      (3)   If the owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog disagrees with the
designation of the dog as a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog, as
applicable, the owner, keeper, or harborer, not later than ten days after
receiving notification of the designation, may request a hearing regarding the
determination. The request for a hearing shall be in writing and shall be filed
with the municipal court or county court that has territorial jurisdiction over
the residence of the dog’s owner, keeper, or harborer. At the hearing, the
person who designated the dog as a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog
has the burden of proving, by clear and convincing evidence, that the dog is a
nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog. The owner, keeper, or harborer of
the dog or the person who designated the dog as a nuisance dog, dangerous dog,
or vicious dog may appeal the court’s final determination as in any other case
filed in that court.
      (4)   A court, upon motion of an owner, keeper, or harborer or an
attorney representing the owner, keeper, or harborer, may order that the dog
designated as a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog be held in the
possession of the owner, keeper, or harborer until the court makes a final
determination under this section or during the pendency of an appeal, as
applicable. Until the court makes a final determination and during the pendency
of any appeal, the dog shall be confined or restrained in accordance with the
provisions of division (e) that apply to dangerous dogs regardless of whether
the dog has been designated as a vicious dog or a nuisance dog rather than a
dangerous dog. The owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog shall not be required
to comply with any other requirements established in this Code or the Ohio
Revised Code that concern a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog, as
applicable, until the court makes a final determination and during the pendency
of any appeal.
      (5)   If a dog is finally determined under this division (k), or on
appeal as described in this division (k), to be a vicious dog, R.C. § 955.11(D)
and divisions (e) to (j) of this section apply with respect to the dog and the
owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog as if the dog were a dangerous dog, and §
618.16 applies with respect to the dog as if it were a dangerous dog, and the
court shall issue an order that specifies that those provisions apply with
respect to the dog and the owner, keeper, or harborer in that manner. As part
of the order, the court shall require the owner, keeper, or harborer to obtain
the liability insurance required under division (f)(1) in an amount described
in division (l)(5)B. of this section.
      (6)   As used in this division (k), NUISANCE DOG, DANGEROUS DOG, and
VICIOUS DOG have the same meanings as in R.C. § 955.11.
(R.C. § 955.222)
   (l)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever recklessly violates division (b) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 951.99)
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (c) of this section or commits a
violation of division (d) of this section that involves a dog that is not a
nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog shall be fined not less than $25 or
more than $100 on a first offense, and on each subsequent offense shall be
fined not less than $75 or more than $250 and may be imprisoned for not more
than 30 days.
         B.   In addition to the penalties prescribed in division (l)(2)A. of
this section, if the offender is guilty of a violation of division (c) of this
section or a violation of division (d) of this section that involves a dog that
is not a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog, the court may order the
offender to personally supervise the dog that the offender owns, keeps, or
harbors, to cause that dog to complete dog obedience training, or to do both.
(R.C. § 955.99(E))
      (3)   A.   Whoever commits a violation of division (d) of this section
that involves a nuisance dog is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on the first
offense and of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on each subsequent offense
involving the same dog. Upon a person being convicted of or pleading guilty to
a third violation of division (d) of this section involving the same dog, the
court shall require the offender to register the involved dog as a dangerous
dog.
         B.   In addition to the penalties prescribed in division (l)(2)A. of
this section, if a violation of division (d) of this section involves a
nuisance dog, the court may order the offender to personally supervise the
nuisance dog that the offender owns, keeps, or harbors, to cause that dog to
complete dog obedience training, or to do both.
(R.C. § 955.99(F))
      (4)   Whoever commits a violation of division (d) of this section that
involves a dangerous dog, or a violation of division (e) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and of a
misdemeanor of the third degree on each subsequent offense. Additionally, the
court may order the offender to personally supervise the dangerous dog that the
offender owns, keeps, or harbors, to cause that dog to complete dog obedience
training, or to do both, and the court may order the offender to obtain
liability insurance pursuant to division (f) of this section. The court, in the
alternative, may order the dangerous dog to be humanely destroyed by a licensed
veterinarian, the county dog warden, or the county humane society at the
owner’s expense. With respect to a violation of division (d) of this section
that involves a dangerous dog, until the court makes a final determination and
during the pendency of any appeal of a violation of that division and at the
discretion of the dog warden, the dog shall be confined or restrained in
accordance with division (e) of this section or at the county dog pound at the
owner’s expense.
(R.C. § 955.99(G))
      (5)   A.   Whoever commits a violation of division (d) of this section
that involves a vicious dog is guilty of one of the following:
            1.   A felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the
dog kills or seriously injures a person. Additionally, the court shall order
that the vicious dog be humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, the
county dog warden, or the county humane society at the owner’s expense.
            2.   A misdemeanor of the first degree if the dog causes serious
injury to a person. Additionally, the court may order the vicious dog to be
humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, the county dog warden, or the
county humane society at the owner’s expense.
         B.   If the court does not order the vicious dog to be destroyed under
division (l)(5)A.2. of this section, the court shall issue an order that
specifies that R.C. § 955.11(D) and divisions (e) to (j) of this section apply
with respect to the dog and the owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog as if the
dog were a dangerous dog and that § 618.16 applies with respect to the dog as
if it were a dangerous dog. As part of the order, the court shall order the
offender to obtain the liability insurance required under division (f)(1) of
this section in an amount, exclusive of interest and costs, that equals or
exceeds $100,000. Until the court makes a final determination and during the
pendency of any appeal of a violation of division (d) of this section and at
the discretion of the dog warden, the dog shall be confined or restrained in
accordance with the provisions described in division (e) of this section or at
the county dog pound at the owner’s expense.
(R.C. § 955.99(H))
      (6)   Whoever violates division (f)(2) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 955.99(J))
      (7)   Whoever violates division (g)(1), (g)(2), or (g)(3) of this section
is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
Additionally, the court shall order that the dog involved in the violation be
humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, the county dog warden, or the
county humane society. Until the court makes a final determination and during
the pendency of any appeal of a violation of division (g)(1), (g)(2), or (g)(3)
of this section and at the discretion of the dog warden, the dog shall be
confined or restrained in accordance with the provisions of division (e) of
this section or at the county dog pound at the owner’s expense.
(R.C. § 955.99(L))
      (8)   Whoever violates division (f)(1), (f)(3), or (f)(4) of this section
is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 955.99(M))
      (9)   Whoever violates division (j)(4) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 955.99(N))
      (10)   A.   If a dog is confined at the county dog pound pursuant to
division (l)(4), (l)(5), or (l)(7) of this section, the county dog warden shall
give written notice of the confinement to the owner of the dog. If the county
dog warden is unable to give the notice to the owner of the dog, the county dog
warden shall post the notice on the door of the residence of the owner of the
dog or in another conspicuous place on the premises at which the dog was
seized. The notice shall include a statement that a security in the amount of
$100 is due to the county dog warden within ten days to secure payment of all
reasonable expenses, including medical care and boarding of the dog for 60
days, expected to be incurred by the county dog pound in caring for the dog
pending the determination. The county dog warden may draw from the security any
actual costs incurred in caring for the dog.
         B.   If the person ordered to post security under division (l)(10)A.
of this section does not do so within ten days of the confinement of the
animal, the dog is forfeited, and the county dog warden may determine the
disposition of the dog unless the court issues an order that specifies
otherwise.
         C.   Not more than ten days after the court makes a final
determination under division (l)(4), (l)(5), or (l)(7) of this section, the
county dog warden shall provide the owner of the dog with the actual cost of
the confinement of the dog. If the county dog warden finds that the security
provided under division (l)(10)A. of this section is less than the actual cost
of confinement of the dog, the owner shall remit the difference between the
security provided and the actual cost to the county dog warden within 30 days
after the court’s determination. If the county dog warden finds that the
security provided under division (l)(10)A. of this section is greater than that
actual cost, the county dog warden shall remit the difference between the
security provided and the actual cost to the owner within 30 days after the
court’s determination.
(R.C. § 955.99(P))
      (11)   As used in this division (l), NUISANCE DOG, DANGEROUS DOG, and
VICIOUS DOG have the same meanings as in R.C. § 955.11.
(R.C. § 955.99(Q))
§ 618.02 ABANDONING ANIMALS.
   (a)   No owner or keeper of a dog, cat or other domestic animal shall
abandon the animal.
(R.C. § 959.01)
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
first degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 959.99(E)(3))
§ 618.03 KILLING OR INJURING ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person shall maliciously, or willfully and without the consent of
the owner, kill or injure a dog, cat or any other domestic animal that is the
property of another. This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian
acting in an official capacity.
(R.C. § 959.02)
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
If the value of the animal killed or the injury done amounts to $300 or more,
whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(R.C. § 959.99(B))
§ 618.04 POISONING ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person shall maliciously, or willfully and without the consent of
the owner, administer poison, except a licensed veterinarian acting in that
capacity, to a dog, cat or any other domestic animal that is the property of
another; and no person shall, willfully and without the consent of the owner,
place any poisoned food where it may be easily found and eaten by any such
animal, either upon his or her own lands or the lands of another.
(R.C. § 959.03)
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 959.99(C))
§ 618.05 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS; CRUELTY TO COMPANION ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person shall:
      (1)   Torture an animal, deprive one of necessary sustenance,
unnecessarily or cruelly beat, needlessly mutilate or kill, or impound or
confine an animal without supplying it during the confinement with a sufficient
quantity of good wholesome food and water;
      (2)   Impound or confine an animal without affording it, during the
confinement, access to shelter from wind, rain, snow or excessive direct
sunlight, if it can reasonably be expected that the animal would otherwise
become sick or in some other way suffer. This division does not apply to
animals impounded or confined prior to slaughter. For the purpose of this
section, “shelter” means an artificial enclosure, windbreak, sunshade or
natural windbreak or sunshade that is developed from the earth’s contour, tree
development or vegetation;
      (3)   Carry or convey an animal in a cruel or inhuman manner;
      (4)   Keep animals other than cattle, poultry or fowl, swine, sheep or
goats in an enclosure without wholesome exercise and change of air, nor feed
cows on food that produces impure or unwholesome milk;
      (5)   Detain livestock in railroad cars or compartments longer than 28
hours after they are so placed without supplying them with necessary food,
water and attention, nor permit the stock to be so crowded as to overlie,
crush, wound or kill each other.
   (b)   Upon the written request of the owner or person in custody of any
particular shipment of livestock, which written request shall be separate and
apart from any printed bill of lading or other railroad form, the length of
time in which the livestock may be detained in any cars or compartment without
food, water, and attention may be extended to 36 hours without penalty
therefor. Division (a) of this section does not prevent the dehorning of
cattle.
   (c)   All fines collected for violations of division (a) of this section
shall be paid to the Society or Association for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals, if there is one in the municipality; otherwise, all fines shall be
paid to the General Fund.
(R.C. § 959.13)
   (d)   Cruelty to companion animals.
      (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   ANIMAL RESCUE FOR DOGS. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 956.01.
         B.   BOARDING KENNEL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 956.01.
         C.   CAPTIVE WHITE-TAILED DEER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
1531.01.
         D.   COMPANION ANIMAL. Any animal that is kept inside a residential
dwelling and any dog or cat regardless of where it is kept, including a pet
store as defined in R.C. § 956.01. COMPANION ANIMAL does not include livestock
or any wild animal.
         E.   CRUELTY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1717.01.
         F.   DOG KENNEL. An animal rescue for dogs, a boarding kennel, or a
training kennel.
         G.   FEDERAL ANIMAL WELFARE ACT. The “Laboratory Animal Act of 1966”,
Pub. L. No. 89-544, 80 Stat. 350 (1966), 7 U.S.C. §§ 2131 et seq., as amended
by the “Animal Welfare Act of 1970”, Pub. L. No. 91-579, 84 Stat. 1560 (1970),
the “Animal Welfare Act Amendments of 1976”, Pub. L. No. 94-279, 90 Stat. 417
(1976), and the “Food Security Act of 1985”, Pub. L. No. 99-198, 99 Stat. 1354
(1985), and as it may be subsequently amended.
         H.   LIVESTOCK. Horses, mules, and other equidae; cattle, sheep,
goats, and other bovidae; swine and other suidae; poultry; alpacas; llamas;
captive white-tailed deer; and any other animal that is raised or maintained
domestically for food or fiber.
         I.   PRACTICE OF VETERINARY MEDICINE. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 4741.01.
         J.   RESIDENTIAL DWELLING. A structure or shelter or the portion of a
structure or
shelter that is used by one or more humans for the purpose of a habitation.
         K.   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM. Any of the following:
            1.   Physical harm that carries an unnecessary or unjustifiable
substantial risk of death;
            2.   Physical harm that involves either partial or total permanent
incapacity;
            3.   Physical harm that involves acute pain of a duration that
results in substantial suffering or that involves any degree of prolonged or
intractable pain.
         L.   TORMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1717.01.
         M.   TORTURE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1717.01.
         N.   TRAINING KENNEL. An establishment operating for profit that
keeps, houses, and maintains dogs for the purpose of training the dogs in
return for a fee or other consideration.
         O.   WILD ANIMAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1531.01.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly torture, torment, needlessly mutilate or
maim, cruelly beat, poison, needlessly kill or commit an act of cruelty against
a companion animal.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly cause serious physical harm to a
companion animal.
      (4)   No person who confines or who is the custodian or caretaker of a
companion animal shall negligently do any of the following:
         A.   Torture, torment, or commit an act of cruelty against the
companion animal;
         B.   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if it can reasonably be
expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way
as a result of or due to the deprivation or confinement;
         C.   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it can reasonably be expected
that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way as a
result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
      (5)   No person who confines or who is the custodian or caretaker of a
companion animal shall recklessly deprive the companion animal of necessary
sustenance or confine the companion animal without supplying it during the
confinement with sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water.
      (6)   No owner, manager, or employee of a dog kennel who confines or is
the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall knowingly do any of the
following:
         A.   Torture, torment, needlessly mutilate or maim, cruelly beat,
poison, needlessly kill, or commit an act of cruelty against the companion
animal;
         B.   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if it is reasonably
expected that the companion animal would die or experience unnecessary or
unjustifiable pain or suffering as a result of the deprivation or confinement;
         C.   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it is reasonably expected
that the companion animal would die or experience unnecessary or unjustifiable
pain or suffering as a result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
      (7)   No owner, manager, or employee of a dog kennel who confines or is
the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall negligently do any of
the following:
         A.   Torture, torment, or commit an act of cruelty against the
companion animal;
         B.   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if it can reasonably be
expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way
as a result of or due to the deprivation or confinement;
         C.   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it can reasonably be expected
that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way as a
result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
      (8)   Divisions (d)(2), (d)(3), (d)(4), (d)(5), (d)(6), and (d)(7) of
this section do not apply to any of the following:
         A.   A companion animal used in scientific research conducted by an
institution in accordance with the federal animal welfare act and related
regulations;
         B.   The lawful practice of veterinary medicine by a person who has
been issued a license, temporary permit, or registration certificate to do so
under R.C. Chapter 4741;
         C.   Dogs being used or intended for use for hunting or field trial
purposes, provided that the dogs are being treated in accordance with usual and
commonly accepted practices for the care of hunting dogs;
         D.   The use of common training devices, if the companion animal is
being treated in accordance with usual and commonly accepted practices for the
training of animals;
         E.   The administering of medicine to a companion animal that was
properly prescribed by a person who has been issued a license, temporary
permit, or registration certificate under R.C. Chapter 4741.
      (9)   Notwithstanding any section of the Ohio Revised Code that otherwise
provides for the distribution of fine moneys, the Clerk of Court shall forward
all fines the Clerk collects that are so imposed for any violation of this
division (d) to the Treasurer of the municipality, whose county humane society
or law enforcement agency is to be paid the fine money as determined under this
division. The Treasurer shall pay the fine moneys to the county humane society
or the county, township, municipal corporation, or state law enforcement agency
in this state that primarily was responsible for or involved in the
investigation and prosecution of the violation. If a county humane society
receives any fine moneys under this division, the county humane society shall
use the fine moneys either to provide the training that is required for humane
society agents under R.C. § 1717.061 or to provide additional training for
humane society agents.
(R.C. § 959.131)
   (e)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree. In addition, the court may order the offender
to forfeit the animal or livestock and may provide for its disposition,
including but not limited to the sale of the animal or livestock. If an animal
or livestock is forfeited and sold pursuant to this division, the proceeds from
the sale first shall be applied to pay the expenses incurred with regard to the
care of the animal from the time it was taken from the custody of the former
owner. The balance of the proceeds from the sale, if any, shall be paid to the
former owner of the animal.
(R.C. § 959.99(D))
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates division (d)(2) or (d)(5) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (d)(3) of this section is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (d)(4) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
first degree on each subsequent offense.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (d)(6) of this section is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (d)(7) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (6)   A.   A court may order a person who is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of division (d) of this section to forfeit to an
impounding agency, as defined in R.C. § 959.132, any or all of the companion
animals in that person’s ownership or care. The court also may prohibit or
place limitations on the person’s ability to own or care for any companion
animals for a specified or indefinite period of time.
         B.   A court may order a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty
to a violation of division (a) of this section or division (d) of this section
to reimburse an impounding agency for the reasonably necessary costs incurred
by the agency for the care of a companion animal that the agency impounded as a
result of the investigation or prosecution of the violation, provided that the
costs were not otherwise paid under R.C. § 959.132.
      (7)   If a court has reason to believe that a person who is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of division (d) of this section has a mental or
emotional disorder that contributed to the violation, the court may impose as a
community control sanction or as a condition of probation a requirement that
the offender undergo psychological evaluation or counseling. The court shall
order the offender to pay the costs of the evaluation or counseling.
(R.C. § 959.99(E))
Statutory reference:
   Impoundment of companion animals; notice and hearing, see R.C. § 959.132
§ 618.06 COLORING RABBITS AND BABY POULTRY; SALE OR DISPLAY OF POULTRY.
   (a)   No person shall dye or otherwise color any rabbit or baby poultry,
including but not limited to chicks and ducklings. No person shall sell, offer
for sale, expose for sale, raffle or give away any rabbit or baby poultry which
has been dyed or otherwise colored. No poultry younger than four weeks of age
may be sold, given away or otherwise distributed to any person in lots of less
than three. Stores, shops, vendors and others offering young poultry for sale
or other distribution shall provide and operate brooders or other heating
devices that may be necessary to maintain poultry in good health, and shall
keep adequate food and water available to the poultry at all times.
(R.C. § 925.62)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree on a first offense; each subsequent offense is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
(R.C. § 925.99(B))
§ 618.07 BARKING OR HOWLING DOGS.
   (a)   No person shall own, harbor or keep in custody a dog which disturbs
the peace by barking, yelping, howling or making other loud noises to the
annoyance and/or discomfort of any person. Continuous barking, yelping, howling
and/or making other loud noises for 15 consecutive minutes by the dog, whether
confined inside a residence or building or to the outside area, shall be deemed
to have disturbed the peace and to have caused the annoyance and discomfort of
persons; provided, that at the time of the complaint, no person or persons were
trespassing or threatening to trespass upon the private property of the owner,
and provided that the dog was not being teased or provoked in any manner.
   (b)   Any person who shall allow any dog habitually to remain, be lodged or
fed within any dwelling, building, yard or enclosure owned or occupied by the
person shall be considered as harboring or keeping the dog.
   (c)   Upon an initial complaint, an enforcement officer shall warn the
person in writing of the violation. Upon a second such complaint within 30
days, the enforcement officer shall charge the person with a violation of this
section.
   (d)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to owners, operators or
employees of licensed veterinary hospitals, licensed kennels or licensed animal
boarding establishments, nor does this section apply to blind, deaf or hearing
impaired, or mobility impaired persons when the dog serves as an assistance
dog.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 618.08 REGISTRATION OF DOGS REQUIRED.
   (a)   No owner, keeper or harborer of a dog more than three months of age,
nor owner of a dog kennel, shall fail to file an application for registration
required by R.C. § 955.01, nor shall he or she fail to pay the legal fee
therefor.
(R.C. § 955.21)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $25 nor
more than $100 on a first offense, and on each subsequent offense shall be
fined not less than $75 nor more than $250 and may be imprisoned for not more
than 30 days.
(R.C. § 955.99(E))
§ 618.09 HINDERING CAPTURE OF UNREGISTERED DOG.
   (a)   No person shall obstruct or interfere with anyone lawfully engaged in
capturing an unlicensed dog or making an examination of a dog wearing a tag.
(R.C. § 955.24)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 955.99(B))
§ 618.10 DOGS REQUIRED TO WEAR TAGS.
   (a)   No owner of a dog, except a dog constantly confined to a dog kennel
registered under R.C. Chapter 955 or one licensed under R.C. Chapter 956, shall
fail to require the dog to wear, at all times, a valid tag issued in connection
with a certificate of registration. A dog found not wearing at any time a valid
tag shall be prima-facie evidence of lack of registration and shall subject any
dog found not wearing such a tag to impounding, sale, or destruction.
(R.C. § 955.10)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 955.99(B))
§ 618.11 UNLAWFUL TAGS.
   (a)   No person shall own, keep or harbor a dog wearing a fictitious,
altered or invalid registration tag or a registration tag not issued by the
County Auditor in connection with the registration of that animal.
(R.C. § 955.25)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 955.99(B))
§ 618.12 RABIES QUARANTINE.
   (a)   No person having knowledge of the existence of rabies in an animal, or
knowledge that an animal has exhibited symptoms or behavior suggestive of
rabies, or knowledge that an animal has bitten any person, shall fail to
immediately report that information to the Mayor or the Chief of Police.
   (b)   Whenever it is established by the Mayor or Chief of Police that any
animal has bitten any person or exhibits symptoms or behavior suggestive of
rabies, the person who owns, harbors or otherwise cares for the animal shall
confine it in close quarantine and isolation or shall place the animal in the
establishment of a veterinarian until, in either case, it is determined by the
County Board of Health that the animal is not afflicted with rabies. The
isolation and quarantine period hereby required shall be not less than ten days
from the date the person was bitten. If the animal has, or develops, any
symptoms suspicious of rabies during the ten-day period, the County Board of
Health shall be notified immediately. All expenses incurred for the keeping of
the animal, or the necessary tests to determine whether rabies exists, shall be
borne exclusively by the person who owns, harbors or otherwise cares for the
animal.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 618.13 HUNTING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   The hunting of animals or fowl within the municipality is prohibited.
No person shall hunt, kill or attempt to kill any animal or fowl by the use of
firearms or any other means. However, nothing in this section shall be deemed
to prohibit the killing of rats and other undesirable rodents authorized to be
killed by the Chief of Police using means for this killing which are also
authorized by the Chief.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 618.14 NUISANCE CONDITIONS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall keep or harbor any animal or fowl in the municipality
so as to create noxious or offensive odors or unsanitary conditions which are a
menace to the health, comfort or safety of the public.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 618.15 IMPOUNDING AND DISPOSITION; RECORDS.
   (a)   A police officer or animal warden may impound every dog or other
animal found in violation of §
618.01. If the impounded dog is not wearing a valid registration tag, the dog
shall forthwith be turned over to an officer charged by law with the custody
and disposal of such dogs. If the dog is wearing a valid registration tag or
the identity of the owner or harborer is otherwise established, notice shall
immediately be given to the owner or harborer that the dog has been impounded.
Notice may be by telephone or by ordinary mail to the last known address of the
owner or harborer. The dog shall not be released except upon the payment of
reasonable expenses for its taking and keeping. Any dog not redeemed within
three days of the time it is seized or impounded may be sold or otherwise
disposed of as provided by R.C. § 955.16.
   (b)   A record of all dogs impounded, the disposition of the same, the
owner’s name and address, if known, and a statement of any costs or receipts
involving the dog shall be kept.
§ 618.16 RESTRICTIONS ON DOG OWNERSHIP FOR CERTAIN CONVICTED FELONS.
   (a)   No person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a felony offense of
violence committed on or after May 22, 2012 or a felony violation of any
provision of R.C. Chapter 959, R.C. Chapter 2923 or R.C. Chapter 2925 committed
on or after May 22, 2012 shall knowingly own, possess, have custody of, or
reside in a residence with either of the following for a period of three years
commencing either upon the date of release of the person from any period of
incarceration imposed for the offense or violation or, if the person is not
incarcerated for the offense or violation, upon the date of the person’s final
release from the other sanctions imposed for the offense or violation:
      (1)   An unspayed or unneutered dog older than 12 weeks of age;
      (2)   Any dog that has been determined to be a dangerous dog under R.C.
Chapter 955 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (b)   A person described in division (a) of this section shall microchip for
permanent identification any dog owned, possessed by, or in the custody of the
person.
   (c)   (1)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any person who is
confined in a correctional institution of the Department of Rehabilitation and
Correction.
      (2)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any person with
respect to any dog that the person owned, possessed, had custody of, or resided
in a residence with prior to May 22, 2012.
(R.C. § 955.54)
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 955.99(O))
§ 618.17 SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH AN ANIMAL.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   ANIMAL. A nonhuman mammal, bird, reptile, or amphibian, either dead
or alive.
      (2)   OFFENSE. A violation of this section or an attempt, in violation of
R.C. § 2923.02, to violate this section.
      (3)   OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 959.132.
      (4)   SEXUAL CONDUCT. Either of the following committed for the purpose
of sexual gratification:
         A.   Any act done between a person and animal that involves contact of
the penis of one and the vulva of the other, the penis of one and the penis of
the other, the penis of one and the anus of the other, the mouth of one and the
penis of the other, the mouth of one and the anus of the other, the vulva of
one and the vulva of the other, the mouth of one and the vulva of the other,
any other contact between a reproductive organ of one and a reproductive organ
of the other, or any other insertion of a reproductive organ of one into an
orifice of the other; and/or
         B.   Without a bona fide veterinary or animal husbandry purpose to do
so, the insertion, however slight, of any part of a person’s body or any
instrument, apparatus, or other object into the vaginal, anal, or reproductive
opening of an animal.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly engage in sexual conduct with an animal or
knowingly possess, sell, or purchase an animal with the intent that it be
subjected to sexual conduct.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly organize, promote, aid, or abet in the
conduct of an act involving any sexual conduct with an animal.
(R.C. § 959.21)
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
second degree. In addition, the court may order the offender to forfeit the
animal or livestock and may provide for its disposition including but not
limited to the sale of the animal or livestock. If an animal or livestock is
forfeited and sold pursuant to this division, the proceeds from the sale first
shall be applied to pay the expenses incurred with regard to the care of the
animal from the time it was taken from the custody of the former owner. The
balance of the proceeds from the sale, if any, shall be paid to the former
owner of the animal.
(R.C. § 959.99(D))
      (2)   If a court has reason to believe that a person who is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of this section suffers from a mental or
emotional disorder that contributed to the violation, the court may impose as a
community control sanction or as a condition of probation a requirement that
the offender undergo psychological evaluation or counseling. The court shall
order the offender to pay the costs of the evaluation or counseling.
(R.C. § 959.99(E)(7))
§ 618.18 PROHIBITING THE KEEPING OF CERTAIN ANIMALS.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   ANIMAL. Any living creature (other than a human being), including
any animal, bird, reptile, fish, livestock or poultry.
      (2)   BEE APIARY. Any place where one or more colonies or nuclei of bees
are kept.
      (3)   EXOTIC ANIMAL.
         A.   Carnivore other than dog or cat;
         B.   Venomous reptile;
         C.   Hoofed animal not defined as livestock; or
         D.   Other animal not domesticate or native to the area, the keeping
of which can pose a danger to other animals or humans.
      (4)   LIVESTOCK. Any horse, donkey, cow, goat, pig, sheep or any similar
hoofed animal.
      (5)   POULTRY. Any chicken, duck, goose, turkey or similar bird.
   (b)   If so residence has any of the above mentioned animals, they shall be
grandfathered in but shall obey the rules of this section once they have gotten
rid of such animals listed above.
   (c)   Whoever violates any provision of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor, and shall be fined not more than $150. Each day the violation
continues shall be treated as a separate offense. If a person has been
previously convicted of a violation of this section, the subsequent violation
shall constitute a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. 853, passed - -2016)
§ 618.19 PROHIBITING ANIMAL DEFECATION ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (a)   No owner, keeper or harborer of any dog, cat or other animal shall
knowingly permit the animal to defecate on the property, either public or
private, of another without the owner, keeper or harborer having in his or her
possession the necessary tools or equipment to remove the defecation.
   (b)   The owner, keeper or harborer shall use the necessary tools and
equipment to remove defecation from the property forthwith.
   (c)   Any person who shall violate any provisions of this section shall be
guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $150 for each
offense.
(Ord. 823, passed 6-25-2013)
§ 618.20 OPERATING OR ESTABLISHMENT OF A DOG KENNEL.
   (a)   A special permit shall be required from Village Council to operate or
establish a dog kennel consisting of three or more dogs. The cost of the permit
shall be $100.
   (b)   It shall be understood a license must also be obtained from the County
Dog Warden.
   (c)   Each dog housed outside shall have a separate house and separate wire
cage with the minimum dimension of three feet wide, six feet high and eight
feet long.
   (d)   To receive a permit, the property owner and/or person of persons in
charge of said dogs must present to the Village Council written permission for
the kennel from all neighbors within 500 feet of said property in all
directions.
   (e)   The property owner and/or person or persons in charge of said dogs
shall be responsible for keeping the kennel in a clean and sanitary fashion.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor of a
first offense; on each subsequent offense such person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (g)   This permit shall expire with the moving or death of the property
owner and/or person or persons in charge of said dogs/kennel.
(Ord. 852, passed - -2016)
CHAPTER 624: DRUGS
Section
   
624.01   Definitions
   
624.02   Adult use cannabis control; limitations on conduct by individuals
   
624.03   Cultivation of marihuana
   
624.04   Drug possession offenses
   
624.05   Possession of drug abuse instruments
   
624.06   Permitting drug abuse
   
624.07   Use or possession of paraphernalia
   
624.08   Abusing harmful intoxicants
   
624.09   Improperly dispensing or distributing nitrous oxide
   
624.10   Possessing nitrous oxide in motor vehicles
   
624.11   Illegal dispensing of drug samples
   
624.12   Counterfeit controlled substances
   
624.13   Controlled substance or prescription labels
   
624.14   Possession, sale and disposal of hypodermics
   
624.15   Evidence
   
624.16   Double jeopardy
   
624.17   Controlled substance schedules
   
624.18   Sale of Pseudoephedrine
   
624.19   Sale of pure caffeine product
   
624.20   Sale of dextromethorphan
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Administration of epinephrine, exemption from prosecution, see R.C. §
2925.64
   Alcoholic beverages, see
Ch. 612
   Disorderly conduct while voluntarily intoxicated, see §
648.04
   Driving or physical control while under the influence, see §
434.01
   Effect of voluntary intoxication on criminal liability, see §
606.07
   Intoxicated pedestrians, see §
416.10
   Placing harmful substance or objects in food or confection, see §
636.16
   Treatment of drug dependent persons in lieu of conviction, see R.C. §
2951.041
   Using weapons while intoxicated, see §
678.04
§ 624.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words,
terms and phrases and their derivatives used in this chapter which are not
defined in this section shall have the meanings given to them in the Ohio
Revised Code.
   (a)   ADMINISTER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (b)   ADULTERATE. To cause a drug to be adulterated as described in R.C. §
3715.63.
   (c)   ALCOHOL AND DRUG ADDICTION SERVICES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5119.01.
   (d)   BULK AMOUNT. Of a controlled substance, means any of the following:
      (1)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in
Schedule I, Schedule II, or Schedule III, with the exception of any controlled
substance analog, marihuana, cocaine, L.S.D., heroin, any fentanyl-related
compound, and hashish and except as provided in division (2), (5), or (6) of
this definition, whichever of the following is applicable:
         A.   An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams or 25 unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of a
Schedule I opiate or opium derivative;
         B.   An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams of a compound, mixture,
preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of raw or gum opium;
         C.   An amount equal to or exceeding 30 grams or ten unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of a
Schedule I hallucinogen other than tetrahydrocannabinol or lysergic acid amide,
or a Schedule I stimulant or depressant;
         D.   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five times the
maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II opiate or opium
derivative;
         E.   An amount equal to or exceeding five grams or ten unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of
phencyclidine;
         F.   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule II stimulant that is in a final dosage form
manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act
(21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the federal drug abuse control laws,
as defined in this section, that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II
depressant substance or a Schedule II hallucinogenic substance;
         G.   An amount equal to or exceeding three grams of a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule
II stimulant, or any of its salts or isomers, that is not in a final dosage
form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic
Act (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the federal drug abuse control
laws;
      (2)   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III or IV substance other than an anabolic
steroid or a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;
      (3)   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;
      (4)   An amount equal to or exceeding 250 milliliters or 250 grams of a
compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of a
Schedule V substance;
      (5)   An amount equal to or exceeding 200 solid dosage units, 16 grams,
or 16 milliliters of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III anabolic steroid;
      (6)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is a
combination of a fentanyl-related compound and any other compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V,
if the defendant is charged with a violation of R.C. § 2925.11 and the
sentencing provisions set forth in R.C. § 2925.11(C)(10)(b) and (C)(11) will
not apply regarding the defendant and the violation, the bulk amount of the
controlled substance for purposes of the violation is the amount specified in
division (1), (2), (3), (4), or (5) of this definition for the other Schedule
III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V controlled substance that is combined with the
fentanyl-related compound.
   (e)   CERTIFIED GRIEVANCE COMMITTEE. A duly constituted and organized
committee of the Ohio State Bar Association or of one or more local bar
associations of the state that complies with the criteria set forth in Rule V,
Section 6 of the Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.
   (f)   COCAINE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A cocaine salt, isomer or derivative, a salt of a cocaine isomer or
derivative, or the base form of cocaine.
      (2)   Coca leaves or a salt, compound, derivative or preparation of coca
leaves, including ecgonine, a salt, isomer or derivative of ecgonine, or a salt
of an isomer or derivative of ecgonine.
      (3)   A salt, compound, derivative or preparation of a substance
identified in division (1) or (2) of this definition that is chemically
equivalent to or identical with any of those substances, except that the
substances shall not include decocainized coca leaves or extraction of coca
leaves if the extractions do not contain cocaine or ecgonine.
   (g)   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A JUVENILE. An offense is COMMITTED IN
THE VICINITY OF A JUVENILE if the offender commits the offense within 100 feet
of a juvenile or within the view of a juvenile, regardless of whether the
offender knows the age of the juvenile, whether the offender knows the offense
is being committed within 100 feet of or within view of the juvenile, or
whether the juvenile actually views the commission of the offense.
   (h)   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SCHOOL. An offense is COMMITTED IN THE
VICINITY OF A SCHOOL if the offender commits the offense on school premises, in
a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of any school
premises, regardless of whether the offender knows the offense is being
committed on school premises, in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the
boundaries of any school premises.
   (i)   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SUBSTANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER
OR A RECOVERING ADDICT. An offense is COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SUBSTANCE
ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER OR A RECOVERING ADDICT if either of the following
apply:
      (1)   The offender commits the offense on the premises of a substance
addiction services provider’s facility, including a facility licensed prior to
June 29, 2019, under R.C. § 5119.391 to provide methadone treatment or an
opioid treatment program licensed on or after that date under R.C. § 5119.37,
or within 500 feet of the premises of a substance addiction services provider’s
facility and the offender knows or should know that the offense is being
committed within the vicinity of the substance addiction services provider’s
facility.
      (2)   The offender sells, offers to sell, delivers, or distributes the
controlled substance or controlled substance analog to a person who is
receiving treatment at the time of the commission of the offense, or received
treatment within 30 days prior to the commission of the offense, from a
substance addiction services provider and the offender knows that the person is
receiving or received that treatment.
   (j)   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (k)   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE ANALOG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
3719.01.
   (l)   COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any drug that bears, or whose container or label bears, a
trademark, trade name or other identifying mark used without authorization of
the owner of rights to the trademark, trade name or identifying mark.
      (2)   Any unmarked or unlabeled substance that is represented to be a
controlled substance manufactured, processed, packed or distributed by a person
other than the person that manufactured, processed, packed or distributed it.
      (3)   Any substance that is represented to be a controlled substance but
is not a controlled substance or is a different controlled substance.
      (4)   Any substance other than a controlled substance that a reasonable
person would believe to be a controlled substance because of its similarity in
shape, size and color, or its markings, labeling, packaging, distribution or
the price for which it is sold or offered for sale.
   (m)   CULTIVATE. Includes planting, watering, fertilizing or tilling.
   (n)   DANGEROUS DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   (o)   DECEPTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   (p)   DISCIPLINARY COUNSEL. The disciplinary counsel appointed by the Board
of Commissioners on Grievances and Discipline of the Ohio Supreme Court under
the Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.
   (q)   DISPENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (r)   DISTRIBUTE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (s)   DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   (t)   DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2913.02(A) that constitutes theft of drugs,
or any violation of R.C. § 2925.02, 2925.03, 2925.04, 2925.041, 2925.05,
2925.06, 2925.11, 2925.12, 2925.13, 2925.22, 2925.23, 2925.24, 2925.31,
2925.32, 2925.36 or 2925.37.
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former law of any municipality, state
or of the United States, that is substantially equivalent to any section listed
in division (1) of this definition.
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former law of any municipality,
state or of the United States, of which planting, cultivating, harvesting,
processing, making, manufacturing, producing, shipping, transporting,
delivering, acquiring, possessing, storing, distributing, dispensing, selling,
inducing another to use, administering to another, using or otherwise dealing
with a controlled substance is an element.
      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing or attempting to commit, any offense under division (1), (2) or (3)
of this definition.
   (u)   DRUG OF ABUSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.
   (v)   FELONY DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Any drug abuse offense that would
constitute a felony under the laws of this state, any other state or the United
States.
   (w)   FENTANYL-RELATED COMPOUND. Any of the following:
      (1)   Fentanyl;
      (2)   Alpha-methylfentanyl (N-[1-(alpha-methyl-beta-phenyl)ethyl-4-
piperidyl] propionanilide; 1-(1-methyl-2-phenylethyl)-4-(N-propanilido)
piperidine);
      (3)   Alpha-methylthiofentanyl (N-[1-methyl-2-(2-thienyl)ethyl-4-
piperidinyl]-N- phenylpropanamide);
      (4)   Beta-hydroxyfentanyl (N-[1-(2-hydroxy-2-phenethyl-4-piperidinyl]-N-
phenylpropanamide);
      (5)   Beta-hydroxy-3-methylfentanyl (other name: N-[1-(2-hydroxy-2-
phenethyl)-3-methyl- 4-piperidinyl]-phenylpropanamide);
      (6)   3-methylfentanyl (N-[3-methyl-1-(2-phenylethyl)-4-piperidyl]-
phenylpropanamide);
      (7)   3-methylthiofentanyl (N-[3-methyl-1-[2-(thienyl)ethyl]-4-
piperidinyl]- phenylpropanamide);
      (8)   Para-fluorofentanyl (N-(4-fluorophenyl)-N-[1-(2-phenethyl)-4-
piperidinyl]propanamide;
      (9)   Thiofentanyl (N-phenyl-N-[1-(2-thienyl)ethyl-4-piperidinyl]-
propanamide;
      (10)   Alfentanil;
      (11)   Carfentanil;
      (12)   Remifentanil;
      (13)   Sufentanil;
      (14)   Acetyl-alpha-methylfentanyl (N-[1-(1-methyl-2-phenethyl)-4-
piperidinyl]-N- phenylacetamide); and
      (15)   Any compound that meets all of the following fentanyl
pharmacophore requirements to bind at the mu receptor, as identified by a
report from an established forensic laboratory, including acetylfentanyl,
furanylfentanyl, valerylfentanyl, butyrylfentanyl, isobutyrylfentanyl, 4-
methoxybutyrylfentanyl, para-fluorobutyrylfentanyl, acrylfentanyl, and ortho-
fluorofentanyl:
         A.   A chemical scaffold consisting of both of the following:
            1.   A five, six, or seven member ring structure containing a
nitrogen, whether or not further substituted;
            2.   An attached nitrogen to the ring, whether or not that nitrogen
is enclosed in a ring structure, including an attached aromatic ring or other
lipophilic group to that nitrogen.
         B.   A polar functional group attached to the chemical scaffold,
including but not limited to a hydroxyl, ketone, amide, or ester;
         C.   An alkyl or aryl substitution off the ring nitrogen of the
chemical scaffold; and
         D.   The compound has not been approved for medical use by the United
States food and drug administration.
   (x)   HARMFUL INTOXICANT. Does not include beer or intoxicating liquor, but
means any of the following:
      (1)   Any compound, mixture, preparation or substance the gas, fumes or
vapor of which when inhaled can induce intoxication, excitement, giddiness,
irrational behavior, depression, stupefaction, paralysis, unconsciousness,
asphyxiation or other harmful physiological effects, and includes but is not
limited to any of the following:
         A.   Any volatile organic solvent, plastic cement, model cement,
fingernail polish remover, lacquer thinner, cleaning fluid, gasoline or other
preparation containing a volatile organic solvent.
         B.   Any aerosol propellant.
         C.   Any fluorocarbon refrigerant.
         D.   Any anesthetic gas.
      (2)   Gamma Butyrolactone;
      (3)   1,4 Butanediol.
   (y)   HASHISH.
      (1)   A resin or a preparation of a resin to which both of the following
apply:
         A.   It is contained in or derived from any part of the plant of the
genus cannabis, whether in solid form or in a liquid concentrate, liquid
extract, or liquid distillate form.
         B.   It has a delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol concentration of more than
0.3%.
      (2)   The term does not include a hemp byproduct in the possession of a
licensed hemp processor under R.C. Chapter 928, provided that the hemp
byproduct is being produced, stored, and disposed of in accordance with rules
adopted under R.C. § 928.03.
   (z)   HYPODERMIC. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (aa)   JUVENILE. A person under 18 years of age.
   (bb)   LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS. Has the
same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   (cc)   L.S.D. Lysergic acid diethylamide.
   (dd)   MAJOR DRUG OFFENDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   (ee)   MANDATORY PRISON TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   (ff)   MANUFACTURE. To plant, cultivate, harvest, process, make, prepare or
otherwise engage in any part of the production of a drug, by propagation,
extraction, chemical synthesis or compounding, or any combination of the same,
and includes packaging, repackaging, labeling and other activities incident to
production.
   (gg)   MANUFACTURER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (hh)   MARIHUANA. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01, except that it
does not include hashish.
   (ii)   METHAMPHETAMINE. Methamphetamine, any salt, isomer or salt of an
isomer of methamphetamine, or any compound, mixture, preparation or substance
containing methamphetamine or any salt, isomer or salt of an isomer of
methamphetamine.
   (jj)   MINOR DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSE. Either of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2925.11, as it existed prior to July 1, 1996,
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   A violation of R.C. § 2925.11, as it exists on and after July 1,
1996, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that is a misdemeanor
or a felony of the fifth degree.
   (kk)   OFFICIAL WRITTEN ORDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (ll)   PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (mm)   PERSON WITH A DRUG DEPENDENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
3719.011.
   (nn)   PHARMACIST. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (oo)   PHARMACY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (pp)   POSSESS or POSSESSION. Having control over a thing or substance but
may not be inferred solely from mere access to the thing or substance through
ownership or occupation of the premises upon which the thing or substance is
found.
   (qq)   PREMISES OF A SUBSTANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER’S FACILITY. Means
the parcel of real property on which any substance addiction service provider’s
facility is situated.
   (rr)   PRESCRIPTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   (ss)   PRESUMPTION FOR A PRISON TERM or PRESUMPTION THAT A PRISON TERM SHALL
BE IMPOSED. A presumption as described in R.C. § 2929.13(D) that a prison term
is a necessary sanction for a felony in order to comply with the purposes and
principles of sentencing under R.C. § 2929.11.
   (tt)   PROFESSIONAL LICENSE. Any license, permit, certificate, registration,
qualification, admission, temporary license, temporary permit, temporary
certificate or temporary registration that is described in R.C. § 2925.01(W)(1)
to (W)(37) and that qualifies a person as a professionally licensed person.
   (uu)   PROFESSIONALLY LICENSED PERSON. Any of the following:
      (1)   A person who has received a certificate or temporary certificate as
a certified public accountant or who has registered as a public accountant
under R.C. Chapter 4701 and who holds an Ohio permit issued under that chapter;
      (2)   A person who holds a certificate of qualification to practice
architecture issued or renewed and registered under R.C. Chapter 4703;
      (3)   A person who is registered as a landscape architect under R.C.
Chapter 4703 or who holds a permit as a landscape architect issued under that
chapter;
      (4)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4707;
      (5)   A person who has been issued a barber's license, barber
instructor's license, assistant barber instructor's license, or independent
contractor's license under R.C. Chapter 4709;
      (6)   A person licensed and regulated to engage in the business of a debt
pooling company by a legislative authority, under authority of R.C. Chapter
4710;
      (7)   A person who has been issued a cosmetologist's license, hair
designer's license, manicurist's license, esthetician's license, natural hair
stylist's license, advanced license to practice cosmetology, advanced license
to practice hair design, advanced license to practice manicuring, advanced
license to practice esthetics, advanced license to practice natural hair
styling, cosmetology instructor's license, hair design instructor's license,
manicurist instructor's license, esthetics instructor's license, natural hair
style instructor's license, independent contractor's license, or tanning
facility permit under R.C. Chapter 4713;
      (8)   A person who has been issued a license to practice dentistry, a
general anesthesia permit, a conscious sedation permit, a limited resident’s
license, a limited teaching license, a dental hygienist’s license or a dental
hygienist’s teacher’s certificate under R.C. Chapter 4715;
      (9)   A person who has been issued an embalmer’s license, a funeral
director’s license, a funeral home license or a crematory license, or who has
been registered for an embalmer’s or funeral director’s apprenticeship under
R.C. Chapter 4717;
      (10)   A person who has been licensed as a registered nurse or practical
nurse, or who has been issued a certificate for the practice of nurse-midwifery
under R.C. Chapter 4723;
      (11)   A person who has been licensed to practice optometry or to engage
in optical dispensing under R.C. Chapter 4725;
      (12)   A person licensed to act as a pawnbroker under R.C. Chapter 4727;
      (13)   A person licensed to act as a precious metals dealer under R.C.
Chapter 4728;
      (14)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 as a pharmacist or
pharmacy intern or registered under that chapter as a registered pharmacy
technician, certified pharmacy technician, or pharmacy technician trainee;
      (15)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 as a manufacturer of
dangerous drugs, outsourcing facility, third-party logistics provider,
repackager of dangerous drugs, wholesale distributor of dangerous drugs, or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs;
      (16)   A person who is authorized to practice as a physician assistant
under R.C. Chapter 4730;
      (17)   A person who has been issued a license to practice medicine and
surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery, or podiatric medicine and surgery
under R.C. Chapter 4731 or has been issued a certificate to practice a limited
branch of medicine under that chapter;
      (18)   A person licensed as a psychologist, independent school
psychologist, or school psychologist under R.C. Chapter 4732;
      (19)   A person registered to practice the profession of engineering or
surveying under R.C. Chapter 4733;
      (20)   A person who has been issued a license to practice chiropractic
under R.C. Chapter 4734;
      (21)   A person licensed to act as a real estate broker or real estate
salesperson under R.C. Chapter 4735;
      (22)   A person registered as a registered environmental health
specialist under R.C. Chapter 3776;
      (23)   A person licensed to operate or maintain a junkyard under R.C.
Chapter 4737;
      (24)   A person who has been issued a motor vehicle salvage dealer’s
license under R.C. Chapter 4738;
      (25)   A person who has been licensed to act as a steam engineer under
R.C. Chapter 4739;
      (26)   A person who has been issued a license or temporary permit to
practice veterinary medicine or any of its branches, or who is registered as a
graduate animal technician under R.C. Chapter 4741;
      (27)   A person who has been issued a hearing aid dealer’s or fitter’s
license or trainee permit under R.C. Chapter 4747;
      (28)   A person who has been issued a class A, class B or class C license
or who has been registered as an investigator or security guard employee under
R.C. Chapter 4749;
      (29)   A person licensed to practice as a nursing home administrator
under R.C. Chapter 4751;
      (30)   A person licensed to practice as a speech-language pathologist or
audiologist under R.C. Chapter 4753;
      (31)   A person issued a license as an occupational therapist or physical
therapist under R.C. Chapter 4755;
      (32)   A person who is licensed as a licensed professional clinical
counselor, licensed professional counselor, social worker, independent social
worker, independent marriage and family therapist, or marriage and family
therapist, or registered as a social work assistant under R.C. Chapter 4757;
      (33)   A person issued a license to practice dietetics under R.C. Chapter
4759;
      (34)   A person who has been issued a license or limited permit to
practice respiratory therapy under R.C. Chapter 4761;
      (35)   A person who has been issued a real estate appraiser certificate
under R.C. Chapter 4763;
      (36)   A person who has been issued a home inspector license under R.C.
Chapter 4764;
      (37)   A person who has been admitted to the bar by order of the Ohio
Supreme Court in compliance with its prescribed and published rules;
      (38)   A person who has been issued a license to practice as a certified
mental health assistant under R.C. Chapter 4772.
   (vv)   PUBLIC PREMISES. Any hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall or
other place of public accommodation, business, amusement or resort.
   (ww)   SALE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (xx)   SAMPLE DRUG. A drug or pharmaceutical preparation that would be
hazardous to health or safety if used without the supervision of a licensed
health professional authorized to prescribe drugs, or a drug of abuse, and
that, at one time, had been placed in a container plainly marked as a sample by
a manufacturer.
   (yy)   SCHEDULE I, SCHEDULE II, SCHEDULE III, SCHEDULE IV or SCHEDULE V.
Have the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (zz)   SCHOOL. Any school operated by a board of education, any community
school established under R.C. Chapter 3314, or any nonpublic school for which
the Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum standards under R.C.
§ 3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities or
training provided by the school is being conducted at the time a criminal
offense is committed.
   (aaa)   SCHOOL BUILDING. Any building in which any of the instruction,
extracurricular activities or training provided by a school is conducted,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities or training provided
by the school is being conducted in the school building at the time a criminal
offense is committed.
   (bbb)   SCHOOL PREMISES. Either of the following:
      (1)   The parcel of real property on which any school is situated,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training
provided by the school is being conducted on the premises at the time a
criminal offense is committed.
      (2)   Any other parcel of real property that is owned or leased by a
board of education of a school, the governing authority of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314, or the governing body of a nonpublic
school for which the Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum
standards under R.C. § 3301.07 and on which some of the instruction,
extracurricular activities or training of the school is conducted, whether or
not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training provided by the
school is being conducted on the parcel of real property at the time a criminal
offense is committed.
   (ccc)   STANDARD PHARMACEUTICAL REFERENCE MANUAL. The current edition, with
cumulative changes if any, of references that are approved by the State Board
of Pharmacy.
   (ddd)   SUBSTANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER. Means an agency, association,
corporation or other legal entity, individual, or program that provides one or
more of the following at a facility:
      (1)   Either alcohol addiction services, or drug addiction services, or
both such services that are certified by the Ohio Director of Mental Health and
Addiction Services under R.C. § 5119.36;
      (2)   Recovery supports that are related to either alcohol addiction
services, or drug addiction services, or both such services and paid for with
federal, state, or local funds administered by the Ohio Department of Mental
Health and Addiction Services or a board of alcohol, drug addiction, and mental
health services.
   (eee)   UNIT DOSE. An amount or unit or a compound, mixture or preparation
containing a controlled substance that is separately identifiable and in a form
that indicates that it is the amount or unit by which the controlled substance
is separately administered to or taken by an individual.
   (fff)   WHOLESALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
(R.C. § 2925.01)
§ 624.02 ADULT USE CANNABIS CONTROL; LIMITATIONS ON CONDUCT BY INDIVIDUALS.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780 and notwithstanding
any conflicting provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code, an adult use
consumer may do the following:
      (1)   Use adult use cannabis;
      (2)   Possess, transfer without remuneration to another adult consumer,
or transport adult use cannabis, subject to division (b) of this section; and
      (3)   Purchase adult use cannabis from an adult use dispensary per day in
amounts that do not exceed the possession limits set forth in division (b)(1)
of this section.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3796:
      (1)   The amount of cannabis that may be possessed by an adult use
consumer shall not exceed:
         A.   Two and one-half ounces of adult use cannabis in any form except
adult use extract; and
         B.   Fifteen grams of adult use cannabis in the form of adult use
extract.
      (2)   The amount of cannabis that may be transferred by an adult use
consumer without remuneration and not advertised or promoted to the public
shall not exceed:
         A.   Two and one-half ounces of adult use cannabis in any form except
adult use extract; and
         B.   Fifteen grams of adult use cannabis in the form of adult use
extract.
      (3)   The amount of cannabis that may be transported by an adult use
consumer shall not exceed:
         A.   Two and one-half ounces of adult use cannabis in any form except
adult use extract; and
         B.   Fifteen grams of adult use cannabis in the form of adult use
extract.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780, an adult use
consumer shall not be subject to arrest, criminal prosecution, or civil penalty
for engaging in any of the activities authorized under R.C. Chapter 3780,
including:
      (1)   Obtaining, using, possessing, or transporting adult use cannabis;
      (2)   Performing conduct authorized under R.C. § 3780.29;
      (3)   Acquiring, possessing, using, purchasing, manufacturing, selling,
or transporting paraphernalia; and
      (4)   Assisting another adult use consumer, or allowing property to be
used, in any of the acts authorized by R.C. Chapter 3780.
   (d)   (1)   An individual is prohibited from operating a vehicle, motor
vehicle, streetcar, trackless trolley, bike, watercraft, or aircraft while
using adult use cannabis or while under the influence of adult use cannabis and
is subject to R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance
for any violation of this division.
      (2)   An individual is prohibited from smoking, vaporizing, or using any
other combustible adult use cannabis product while in a vehicle, motor vehicle,
streetcar, trackless trolley, bike, watercraft, or aircraft and is subject to
R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for any
violation of this division.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780, no individual under
21 years of age shall knowingly show or give false information concerning the
individual's name, age, or other identification for the purpose of purchasing
adult use cannabis from an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C. Chapter
3780.
   (f)   Nothing in R.C. Chapter 3780 is intended to permit the transfer or
sale of adult use cannabis, with or without remuneration, to an individual
under 21 years of age, or to allow an individual under 21 years of age to
purchase, possess, use, process, transport, or cultivate cannabis except where
authorized by R.C. Chapter 3796.
   (g)   It is unlawful for any parent or guardian to knowingly permit their
residence, any other private property under their control, or any vehicle,
conveyance, or watercraft under their control to be used by an invitee of the
parent's child or the guardian's ward, if the invitee is under 21 years of age,
in a manner that constitutes a violation of R.C. Chapter 3780.
      (1)   A parent or guardian is deemed to have knowingly permitted their
residence, any other private property under their control, or any vehicle,
conveyance, or watercraft under their control to be used in violation of R.C.
Chapter 3780 if they knowingly authorize or permit consumption of cannabis by
underage invitees.
      (2)   Where the residence or other property has an owner and a tenant or
lessee, the trier of fact may infer that the residence or other property is
occupied only by the tenant or lessee.
(R.C. § 3780.36)
   (h)   Penalties.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3796, R.C. § 2925.11
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall apply when an adult use
consumer possesses an amount of cannabis greater than the limits set forth in
division (b)(1) of this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780, an adult use
consumer who uses adult use cannabis in public areas, or who violates division
(d)(2) of this section as a passenger, is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (3)   A.   An individual under 21 years of age who knowingly shows or
gives false information concerning the individual's name, age, or other
identification for the purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining adult use
cannabis from an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C. Chapter 3780 is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If, in committing a first
violation, the offender presented to an adult use dispensary licensed under
R.C. Chapter 3780 a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver's license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver's
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $250 and not
more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more
than six months.
         B.   On a second violation in which, for the second time, the offender
presented to an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C. Chapter 3780 a false,
fictitious, or altered identification card, a false or fictitious driver's
license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver's license issued by any
state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree and shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, and
may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months. The
court also may impose a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's or
commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from
the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7). The court, in lieu of suspending
the offender's temporary instruction permit, probationary driver's license, or
driver's license, instead may order the offender to perform a determinate
number of hours of community service, with the court determining the actual
number of hours and the nature of the community service the offender shall
perform.
         C.   On a third or subsequent violation in which, for the third or
subsequent time, the offender presented to an adult use dispensary licensed
under R.C. Chapter 3780 a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a
false or fictitious driver's license purportedly issued by any state, or a
driver's license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than
$500 nor more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of
not more than six months. Except as provided in this division, the court also
may impose a class six suspension of the offender's driver's or commercial
driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6), and the court may order that the suspension
or denial remain in effect until the offender attains the age of 21 years. The
court, in lieu of suspending the offender's temporary instruction permit,
probationary driver's license, or driver's license, instead may order the
offender to perform a determinate number of hours of community service, with
the court determining the actual number of hours and the nature of the
community service the offender shall perform.
      (4)   An individual who is under 21 years of age and who solicits another
individual to purchase adult use cannabis from an adult use dispensary licensed
under R.C. Chapter 3780 is guilty of:
         A.   For a first violation, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; and
         B.   For a second or subsequent violation, a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
      (5)   An employee or agent of an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C.
Chapter 3780 who knowingly sells cannabis to an individual under 21 years of
age is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (6)   Any individual who violates R.C. § 3780.10(A), or R.C. § 3780.29
(F), is guilty of the illegal trafficking in drugs under R.C. § 2925.03 and the
illegal manufacture of drugs under R.C. § 2925.04.
      (7)   Any individual who violates division (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this
section guilty of the illegal trafficking in drugs under R.C. § 2925.03.
      (8)   Any individual who violates R.C. § 3780.20(B) is guilty of illegal
dispensing of drug samples under R.C. § 2925.36 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
      (9)   A.   An individual who violates division (g) of this section is
guilty of:
            1.   For a first violation, a misdemeanor of the third degree; and
            2.   For a second or subsequent violation, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
         B.   If a violation of division (g) of this section directly or
indirectly results in great bodily harm or death to any individual, the
individual violating division (g) is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 3780.99)
Statutory reference:
   Felony drug trafficking offenses, see R.C. § 2925.03(C)
§ 624.03 CULTIVATION OF MARIHUANA.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cultivate marihuana.
   (b)   This section does not apply to any person listed in R.C. § 2925.03(B)
(1), (B)(2) or (B)(3), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, to
the extent and under the circumstances described in that division.
   (c)   Whoever commits a violation of division (a) of this section is guilty
of illegal cultivation of marihuana.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in the following divisions, illegal
cultivation of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor or, if the offense was
committed in the vicinity of a school or in the vicinity of a juvenile, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   If the amount of marihuana involved equals or exceeds 100 grams but
is less than 200 grams, illegal cultivation of marihuana is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree or, if the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school
or in the vicinity of a juvenile, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   If the amount of marihuana involved equals or exceeds 200 grams,
illegal cultivation of marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (d)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section
does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s criminal
record, including any inquiries contained in any application for employment,
license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s
appearance as a witness.
(R.C. § 2925.04(A), (B), (C)(5), (G))
§ 624.04 DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly obtain, possess or use a controlled
substance or a controlled substance analog.
   (b)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         A.   Manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to
prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, and other persons whose
conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731,
4741, and 4772.
         B.   If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any person who is
conducting or participating in a research project involving the use of an
anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the United States Food and
Drug Administration.
         C.   Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes, dispenses or
administers for livestock or other nonhuman species an anabolic steroid that is
expressly intended for administration through implants to livestock or other
nonhuman species and approved for that purpose under the Federal Food, Drug and
Cosmetic Act, and is sold, offered for sale, prescribed, dispensed or
administered for that purpose in accordance with that Act.
         D.   Any person who obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs if the prescription was issued for a legitimate medical purpose and not
altered, forged, or obtained through deception or commission of a theft
offense. As used in this division (b)(1)D., DECEPTION and THEFT OFFENSE have
the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (2)   A.   As used in division (b)(2) of this section:
            1.   COMMUNITY ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 5119.01.
            2.   COMMUNITY CONTROL SANCTION. Has the same meanings as in R.C. §
2929.01.
            3.   HEALTH CARE FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2919.16.
            4.   MINOR DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSE. A violation of this section or
R.C. § 2925.11 that is a misdemeanor or a felony of the fifth degree.
            5.   PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
            6.   POST-RELEASE CONTROL SANCTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2967.28.
            7.   PUBLIC AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2930.01.
            8.   QUALIFIED INDIVIDUAL. A person who is acting in good faith who
seeks or obtains medical assistance for another person who is experiencing a
drug overdose, a person who experiences a drug overdose and who seeks medical
assistance for that overdose, or a person who is the subject of another person
seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that overdose as described in
division (b)(2)B. of this section.
            9.   SEEK OR OBTAIN MEDICAL ASSISTANCE. Includes, but is not
limited to making a 9-1-1 call, contacting in person or by telephone call an
on-duty peace officer, or transporting or presenting a person to a health care
facility.
         B.   Subject to division (b)(2)E. of this section, a qualified
individual shall not be arrested, charged, prosecuted, convicted, or penalized
pursuant to this chapter for a minor drug possession offense or a violation of
R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. § 2925.141 if all of the
following apply:
            1.   The evidence of the obtaining, possession, or use of the
controlled substance or controlled substance analog, drug abuse instruments, or
drug paraphernalia that would be the basis of the offense was obtained as a
result of the qualified individual seeking the medical assistance or
experiencing an overdose and needing medical assistance.
            2.   Subject to division (b)(2)F. of this section, within 30 days
after seeking or obtaining the medical assistance, the qualified individual
seeks and obtains a screening and receives a referral for treatment from a
community addiction services provider or a properly credentialed addiction
treatment professional.
            3.   Subject to division (b)(2)F. of this section, the qualified
individual who obtains a screening and receives a referral for treatment under
division (b)(2)B.2. of this section, upon the request of any prosecuting
attorney, submits documentation to the prosecuting attorney that verifies that
the qualified individual satisfied the requirements of that division. The
documentation shall be limited to the date and time of the screening obtained
and referral received.
         C.   If a person who is serving a community control sanction or is
under a sanction on post- release control acts pursuant to division (b)(2)B. of
this section, then R.C. § 2929.141(B), R.C. § 2929.15(B)(2), R.C. § 2929.25(D)
(3), or R.C. § 2967.28(F)(3) applies to the person with respect to any
violation of the sanction or post-release control sanction based on a minor
drug possession offense, as defined in R.C. § 2925.11, or a violation of R.C. §
2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. § 2925.141.
         D.   Nothing in division (b)(2)B. of this section shall be construed
to do any of the following:
            1.   Limit the admissibility of any evidence in connection with the
investigation or prosecution of a crime with regards to a defendant who does
not qualify for the protections of division (b)(2)B. of this section or with
regards to any crime other than a minor drug possession offense or a violation
of R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. § 2925.141 committed by a
person who qualifies for protection pursuant to division (b)(2)B. of this
section;
            2.   Limit any seizure of evidence or contraband otherwise
permitted by law;
            3.   Limit or abridge the authority of a peace officer to detain or
take into custody a person in the course of an investigation or to effectuate
an arrest for any offense except as provided in that division;
            4.   Limit, modify, or remove any immunity from liability available
pursuant to law in effect prior to September 13, 2016 to any public agency or
to an employee of any public agency.
         E.   Division (b)(2)B. of this section does not apply to any person
who twice previously has been granted an immunity under division (b)(2)B. of
this section. No person shall be granted an immunity under division (b)(2)B. of
this section more than two times.
         F.   Nothing in this section shall compel any qualified individual to
disclose protected health information in a way that conflicts with the
requirements of the “Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of
1996”, 104 Pub. L. No. 191, 110 Stat. 2021, 42 U.S.C. §§ 1320d et seq., as
amended, and regulations promulgated by the United States Department of Health
and Human Services to implement the act or the requirements of 42 C.F.R. Part
2.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of one of the
following:
      (1)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule I or Schedule II, with the
exception of marihuana or hashish, whoever violates division (a) of this
section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V,
whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of possession of drugs.
The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(2)B. of this
section, possession of drugs is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the
offender previously has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         B.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds the bulk
amount, possession of drugs is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   If the drug involved in the violation is marihuana or a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance containing marihuana other than hashish,
whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of possession of
marihuana. The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(3)B. or (c)(3)C. of
this section, possession of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor.
         B.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds 100 grams
but is less than 200 grams, possession of marihuana is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
         C.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds 200 grams,
possession of marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (4)   If the drug involved in the violation is hashish or a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance containing hashish, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of possession of hashish. The penalty
for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(4)B. or (c)(4)C. of
this section, possession of hashish is a minor misdemeanor.
         B.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds five grams
but is less than ten grams of hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds one
gram but is less than two grams of hashish in a liquid concentrate, liquid
extract, or liquid distillate form, possession of hashish is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.
         C.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds ten grams of
hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds two grams of hashish in a liquid
concentrate, liquid extract, or liquid distillate form, possession of hashish
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is a combination of a fentanyl-related compound
and marihuana, one of the following applies:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(5)B. of this
section, the offender is guilty of possession of marihuana and shall be
punished as provided in division (c)(3) of this section. Except as otherwise
provided in division (c)(5)B. of this section, the offender is not guilty of
possession of a fentanyl-related compound under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) and shall
not be charged with, convicted of, or punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) for
possession of a fentanyl-related compound.
         B.   If the offender knows or has reason to know that the compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is the drug involved contains a
fentanyl-related compound, the offender is guilty of possession of a fentanyl-
related compound and shall be punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11).
      (6)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is a combination of a fentanyl-related compound
and any Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V controlled substance that is
not a fentanyl-related compound, one of the following applies:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(6)B. of this
section, the offender is guilty of possession of drugs and shall be punished as
provided in division (c)(2) of this section. Except as otherwise provided in
division (c)(6)B. of this section, the offender is not guilty of possession of
a fentanyl-related compound under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) and shall not be
charged with, convicted of, or punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) for
possession of a fentanyl-related compound.
         B.   If the offender knows or has reason to know that the compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is the drug involved contains a
fentanyl-related compound, the offender is guilty of possession of a fentanyl-
related compound and shall be punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11).
   (d)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section
does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s criminal
record, including any inquiries contained in any application for employment,
license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s
appearance as a witness.
   (e)   In addition to any prison term or jail term authorized or required by
division (c) of this section and R.C. §§ 2929.13, 2929.14, 2929.22, 2929.24,
and 2929.25, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and in
addition to any other sanction that is imposed for the offense under this
section, R.C. §§ 2929.11 through 2929.18, or R.C. §§ 2929.21 through 2929.28,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, if applicable, the court
shall also do the following:
      (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to
any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33 applies.
   (f)   (1)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
      (2)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (f) of this section, the
sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.11)
Statutory reference:
   Felony drug possession offenses, see R.C. § 2925.11(C)
§ 624.05 POSSESSION OF DRUG ABUSE INSTRUMENTS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make, obtain, possess or use any instrument,
article or thing the customary and primary purpose of which is for the
administration or use of a dangerous drug, other than marihuana, when the
instrument involved is a hypodermic or syringe, whether or not of crude or
extemporized manufacture or assembly, and the instrument, article or thing
involved has been used by the offender to unlawfully administer or use a
dangerous drug, other than marihuana, or to prepare a dangerous drug, other
than marihuana, for unlawful administration or use.
   (b)   (1)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies
and other persons whose conduct was in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719,
4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, and 4772.
      (2)   Division (B)(2) of R.C. § 2925.11 applies with respect to a
violation of this section when a person seeks or obtains medical assistance for
another person who is experiencing a drug overdose, a person experiences a drug
overdose and seeks medical assistance for that overdose, or a person is the
subject of another person seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that
overdose.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing drug abuse
instruments, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a drug abuse offense, violation of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition
to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33 applies.
      (3)   A.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         B.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (d)(3) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.12)
§ 624.06 PERMITTING DRUG ABUSE.
   (a)   No person who is the owner, operator or person in charge of a
locomotive, watercraft, aircraft or other vehicle, as defined in R.C. §
4501.01, shall knowingly permit the vehicle to be used for the commission of a
felony drug abuse offense.
   (b)   No person, who is the owner, lessee or occupant, or who has custody,
control or supervision of premises, or real estate, including vacant land,
shall knowingly permit his or her premises, or real estate, including vacant
land, to be used for the commission of a felony drug abuse offense by another
person.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting drug abuse.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(2) of this section, permitting
drug abuse is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Permitting drug abuse is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the felony drug abuse offense in question is a
violation of R.C. § 2925.02, 2925.03, or 2925.04, or if the felony drug abuse
offense in question is a violation of R.C. § 2925.041 and the offender had
actual knowledge, at the time the offender permitted the vehicle, premises, or
real estate to be used as described in division (a) or (b) of this section,
that the person who assembled or possessed the chemicals in question in
violation of R.C. § 2925.041 had assembled or possessed them with the intent to
manufacture a controlled substance in Schedule I or Schedule II in violation of
R.C. § 2925.04.
   (d)   (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition
to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33 applies.
      (3)   A.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016, may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
similar municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States that
arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender's license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         B.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (d)(3) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. § 3719.21, the clerk of
the court shall pay a fine imposed for a violation of this section pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.18(A) in accordance with and subject to the requirements of R.C. §
2925.03(F). The agency that receives the fine shall use the fine as specified
in R.C. § 2925.03(F).
   (f)   Any premises or real estate that is permitted to be used in violation
of division (b) of this section constitutes a nuisance subject to abatement
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2925.13)
§ 624.07 USE OR POSSESSION OF PARAPHERNALIA.
   (a)   As used in this section, DRUG PARAPHERNALIA means any equipment,
product or material of any kind that is used by the offender, intended by the
offender for use or designed for use in propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the
human body, a controlled substance in violation of this chapter. DRUG
PARAPHERNALIA includes but is not limited to any of the following equipment,
products or materials that are used by the offender, intended by the offender
for use, or designed by the offender for use, in any of the following manners:
      (1)   A kit for propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting any
species of a plant that is a controlled substance or from which a controlled
substance can be derived.
      (2)   A kit for manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing or preparing a controlled substance.
      (3)   Any object, instrument or device for manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing or preparing methamphetamine.
      (4)   An isomerization device for increasing the potency of any species
of a plant that is a controlled substance.
      (5)   Testing equipment for identifying, or analyzing the strength,
effectiveness, or purity of, a controlled substance, except for those exempted
in division (d)(4) of this section;
      (6)   A scale or balance for weighing or measuring a controlled
substance.
      (7)   A diluent or adulterant, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose or lactose, for cutting a controlled substance.
      (8)   A separation gin or sifter for removing twigs and seeds from, or
otherwise cleaning or refining, marihuana.
      (9)   A blender, bowl, container, spoon or mixing device for compounding
a controlled substance.
      (10)   A capsule, balloon, envelope or container for packaging small
quantities of a controlled substance.
      (11)   A container or device for storing or concealing a controlled
substance.
      (12)   A hypodermic syringe, needle or instrument for parenterally
injecting a controlled substance into the human body.
      (13)   An object, instrument or device for ingesting, inhaling or
otherwise introducing into the human body, marihuana, cocaine, hashish or
hashish oil, such as a metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic
pipe, with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head or punctured
metal bowl; water pipe; carburetion tube or device; smoking or carburetion
mask; roach clip or similar object used to hold burning material, such as a
marihuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the
hand; miniature cocaine spoon, or cocaine vial; chamber pipe; carburetor pipe;
electric pipe; air driver pipe; chillum; bong; or ice pipe or chiller.
   (b)   In determining if any equipment, product or material is drug
paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in addition
to other relevant factors, the following:
      (1)   Any statement by the owner or by anyone in control of the
equipment, product or material, concerning its use.
      (2)   The proximity in time or space of the equipment, product or
material, or of the act relating to the equipment, product or material, to a
violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2925.
      (3)   The proximity of the equipment, product or material to any
controlled substance.
      (4)   The existence of any residue of a controlled substance on the
equipment, product or material.
      (5)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of the owner, or of
anyone in control, of the equipment, product or material, to deliver it to any
person whom he or she knows intends to use the equipment, product or material
to facilitate a violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter
2925. A finding that the owner or anyone in control of the equipment, product
or material is not guilty of a violation of any other provision of this chapter
or R.C. Chapter 2925 does not prevent a finding that the equipment, product or
material was intended or designed by the offender for use as drug
paraphernalia.
      (6)   Any oral or written instruction provided with the equipment,
product or material concerning its use.
      (7)   Any descriptive material accompanying the equipment, product or
material and explaining or depicting its use.
      (8)   National or local advertising concerning the use of the equipment,
product or material.
      (9)   The manner and circumstances in which the equipment, product or
material is displayed for sale.
      (10)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of the sales of the
equipment, product or material to the total sales of the business enterprise.
      (11)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses of the equipment,
product or material in the community.
      (12)   Expert testimony concerning the use of the equipment, product or
material.
   (c)   (1)   Subject to divisions (d)(2), (d)(3), and (d)(4) of this section,
no person shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, drug
paraphernalia.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly sell, or possess or manufacture with
purpose to sell, drug paraphernalia, if he or she knows or reasonably should
know that the equipment, product or material will be used as drug
paraphernalia.
      (3)   No person shall place an advertisement in any newspaper, magazine,
handbill or other publication that is published and printed and circulates
primarily within this state, if he or she knows that the purpose of the
advertisement is to promote the illegal sale in this municipality or in this
state of the equipment, product or material that the offender intended or
designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
   (d)   (1)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies
and other persons whose conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715,
4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, and 4772. This section shall not be construed to
prohibit the possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by R.C. §
3719.172.
      (2)   Division (c)(1) of this section does not apply to a person’s use,
or possession with purpose to use, any drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a
product, or material of any kind that is used by the person, intended by the
person for use, or designed for use in storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body
marihuana.
      (3)   Division (B)(2) of R.C. § 2925.11 applies with respect to a
violation of division (c)(1) of this section when a person seeks or obtains
medical assistance for another person who is experiencing a drug overdose, a
person experiences a drug overdose and seeks medical assistance for that
overdose, or a person is the subject of another person seeking or obtaining
medical assistance for that overdose.
      (4)   Division (c)(1) of this section does not apply to a person’s use,
or possession with purpose to use, any drug testing strips to determine the
presence of fentanyl or a fentanyl-related compound.
   (e)   Notwithstanding R.C. Chapter 2981, any drug paraphernalia that was
used, possessed, sold or manufactured in violation of this section shall be
seized, after a conviction for that violation, shall be forfeited, and upon
forfeiture shall be disposed of pursuant to R.C. § 2981.12(B).
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates division (c)(1) of this section is guilty of
illegal use or possession of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (f)(3) of this section, whoever
violates division (c)(2) of this section is guilty of dealing in drug
paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (c)(2) of this section by selling drug
paraphernalia to a juvenile is guilty of selling drug paraphernalia to
juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (c)(3) of this section is guilty of
illegal advertising of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (g)   (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition
to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33 applies.
      (3)   A.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         B.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (g)(3) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.14)
   (h)   Illegal use or possession of marihuana drug paraphernalia.
      (1)   As used in this division (h), DRUG PARAPHERNALIA has the same
meaning as in division (a) of this section.
      (2)   In determining if any equipment, product, or material is drug
paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in addition
to other relevant factors, all factors identified in division (b) of this
section.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, any
drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a product, or material of any kind that
is used by the person, intended by the person for use, or designed for use in
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body marihuana.
      (4)   This division (h) does not apply to any person identified in
division (d)(1) of this section, and it shall not be construed to prohibit the
possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by R.C. § 3719.172.
      (5)   A.   Division (e) of this section applies with respect to any drug
paraphernalia that was used or possessed in violation of division (h) of this
section.
         B.   Division (B)(2) of R.C. § 2925.11 applies with respect to a
violation of this division (h) when a person seeks or obtains medical
assistance for another person who is experiencing a drug overdose, a person
experiences a drug overdose and seeks medical assistance for that overdose, or
a person is the subject of another person seeking or obtaining medical
assistance for that overdose.
      (6)   A.   Whoever violates division (h)(3) of this section is guilty of
illegal use or possession of marihuana drug paraphernalia, a minor misdemeanor.
         B.   Arrest or conviction for a violation of division (h)(3) of this
section does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the
person so arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s
criminal record, including any inquiries contained in any application for
employment, license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with
the person’s appearance as a witness.
      (7)   A.   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for
a violation of division (h) of this section, the court shall do the following,
if applicable:
            1.   If the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a
violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or
the law of another state or the United States arising out of the same set of
circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or permit for not more than five years.
            2.   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
         B.   1.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under division (h)
of this section prior to September 13, 2016, may file a motion with the
sentencing court requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an
offender who pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another
state or the United States that arose out of the same set of circumstances as
the violation for which the offender’s license or permit was suspended under
division (h) of this section shall not file such a motion.
            2.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (h)(7)B. of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.141)
§ 624.08 ABUSING HARMFUL INTOXICANTS.
   (a)   Except for lawful research, clinical, medical, dental or veterinary
purposes, no person, with purpose to induce intoxication or similar
physiological effects, shall obtain, possess or use a harmful intoxicant.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of abusing harmful
intoxicants, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a drug abuse offense, abusing harmful intoxicants is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (c)   (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition
to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33 applies.
      (3)   A.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to the September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         B.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (c)(3) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.31)
§ 624.09 IMPROPERLY DISPENSING OR DISTRIBUTING NITROUS OXIDE.
   (a)   No person who dispenses or distributes nitrous oxide in cartridges
shall fail to comply with either of the following:
      (1)   The record-keeping requirements established under division (c) of
this section.
      (2)   The labeling and transaction identification requirements
established under division (d) of this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is guilty
of improperly dispensing or distributing nitrous oxide, a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
   (c)   Beginning July 1, 2001, a person who dispenses or distributes nitrous
oxide shall record each transaction involving the dispensing or distribution of
the nitrous oxide on a separate card. The person shall require the purchaser to
sign the card and provide a complete residence address. The person dispensing
or distributing the nitrous oxide shall sign and date the card. The person
shall retain the card recording a transaction for one year from the date of the
transaction. The person shall maintain the cards at the person’s business
address and make them available during normal business hours for inspection and
copying by officers or employees of the State Board of Pharmacy or of other law
enforcement agencies that are authorized to investigate violations of this
code, R.C. Chapter 2925, Chapter 3719 or Chapter 4729, or federal drug abuse
control laws. The cards used to record each transaction shall inform the
purchaser of the following:
      (1)   That nitrous oxide cartridges are to be used only for purposes of
preparing food;
      (2)   That inhalation of nitrous oxide can have dangerous health effects;
and
      (3)   That it is a violation of state law to distribute or dispense
cartridges of nitrous oxide to any person under age 21, punishable as a felony
of the fifth degree.
   (d)   (1)   Each cartridge of nitrous oxide dispensed or distributed in this
municipality shall bear the following printed warning: “Nitrous oxide
cartridges are to be used only for purposes of preparing food. Nitrous oxide
cartridges may not be sold to persons under age 21. Do not inhale contents.
Misuse can be dangerous to your health.”
      (2)   Each time a person dispenses or distributes one or more cartridges
of nitrous oxide, the person shall mark the packaging containing the cartridges
with a label or other device that identifies the person who dispensed or
distributed the nitrous oxide and the person’s business address.
(R.C. § 2925.32(B)(4), (D)(2), (F), (G))
Statutory reference:
   Trafficking in harmful intoxicants, felony offenses, see R.C. § 2925.32
§ 624.10 POSSESSING NITROUS OXIDE IN MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (a)   As used in this section, MOTOR VEHICLE, STREET and HIGHWAY have the
same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   (b)   Unless authorized by these Codified Ordinances or by state law, no
person shall possess an open cartridge of nitrous oxide in either of the
following circumstances:
      (1)   While operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on a
street, highway or other public or private property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic or parking.
      (2)   While being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on a street,
highway or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular traffic or parking.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing nitrous oxide in
a motor vehicle, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (d)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for
possessing nitrous oxide in a motor vehicle, the court may suspend for not more
than five years the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit.
(R.C. § 2925.33)
§ 624.11 ILLEGAL DISPENSING OF DRUG SAMPLES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly furnish a sample drug to another person.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to manufacturers,
wholesalers, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, licensed health professionals
authorized to prescribe drugs, and other persons whose conduct is in accordance
with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4725, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, and 4722.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal dispensing of
drug samples.
      (2)   If the drug involved in the offense is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule I or Schedule II, with the
exception of marihuana, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the drug involved in the offense is a dangerous drug or a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule
IV or Schedule V, or is marihuana, the penalty for the offense shall be
determined as follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in the following division, illegal
dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
         B.   If the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school or in
the vicinity of a juvenile, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
   (d)   (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition
to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33 applies.
      (3)   A.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016, may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
similar municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States that
arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender's license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         B.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (d)(3) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. § 3719.21, the clerk of
the court shall pay a fine imposed for a violation of this section pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.18(A) in accordance with and subject to the requirements of R.C. §
2925.03(F). The agency that receives the fine shall use the fine as specified
in R.C. § 2925.03(F).
(R.C. § 2925.36(A) - (D), (F))
Statutory reference:
   Felony offenses, see R.C. § 2925.36(C)(2)
§ 624.12 COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly possess any counterfeit controlled
substance.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section shall be guilty of
possession of counterfeit controlled substances, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 2925.37(A), (G))
Statutory reference:
   Trafficking, other felony counterfeit controlled substance offenses, see
R.C. § 2925.37(H) - (M)
§ 624.13 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE OR PRESCRIPTION LABELS.
   (a)   Whenever a manufacturer sells a controlled substance, and whenever a
wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility sells a controlled substance in
a package the wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility has prepared, the
manufacturer or the wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility, as the
case may be, shall securely affix to each package in which the controlled
substance is contained a label showing in legible English the name and address
of the vendor and the quantity, kind, and form of controlled substance
contained therein. No person, except a pharmacist for the purpose of dispensing
a controlled substance upon a prescription shall alter, deface, or remove any
label so affixed. As used in this division, REPACKAGER and OUTSOURCING FACILITY
have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   (b)   No person shall alter, deface or remove any label affixed pursuant to
R.C. § 3719.08 as long as any of the original contents remain.
(R.C. § 3719.08(A), (E))
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this
section, or R.C. § 3719.07 or § 3719.08, or a drug abuse offense, a violation
of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If
the violation involves the sale, offer to sell, or possession of a Schedule I
or Schedule II controlled substance, with the exception of marihuana, and if
the offender, as a result of the violation, is a major drug offender, then R.C.
§ 3719.99(D) applies.
(R.C. § 3719.99(C))
§ 624.14 POSSESSION, SALE AND DISPOSAL OF HYPODERMICS.
   (a)   Possession of a hypodermic is authorized for the following:
      (1)   A manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in hypodermics, or
medication packaged in hypodermics, and any authorized agent of employee of
that manufacturer, distributor or dealer, in the regular course of business;
      (2)   A terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, in the regular course of
business;
      (3)   A person authorized to administer injections, in the regular course
of the person’s profession or employment;
      (4)   A person, when the hypodermic in his or her possession was lawfully
obtained and is kept and used for the purpose of self-administration of insulin
or other drug prescribed for the treatment of disease by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs;
      (5)   A person whose use of a hypodermic is for legal research, clinical,
educational or medicinal purposes;
      (6)   A farmer, for the lawful administration of a drug to an animal;
      (7)   A person whose use of a hypodermic is for lawful professional,
mechanical, trade or craft purposes.
   (b)   No manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in, hypodermics or
medication packaged in hypodermics, or their authorized agents or employees,
and no terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall display any hypodermic for
sale. No person authorized to possess a hypodermic pursuant to division (a) of
this section shall negligently fail to take reasonable precautions to prevent
any hypodermic in the person’s possession from theft or acquisition by any
unauthorized person.
(R.C. § 3719.172(A), (B))
   (c)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of a violation of division (b) of this section, R.C. § 3719.05, 3719.06,
3719.13, 3719.172(B) or 3719.31, or a drug abuse offense, a violation of
division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 3719.99(E))
Statutory reference:
   Felony offenses, see R.C. § 3719.172(C), (D)
§ 624.15 EVIDENCE.
   (a)   (1)   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of this chapter or
R.C. Chapter 2925 or Chapter 3719, a laboratory report from the Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation or a laboratory operated by another
law enforcement agency, or a laboratory established by or under the authority
of an institution of higher education that has its main campus in this state
and that is accredited by the Association of American Universities or the North
Central Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, primarily for the
purpose of providing scientific service to law enforcement agencies, and signed
by the person performing the analysis, stating that the substance that is the
basis of the alleged offense has been weighed and analyzed and stating the
findings as to the content, weight and identity of the substance and that it
contains any amount of a controlled substance and the number and description of
unit dosages, is prima facie evidence of the content, identity and weight or
the existence and number of unit dosages of the substance. In any criminal
prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 2925.041 or a violation of this chapter,
R.C. Chapter 2925 or R.C. Chapter 3719 that is based on the possession of
chemicals sufficient to produce a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance
included in Schedule I, Schedule II, Schedule III, Schedule IV or Schedule V, a
laboratory report from the Bureau or from any laboratory that is operated or
established as described in this division that is signed by the person
performing the analysis, stating that the substances that are the basis of the
alleged offense have been weighed and analyzed and stating the findings as to
the content, weight, and identity of each of the substances, is prima facie
evidence of the content, identity and weight of the substances.
      (2)   Attached to that report shall be a copy of a notarized statement by
the signer of the report giving the name of the signer and stating that the
signer is an employee of the laboratory issuing the report and that performing
the analysis is a part of the signer’s regular duties, and giving an outline of
the signer’s education, training and experience for performing an analysis of
materials included under this section. The signer shall attest that
scientifically accepted tests were performed with due caution, and that the
evidence was handled in accordance with established and accepted procedures
while in the custody of the laboratory.
   (b)   The prosecuting attorney shall serve a copy of the report on the
attorney of record for the accused, or on the accused if the accused has no
attorney, prior to any proceeding in which the report is to be used against the
accused other than at a preliminary hearing or grand jury proceeding where the
report may be used without having been previously served upon the accused.
   (c)   The report shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents, identity
and weight or the existence and number of unit dosages of the substance if the
accused or the accused’s attorney demands the testimony of the person signing
the report, by serving the demand upon the prosecuting attorney, within seven
days from the accused or the accused’s attorney’s receipt of the report. The
time may be extended by a trial judge in the interests of justice.
   (d)   Any report issued for use under this section shall contain notice of
the right of the accused to demand, and the manner in which the accused shall
demand, the testimony of the person signing the report.
   (e)   Any person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or R.C.
Chapter 2925 or Chapter 3719 is entitled, upon written request made to the
prosecuting attorney, to have a portion of the substance that is, or of each of
the substances that are, the basis of the alleged violation preserved for the
benefit of independent analysis performed by a laboratory analyst employed by
the accused person, or, if the accused is indigent, by a qualified laboratory
analyst appointed by the court. The portion shall be a representative sample of
the entire substance that is, or of each of the substances that are, the basis
of the alleged violation and shall be of sufficient size, in the opinion of the
court, to permit the accused’s analyst to make a thorough scientific analysis
concerning the identity of the substance or substances. The prosecuting
attorney shall provide the accused’s analyst with the sample portion at least
14 days prior to trial, unless the trial is to be held in a court not of record
or unless the accused person is charged with a minor misdemeanor, in which case
the prosecuting attorney shall provide the accused’s analyst with the sample
portion at least three days prior to trial. If the prosecuting attorney
determines that such a sample portion cannot be preserved and given to the
accused’s analyst, the prosecuting attorney shall so inform the accused person,
or the accused’s attorney. In such a circumstance, the accused person is
entitled, upon written request made to the prosecuting attorney, to have the
accused’s privately employed or court appointed analyst present at an analysis
of the substance that is, or the substances that are, the basis of the alleged
violation, and, upon further written request, to receive copies of all recorded
scientific data that result from the analysis and that can be used by an
analyst in arriving at conclusions, findings or opinions concerning the
identity of the substance or substances subject to the analysis.
   (f)   In addition to the rights provided under division (e) of this section,
any person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2925
or Chapter 3719 that involves a bulk amount of a controlled substance, or any
multiple thereof, or who is accused of a violation of R.C. § 2925.11 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, other than a minor misdemeanor
violation, that involves marihuana, is entitled, upon written request made to
the prosecuting attorney, to have a laboratory analyst of the accused’s choice,
or, if the accused is indigent, a qualified laboratory analyst appointed by the
court, present at a measurement or weighing of the substance that is the basis
of the alleged violation. Also, the accused person is entitled, upon further
written request, to receive copies of all recorded scientific data that result
from the measurement or weighing and that can be used by an analyst in arriving
at conclusions, findings, or opinions concerning the weight, volume or number
of unit doses of the substance subject to the measurement or weighing.
(R.C. § 2925.51)
   (g)   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required under
R.C. §§ 2929.18 and 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or required
under any provision of law, the court imposing sentence upon an offender who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a drug abuse offense may order the offender to
pay to the state, municipal or county law enforcement agencies that handled the
investigation and prosecution all of the costs that the state, municipal
corporation or county reasonably incurred in having tests performed under this
section or R.C. § 2925.51 or in any other manner on any substance that was the
basis of, or involved in, the offense to determine whether the substance
contained any amount of a controlled substance if the results of the tests
indicate that the substance tested contained any controlled substance. No court
shall order an offender under this section to pay the costs of tests performed
on a substance if the results of the tests do not indicate that the substance
tested contained any controlled substance. The court shall hold a hearing to
determine the amount of costs to be imposed under this section. The court may
hold the hearing as part of the sentencing hearing for the offender.
(R.C. § 2925.511)
§ 624.16 DOUBLE JEOPARDY.
   No person shall be prosecuted for a violation of this chapter if the person
has been acquitted or convicted under the federal drug abuse control laws of
the same act or omission which, it is alleged, constitutes a violation of this
chapter.
(R.C. §§ 2925.50, 3719.19)
§ 624.17 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE SCHEDULES.
   Controlled Substance Schedules I, II, III, IV and V, as established in R.C.
§ 3719.41 and amended by R.C. §§ 3719.43 and 3719.44, are hereby adopted by
reference, and shall be treated as if set forth in full herein.
§ 624.18 SALE OF PSEUDOEPHEDRINE.
   (a)   Unlawful purchases.
      (1)   As used in divisions (a), (b), (c) and (d) of this section:
         A.   CONSUMER PRODUCT. Any food or drink that is consumed or used by
humans and any drug, including a drug that may be provided legally only
pursuant to a prescription, that is intended to be consumed or used by humans.
         B.   EPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or salts
of optical isomers.
         C.   EPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains ephedrine.
         D.   PSEUDOEPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation
that contains any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts, optical
isomers, or salts of optical isomers.
         E.   PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains
pseudoephedrine.
         F.   RETAILER. A place of business that offers consumer products for
sale to the general public.
         G.   SINGLE-INGREDIENT PREPARATION. A compound, mixture, preparation,
or substance that contains a single active ingredient.
         H.   TERMINAL DISTRIBUTOR OF DANGEROUS DRUGS. Has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 4729.01.
      (2)   A.   1.   No individual shall knowingly purchase, receive, or
otherwise acquire an amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
that is greater than either of the following unless the pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product is dispensed by a pharmacist pursuant to a valid
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs and the conduct of the pharmacist and the licensed health professional
authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715,
4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, or 4772:
               a.   Three and six-tenths grams within a period of a single day;
               b.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
            2.   The limits specified in divisions (a)(2)A.1.a. and (a)
(2)A.1.b. of this section apply to the total amount of base pseudoephedrine or
base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product,
respectively. The limits do not apply to the product’s overall weight.
         B.   It is not a violation of division (b)(1) of this section for an
individual to receive or accept more than an amount of pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product specified in division (a)(2)A.1.a. or (a)(2)A.1.b. of this
section if the individual is an employee of a retailer or terminal distributor
of dangerous drugs, and the employee receives or accepts from the retailer or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs the pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product in a sealed container in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (3)   A.   No individual under 18 years of age shall knowingly purchase,
receive, or otherwise acquire a pseudoephedrine product, or ephedrine product
unless the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product is dispensed by a
pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs and the conduct of the pharmacist
and the licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs is in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, or 4772.
         B.   Division (a)(3)A. of this section does not apply to an individual
under 18 years of age who purchases, receives, or otherwise acquires a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product from any of the following:
            1.   A licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs
or pharmacist who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides the pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to that individual and whose conduct is in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, or 4772;
            2.   A parent or guardian of that individual who provides the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            3.   A person, as authorized by that individual’s parent or
guardian, who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides the pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            4.   A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs who
provides the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to that individual if
the individual is an employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs and the individual receives or accepts from the retailer or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs the pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product in a sealed container in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (4)   No individual under 18 years of age shall knowingly show or give
false information concerning the individual’s name, age, or other
identification for the purpose of purchasing, receiving, or otherwise acquiring
a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.
      (5)   No individual shall knowingly fail to comply with the requirements
of R.C. § 3715.051(B).
      (6)   Whoever violates division (a)(2)A. of this section is guilty of
unlawful purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (a)(3)A. of this section is guilty of
underage purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if it could be
committed by an adult.
      (8)   Whoever violates division (a)(4) of this section is guilty of using
false information to purchase a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the first degree if it could be
committed by an adult.
      (9)   Whoever violates division (a)(5) of this section is guilty of
improper purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2925.55)
   (b)   Unlawful retail sales.
      (1)   A.   1.   Except as provided in division (b)(1)B. of this section,
no retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or an employee of a
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall knowingly sell, offer
to sell, hold for sale, deliver, or otherwise provide to any individual an
amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product that is greater than
either of the following:
               a.   Three and six-tenths grams within a period of a single day;
               b.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
            2.   The maximum amounts specified in divisions (b)(1)A.1.a. and
(b)(1)A.1.b. of this section apply to the total amount of base pseudoephedrine
or base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product,
respectively. The maximum amounts do not apply to the product’s overall weight.
         B.   1.   Division (b)(1)A. of this section does not apply to any
quantity of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product dispensed by a
pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs if the conduct of the pharmacist and
the licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, or 4772.
            2.   It is not a violation of division (b)(1)A. of this section for
a retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, or employee of either to
provide to an individual more than an amount of pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product specified in division (b)(1)A.1.a. or (b)(1)A.1.b. of this
section under either of the following circumstances:
               a.   The individual is an employee of the retailer or terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs, and the employee receives or accepts from the
retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, or employee the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product in a sealed container in
connection with manufacturing, warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging,
loading, or unloading of the product;
               b.   A stop-sale alert is generated after the submission of
information to the national precursor log exchange under the conditions
described in R.C. § 3715.052(A)(2).
      (2)   A.   Except as provided in division (b)(2)B. of this section, no
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or an employee of a
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall sell, offer to sell,
hold for sale, deliver, or otherwise provide a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product to an individual who is under 18 years of age.
         B.   Division (b)(2)A. of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
            1.   A licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs
or pharmacist who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides a pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to an individual under 18 years of age and whose
conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731,
4741, or 4772;
            2.   A parent or guardian of an individual under 18 years of age
who provides a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            3.   A person who, as authorized by the individual’s parent or
guardian, dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product to an individual under 18 years of age;
            4.   The provision by a retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs, or employee of either of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
in a sealed container to an employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs who is under 18 years of age in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (3)   No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall fail
to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 3715.051(A) or R.C. § 3715.052(A)(2).
      (4)   No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall fail
to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 3715.052(A)(1).
      (5)   Whoever violates division (b)(1)A. of this section is guilty of
unlawfully selling a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (b)(2)A. of this section is guilty of
unlawfully selling a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to a minor, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (b)(3) of this section is guilty of
improper sale of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a misdemeanor
of the second degree.
      (8)   Whoever violates division (b)(4) of this section is guilty of
failing to submit information to the national precursor log exchange, a
misdemeanor for which the offender shall be fined not more than $1,000 per
violation.
(R.C. § 2925.56)
   (c)   Transaction scans.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division and division (d) of this section,
the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
         A.   CARD HOLDER. Any person who presents a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card to a seller, or an agent or employee
of a seller, to purchase or receive any pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product from the seller, agent or employee.
         B.   IDENTIFICATION CARD has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2927.021.
         C.   SELLER. A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs.
         D.   TRANSACTION SCAN. The process by which a seller or an agent or
employee of a seller checks by means of a transaction scan device the validity
of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card that is
presented as a condition for purchasing or receiving any pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product.
         E.   TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2927.021.
      (2)   A.   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may perform a
transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check the validity of
a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a
card holder as a condition for selling, giving away or otherwise distributing
to the card holder a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.
         B.   If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed
under division (c)(2)A. of this section fails to match the information printed
on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by the card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the information
so printed is false or fraudulent, neither the seller nor any agent or employee
of the seller shall sell, give away or otherwise distribute any pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to the card holder.
         C.   Division (c)(2)A. of this section does not preclude a seller or
an agent or employee of a seller as a condition for selling, giving away or
otherwise distributing a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the
person presenting the document from using a transaction scan device to check
the validity of a document other than a driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or an identification card if the document includes a bar code or magnetic strip
that may be scanned by the device.
      (3)   Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. §
4301.61(C) apply to the use of transaction scan devices for purposes of this
division (c) and division (d) of this section.
      (4)   A.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information derived from
a transaction scan, except the following:
            1.   The name, address, and date of birth of the person listed on
the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by
a card holder;
            2.   The expiration date, identification number, and issuing agency
of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by a card holder.
         B.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use the
information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is permitted to be
recorded and maintained under division (c)(4)A. of this section except for
purposes of division (d) of this section, R.C. § 2925.58, or R.C. § 3715.052(A)
(1).
         C.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use a
transaction scan device for a purpose other than the purpose specified in
division (c)(2)A. of this section.
         D.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall sell or
otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan to any
third party, including but not limited to selling or otherwise disseminating
that information for any marketing, advertising or promotional activities, but
a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant
to a court order or as specifically authorized by division (d) of this section
or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (5)   Nothing in this division (c) or division (d) of this section
relieves a seller or an agent or employee of a seller of any responsibility to
comply with any other applicable state or federal laws or rules governing the
sale, giving away or other distribution of pseudoephedrine products or
ephedrine products.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (c)(2)B. or (c)(4) of this section is
guilty of engaging in an illegal pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
transaction scan, and the court may impose upon the offender a civil penalty of
up to $1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of the Court shall pay each
collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for deposit into the County
Treasury.
(R.C. § 2925.57)
   (d)   Affirmative defenses.
      (1)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be found
guilty of a charge of a violation of division (b) of this section in which the
age of the purchaser or other recipient of a pseudoephedrine product is an
element of the alleged violation if the seller, agent or employee raises and
proves as an affirmative defense that all of the following occurred:
         A.   A card holder attempting to purchase or receive a pseudoephedrine
product presented a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card.
         B.   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or identification card that the card holder presented indicated that the
license or card was valid.
         C.   The pseudoephedrine product was sold, given away or otherwise
distributed to the card holder in reasonable reliance upon the identification
presented and the completed transaction scan.
      (2)   In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee of a seller
has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (d)(1) of this section,
the trier of fact in the action for the alleged violation of division (b) of
this section shall consider any written policy that the seller has adopted and
implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of division (b) of this
section. For purposes of division (d)(1)C. of this section, the trier of fact
shall consider that reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and
the completed transaction scan may require a seller or an agent or employee of
a seller to exercise reasonable diligence to determine, and that the use of a
transaction scan device does not excuse a seller or an agent or employee of a
seller from exercising reasonable diligence to determine, the following:
         A.   Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or employee of a
seller sells, gives away or otherwise distributes a pseudoephedrine product is
18 years of age or older;
         B.   Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a card holder
is that of the card holder.
      (3)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by
division (d)(1) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a
Deputy Registrar who issued an identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50
through 4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of
that issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with
the Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.
(R.C. § 2925.58)
   (e)   Retailer’s duties.
      (1)   As used in divisions (e) and (f) of this section:
         A.   CONSUMER PRODUCT. Any food or drink that is consumed or used by
humans and any drug, including a drug that may be provided legally only
pursuant to a prescription, that is intended to be consumed or used by humans.
         B.   DRUG. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         C.   EPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or salts
of optical isomers.
         D.   EPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains ephedrine.
         E.   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. An officer or employee of any agency or
authority of the United States, a state, a territory, a political subdivision
of a state or territory, or an Indian tribe, who is empowered by the law to
investigate or conduct an official inquiry into a potential violation of law or
prosecute or otherwise conduct a criminal, civil, or administrative proceeding
arising from an alleged violation of law.
         F.   LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS. Has
the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         G.   NATIONAL PRECURSOR LOG EXCHANGE or EXCHANGE. The electronic
system for tracking sales of pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products on
a national basis that is administered by the National Association of Drug
Diversion Investigators or a successor organization.
         H.   PHARMACIST. A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 to engage
in the practice of pharmacy.
         I.   PHARMACY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         J.   PRESCRIBER. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         K.   PRESCRIPTION. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         L.   PROOF OF AGE. A driver’s license, a commercial driver’s license,
a military identification card, a passport, or an identification card issued
under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows a person is 18 years of age or
older.
         M.   PSEUDOEPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation
that contains any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts, optical
isomers, or salts of optical isomers.
         N.   PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains
pseudoephedrine.
         O.   RETAILER. A place of business that offers consumer products for
sale to the general public.
         P.   SINGLE-INGREDIENT PREPARATION. A compound, mixture, preparation,
or substance that contains a single active ingredient.
         Q.   STOP-SALE ALERT. A notification sent from the national precursor
log exchange to a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs
indicating that the completion of a sale of a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product would result in a violation of R.C. § 2925.56(A)(1) or
federal law.
         R.   TERMINAL DISTRIBUTOR OF DANGEROUS DRUGS. Has the same meanings as
in R.C. § 4729.01.
         S.   WHOLESALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
      (2)   A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs that sells,
offers to sell, holds for sale, delivers, or otherwise provides a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the public shall do all of the
following:
         A.   Segregate pseudoephedrine products or ephedrine products from
other merchandise so that no member of the public may procure or purchase such
products without the direct assistance of a pharmacist or other authorized
employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs;
         B.   With regard to each time a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product is sold or otherwise provided without a valid prescription:
            1.   Determine, by examination of a valid proof of age, that the
purchaser or recipient is at least 18 years of age;
            2.   a.   Using any information available, including information
from the national precursor log exchange if the information is accessible, make
a reasonable attempt to ensure that no individual purchases or receives an
amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product that is greater than
either of the following:
                  i.   Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single
day;
                  ii.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
               b.   The maximum amounts specified in divisions (e)(2)B.2.a.i.
and (e)(2)B.2.a.ii. of this section apply to the total amount of base
pseudoephedrine or base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product, respectively. The maximum amounts do not apply to the product’s
overall weight.
         C.   Maintain a log book of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product purchases, in accordance with R.C. § 3715.051;
         D.   If required to comply with section R.C. § 3715.052, submit the
information specified in divisions (A)(1)(a) to (A)(1)(d) of that section to
the national precursor log exchange.
      (3)   Prescriptions, orders, and records maintained pursuant to this
section and stocks of pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products shall be
open for inspection to federal, state, county, and municipal officers, and
employees of the State Board of Pharmacy whose duty it is to enforce the laws
of this state or of the United States relating to controlled substances. Such
prescriptions, orders, records, and stocks shall be open for inspection by the
State Medical Board and its employees for purposes of enforcing R.C. Chapter
4731.
(R.C. § 3715.05)
   (f)   Theft or loss; reporting requirements.
      (1)   Each retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy,
prescriber or wholesaler that sells, offers to sell, holds for sale, delivers
or otherwise provides any pseudoephedrine product and that discovers the theft
or loss of any pseudoephedrine product in an amount of more than nine grams per
incident of theft or loss shall notify all of the following upon discovery of
the theft or loss:
         A.   The State Board of Pharmacy, by telephone immediately upon
discovery of the theft or loss;
         B.   Law enforcement authorities. If the incident is a theft and the
theft constitutes a felony, the retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs, pharmacy, prescriber or wholesaler shall report the theft to the law
enforcement authorities in accordance with R.C. § 2921.22.
      (2)   Within 30 days after making a report by telephone to the State
Board of Pharmacy pursuant to division (f)(1)A. of this section, a retailer,
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy, prescriber or wholesaler
shall send a written report to the State Board of Pharmacy.
      (3)   The reports required under this section shall identify the product
that was stolen or lost, the amount of the product stolen or lost, and the date
and time of discovery of the theft or loss.
(R.C. § 3715.06)
§ 624.19 SALE OF PURE CAFFEINE PRODUCT.
   (a)   As used in this section, PURE CAFFEINE PRODUCT means:
      (1)   Subject to division (a)(2) of this section, a product that consists
solely or primarily of caffeine and is manufactured into a crystalline, liquid,
or powdered form.
      (2)   The phrase does not include any of the following that contains
caffeine and is formulated, manufactured, and labeled in accordance with the
laws and regulations enforced by the United States Food and Drug
Administration:
         A.   Coffee, tea, any soft drink, any energy drink, or any other
caffeine-containing beverage;
         B.   Any energy product.
   (b)   Except as provided in division (c) of this section, no person shall
knowingly sell or offer for sale a pure caffeine product.
   (c)   Division (b) of this section does not prohibit a person from selling
or offering for sale any product manufactured in a unit-dose form such as a
pill, tablet, or caplet, but only if each unit dose of the product contains not
more than 250 milligrams of caffeine.
   (d)   Nothing in this section prohibits either of the following:
      (1)   Possession of a product described in division (c) of this section;
      (2)   Possession of a pure caffeine product by any of the following:
         A.   A food processing establishment, as defined in R.C. § 3715.021;
         B.   A manufacturer of a drug that is available without a
prescription;
         C.   A laboratory that holds a current, valid category III terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs license issued by the state board of pharmacy
under R.C. § 4729.54;
         D.   A laboratory of any agency or department of this state that
performs testing, analysis, and other laboratory services on behalf of the
state;
         E.   A postal or delivery service that transports or delivers a pure
caffeine product to an entity specified in divisions (d)(2)A. to (d)(2)D. of
this section.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of illegal
sale of pure caffeine, a minor misdemeanor on a first offense and a misdemeanor
of the third degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 2925.34)
§ 624.20 SALE OF DEXTROMETHORPHAN.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   DEXTROMETHORPHAN. The dextrorotatory isomer of 3-methoxy-N-
methylmorphinan, including its salts, but not including its racemic or
levorotatory forms.
      (2)   EVIDENCE OF MAJORITY AND IDENTITY. A document issued by the federal
government or a state, county, or municipal government, or a subdivision or
agency of any of the foregoing, including a driver’s or commercial driver’s
license, an identification card issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52, a
military identification card, or any other form of identification that bears
the name, date of birth, description, and picture of the person identified.
      (3)   RETAILER. A place of business that offers consumer products for
sale to the general public, including a terminal distributor of dangerous drugs
that is licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 and operated as a pharmacy.
   (b)   No retailer or employee of a retailer shall knowingly supply, deliver,
give, or otherwise provide a drug, material, compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance containing any quantity of dextromethorphan through the sale of any
product to a person under 18 years of age, unless the person has been issued a
prescription for the product being purchased.
   (c)   For purposes of division (b) of this section, the person making the
sale of a product containing dextromethorphan shall require and obtain evidence
of majority and identity from the purchaser, unless from the purchaser’s
outward appearance the person making the sale would reasonably presume the
purchaser to be 25 years of age or older. Proof that the person making the sale
demanded, was shown, and acted in reasonable reliance on the purchaser’s
evidence of majority and identity is a defense to any charge of a violation of
division (b) of this section.
   (d)   A retailer or employee of a retailer is not liable for damages in a
civil action for injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly
arises from an act or omission associated with a failure to prevent the sale of
a product containing dextromethorphan to a person under 18 years of age, unless
the act or omission constitutes willful or wanton misconduct.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of illegally
selling dextromethorphan, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2925.62)
CHAPTER 630: GAMBLING
Section
   
630.01   Definitions
   
630.02   Gambling in general
   
630.03   Operating a gambling house
   
630.04   Public gaming
   
630.05   Cheating
   
630.06   Responsibility of charitable organization conducting bingo game
   
630.07   Maintenance of records by charitable organizations
   
630.08   Qualifications of bingo game operator
   
630.09   Exemption for bingo games conducted for amusement
   
630.10   Prohibitions where instant bingo game is conducted
   
630.11   Raffle drawings
   
630.12   Instant bingo other than at bingo sessions
   
630.13   Restrictions on owner or lessor of location at instant bingo
   
630.14   Skill-based amusement machines; prohibited conduct
   
630.15   Electronic instant bingo; prohibited conduct
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police Department,
see §
654.16
   Power to destroy devices, see R.C. § 715.51
   Power to prohibit gambling, see R.C. § 715.49
§ 630.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   BET. The hazarding of anything of value upon the result of an event,
undertaking, or contingency, but does not include a bona fide business risk.
   (b)   BINGO. Either of the following:
      (1)   A game with all of the following characteristics:
         A.   The participants use bingo cards or sheets, including paper
formats and electronic representation or image formats, that are divided into
25 spaces arranged in 5 horizontal and 5 vertical rows of spaces, with each
space, except the central space, being designated by a combination of a letter
and a number and with the central space being designated as a free space;
         B.   The participants cover the spaces on the bingo cards or sheets
that correspond to combinations of letters and numbers that are announced by a
bingo game operator;
         C.   A bingo game operator announces combinations of letters and
numbers that appear on objects that a bingo game operator selects by chance,
either manually or mechanically, from a receptacle that contains 75 objects at
the beginning of each game, each object marked by a different combination of a
letter and a number that corresponds to one of the 75 possible combinations of
a letter and a number that can appear on the bingo cards or sheets;
         D.   The winner of the bingo game includes any participant who
properly announces during the interval between the announcements of letters and
numbers, as described in division (1)C. of this definition, that a
predetermined and pre-announced pattern of spaces has been covered on a bingo
card or sheet being used by the participant.
      (2)   Instant bingo, electronic instant bingo, and raffles.
   (c)   BINGO GAME OPERATOR. Any person, except security personnel, who
performs work or labor at the site of bingo including but not limited to
collecting money from participants, handing out bingo cards or sheets or
objects to cover spaces on bingo cards or sheets, selecting from a receptacle
the objects that contain the combination of letters and numbers that appear on
bingo cards or sheets, calling out the combinations of letters and numbers,
distributing prizes, selling or redeeming instant bingo tickets or cards,
selling or redeeming electronic instant bingo tickets, credits, or vouchers,
accessing an electronic instant bingo system other than as a participant,
supervising the operation of a punch board, selling raffle tickets, selecting
raffle tickets from a receptacle and announcing the winning numbers in a
raffle, and preparing, selling, and serving food or beverages. BINGO GAME
OPERATOR does not include a person who is installing, maintaining, updating, or
repairing an electronic instant bingo system.
   (d)   BINGO SESSION. A period that includes both of the following:
      (1)   Not to exceed five continuous hours for the conduct of one or more
games described in division (1) of the definition of BINGO in this section,
instant bingo and electronic instant bingo;
      (2)   A period for the conduct of instant bingo and electronic instant
bingo for not more than two hours before and not more than two hours after the
period described in division (1) of this definition.
   (e)   BINGO SUPPLIES. Bingo cards or sheets; instant bingo tickets or cards;
electronic bingo aids; raffle tickets; punch boards; seal cards; instant bingo
ticket dispensers; electronic instant bingo systems; and devices for selecting
or displaying the combination of bingo letters and numbers or raffle tickets.
Items that are BINGO SUPPLIES are not gambling devices if sold or otherwise
provided, and used, in accordance with this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915. For
purposes of this chapter, BINGO SUPPLIES are not to be considered equipment
used to conduct a bingo game.
   (f)   BOOKMAKING. The business of receiving or paying off bets.
   (g)   CHAMBER OF COMMERCE. Any organization of individuals, professionals
and businesses that has the purpose to advance the commercial, financial,
industrial and civic interests of the community and that is, and has received
from the Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that currently is in
effect stating that the organization is, exempt from federal income taxation
under I.R.C. § 501(a) and described in I.R.C. § 501(c)(6).
   (h)   CHARITABLE BINGO GAME. Any bingo game described in divisions (1) or
(2) of the definition of BINGO in this section that is conducted by a
charitable organization that has obtained a license pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08
and the proceeds of which are used for a charitable purpose.
   (i)   CHARITABLE INSTANT BINGO ORGANIZATION. An organization that is exempt
from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3)
and is a charitable organization as defined in this section. A CHARITABLE
INSTANT BINGO ORGANIZATION does not include a charitable organization that is
exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in I.R.C. §
501(c)(3) and that is created by a veteran’s organization, a fraternal
organization, or a sporting organization in regards to bingo conducted or
assisted by a veteran’s organization, a fraternal organization or a sporting
organization pursuant to R.C. § 2915.13, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (j)   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, CHARITABLE
ORGANIZATION means either of the following:
         A.   An organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under
IRC § 501(a) and described in I.R.C. § 501(c)(3);
         B.   A volunteer rescue service organization, volunteer firefighter’s
organization, veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under I.R.C. §§ 501(c)
(4), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10) or 501(c)(19).
      (2)   To qualify as a charitable organization, an organization shall have
been in continuous existence as such in this state for a period of two years
immediately preceding either the making of an application for a bingo license
under R.C. § 2915.08 or the conducting of any game of chance as provided in
R.C. § 2915.02(D), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (k)   CHARITABLE PURPOSE. The net profit of bingo, other than instant bingo
or electronic instant bingo, is used by, or is given, donated or otherwise
transferred to, any of the following:
      (1)   Any organization that is described in I.R.C. § 509(a)(1), (a)(2) or
(a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an organization that is tax exempt
under I.R.C. § 501(a) and described in I.R.C. § 501(c)(3);
      (2)   A veteran’s organization that is a post, chapter or organization of
veterans, or an auxiliary unit or society of, or a trust or foundation for, any
such post, chapter or organization organized in the United States or any of its
possessions, at least 75% of the members of which are veterans and
substantially all of the other members of which are individuals who are
spouses, widows or widowers of veterans, or those individuals, provided that no
part of the net earnings of the post, chapter or organization inures to the
benefit of any private shareholder or individual, and further provided that the
net profit is used by the post, chapter or organization for the charitable
purposes set forth in R.C. § 5739.02(B)(12), is used for awarding scholarships
to or for attendance at an institution mentioned in that division of the
Revised Code, is donated to a governmental agency, or is used for nonprofit
youth activities, the purchase of United States or Ohio flags that are donated
to schools, youth groups or other bona fide nonprofit organizations, promotion
of patriotism or disaster relief;
      (3)   A fraternal organization that has been in continuous existence in
this state for 15 years and that uses the net profit exclusively for religious,
charitable, scientific, literary or educational purposes, or for the prevention
of cruelty to children or animals, if contributions for that use would qualify
as a deductible charitable contribution under I.R.C. § 170;
      (4)   A volunteer firefighter’s organization that uses the net profit for
the purposes set forth in the definition of VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER’S
ORGANIZATION in this section.
   (l)   COMMUNITY ACTION AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 122.66.
   (m)   CONDUCT. To back, promote, organize, manage, carry on, sponsor or
prepare for the operation of bingo or a game of chance, a scheme of chance, or
a sweepstakes.
   (n)   DEAL. A single game of instant bingo tickets, or a single game of
electronic instant bingo tickets, all with the same serial number.
   (o)   DISTRIBUTOR. Any person who purchases or obtains bingo supplies and
who does either of the following:
      (1)   Sells, offers for sale or otherwise provides or offers to provide
the bingo supplies to another person for use in this state;
      (2)   Modifies, converts, adds to or removes parts from the bingo
supplies to further their promotion or sale for use in this state.
   (p)   ELECTRONIC BINGO AID.
      (1)   ELECTRONIC BINGO AID means an electronic device used by a
participant to monitor bingo cards or sheets purchased at the time and place of
a bingo session and that does all of the following:
         A.   It provides a means for a participant to input numbers and
letters announced by a bingo caller.
         B.   It compares the numbers and letters entered by the participant to
the bingo faces previously stored in the memory of the device.
         C.   It identifies a winning bingo pattern.
      (2)   ELECTRONIC BINGO AID does not include any device into which a coin,
currency, token or an equivalent is inserted to activate play.
   (q)   ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO.
      (1)   A form of bingo that consists of an electronic or digital
representation of instant bingo in which a participant wins a prize if the
participant’s electronic instant bingo ticket contains a combination of numbers
or symbols that was designated in advance as a winning combination, and to
which all of the following apply:
         A.   Each deal has a predetermined, finite number of winning and
losing tickets and a predetermined prize amount and deal structure, provided
that there may be multiple winning combinations in each deal and multiple
winning tickets.
         B.   Each electronic instant bingo ticket within a deal has a unique
serial number that is not regenerated.
         C.   Each electronic instant bingo ticket within a deal is sold for
the same price.
         D.   After a participant purchases an electronic instant bingo ticket,
the combination of numbers or symbols on the ticket is revealed to the
participant.
         E.   The reveal of numbers or symbols on the ticket may incorporate an
entertainment or bonus theme, provided that the reveal does not include
spinning reels that resemble a slot machine.
         F.   The reveal theme, if any, does not require additional
consideration or award any prize other than any predetermined prize associated
with the electronic instant bingo ticket.
      (2)   ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO shall not include any of the following:
         A.   Any game, entertainment, or bonus theme that replicates or
simulates any of the following:
            1.   The gambling games of keno, blackjack, roulette, poker, craps,
other casino-style table games;
            2.   Horse racing;
            3.   Gambling games offered in this state on slot machines or video
lottery terminals. As used in this division, VIDEO LOTTERY TERMINAL has the
same meaning as in R.C. § 3770.21.
         B.   Any device operated by dropping one or more coins or tokens into
a slot and pulling a handle or pushing a button or touchpoint on a touchscreen
to activate one to three or more rotating reels marked into horizontal segments
by varying symbols, where the predetermined prize amount depends on how and how
many of the symbols line up when the rotating reels come to a rest;
         C.   Any device that includes a coin or token slot, tray, or hopper
and the ability to dispense coins, cash, tokens, or anything of value other
than a credit ticket voucher.
   (r)   ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO SYSTEM. Both of the following:
      (1)   A mechanical, electronic, digital, or video device and associated
software to which all of the following apply:
         A.   It is used by not more than one player at a time to play
electronic instant bingo on a single screen that is physically connected to the
device;
         B.   It is located on the premises of the principal place of business
of a veteran’s or fraternal organization that holds a type II or type III bingo
license to conduct electronic instant bingo at that location issued under R.C.
§ 2915.08.
      (2)   Any associated equipment or software used to manage, monitor, or
document any aspect of electronic instant bingo.
   (s)   EXPENSES. The reasonable amount of gross profit actually expended for
all of the following:
      (1)   The purchase or lease of bingo supplies;
      (2)   The annual license fee required under R.C. § 2915.08;
      (3)   Bank fees and service charges for a bingo session or game account
described in R.C. § 2915.10;
      (4)   Audits and accounting services;
      (5)   Safes;
      (6)   Cash registers;
      (7)   Hiring security personnel;
      (8)   Advertising bingo;
      (9)   Renting premises in which to conduct a bingo session;
      (10)   Tables and chairs;
      (11)   Expenses for maintaining and operating a charitable organization’s
facilities, including but not limited to a post home, club house, lounge,
tavern or canteen and any grounds attached to the post home, club house,
lounge, tavern or canteen;
      (12)   Payment of real property taxes and assessments that are levied on
a premises on which bingo is conducted;
      (13)   Any other product or service directly related to the conduct of
bingo that is authorized in rules adopted by the Attorney General under R.C. §
2915.08(F)(1).
   (t)   FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION. Any society, order, state headquarters or
association within this state, except a college or high school fraternity, that
is not organized for profit, that is a branch, lodge or chapter of a national
or state organization, that exists exclusively for the common business or
sodality of its members.
   (u)   GAMBLING DEVICE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A book, totalizer or other equipment used for recording bets;
      (2)   A ticket, token or other device representing a chance, share or
interest in a scheme of chance or evidencing a bet;
      (3)   A deck of cards, dice, gaming table, roulette wheel, slot machine
or other apparatus designed for use in connection with a game of chance;
      (4)   Any equipment, device, apparatus or paraphernalia specially
designed for gambling purposes;
      (5)   Bingo supplies sold or otherwise provided, or used, in violation of
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (v)   GAMBLING OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. Chapter 2915;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States substantially equivalent to any
provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 or a violation of R.C. § 2915.06
as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law
of this or any other state or of the United States, of which gambling is an
element;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing, any
offense under division (1), (2) or (3) of this definition.
   (w)   GAME FLARE. The board or placard, or electronic representation of a
board or placard, that accompanies each deal of instant bingo or electronic
instant bingo tickets and that includes the following information for the game:
      (1)   The name of the game;
      (2)   The manufacturer’s name or distinctive logo;
      (3)   The form number;
      (4)   The ticket count;
      (5)   The prize structure, including the number of winning tickets by
denomination and the respective winning symbol or number combinations for the
winning tickets;
      (6)   The cost per play;
      (7)   The serial number of the game.
   (x)   GAME OF CHANCE. Poker, craps, roulette or other game in which a player
gives anything of value in the hope of gain, the outcome of which is determined
largely by chance, but does not include bingo.
   (y)   GAME OF CHANCE CONDUCTED FOR PROFIT. Any game of chance designed to
produce income for the person who conducts or operates the game of chance, but
does not include bingo.
   (z)   GROSS ANNUAL REVENUES. The annual gross receipts derived from the
conduct of bingo described in division (1) of the definition of BINGO in this
section plus the annual net profit derived from the conduct of bingo described
in division (2) of the definition of “bingo” in this section.
   (aa)   GROSS PROFIT. Gross receipts minus the amount actually expended for
the payment of prize awards.
   (bb)   GROSS RECEIPTS. All money or assets, including admission fees, that a
person receives from bingo without the deduction of any amounts for prizes paid
out or for the expenses of conducting bingo. GROSS RECEIPTS does not include
any money directly taken in from the sale of food or beverages by a charitable
organization conducting bingo, or by a bona fide auxiliary unit or society of a
charitable organization conducting bingo, provided all of the following apply:
      (1)   The auxiliary unit or society has been in existence as a bona fide
auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization for at least two years
prior to conducting bingo.
      (2)   The person who purchases the food or beverage receives nothing of
value except the food or beverage and items customarily received with the
purchase of that food or beverage.
      (3)   The food and beverages are sold at customary and reasonable prices.
   (cc)   HISTORIC RAILROAD. All or a portion of the tracks and right-of-way of
a railroad that was owned and operated by a for-profit common carrier in this
state at any time prior to January 1, 1950.
   (dd)   INSTANT BINGO. A form of bingo that shall use folded or banded
tickets or paper cards with perforated break-open tabs, a face of which is
covered or otherwise hidden from view to conceal a number, letter, or symbol,
or set of numbers, letters, or symbols, some of which have been designated in
advance as prize winners, and may also include games in which some winners are
determined by the random selection of one or more bingo numbers by the use of a
seal card or bingo blower. INSTANT BINGO also includes a punch board game. In
all INSTANT BINGO the prize amount and structure shall be predetermined. The
term does not include electronic instant bingo or any device that is activated
by the insertion of a coin, currency, token, or an equivalent, and that
contains as one of its components a video display monitor that is capable of
displaying numbers, letters, symbols, or characters in winning or losing
combinations.
   (ee)   INSTANT BINGO TICKET DISPENSER. A mechanical device that dispenses an
instant bingo ticket or card as the sole item of value dispensed and that has
the following characteristics:
      (1)   It is activated upon the insertion of United States currency.
      (2)   It performs no gaming functions.
      (3)   It does not contain a video display monitor or generate noise.
      (4)   It is not capable of displaying any numbers, letters, symbols or
characters in winning or losing combinations.
      (5)   It does not simulate or display rolling or spinning reels.
      (6)   It is incapable of determining whether a dispensed bingo ticket or
card is a winning or non- winning ticket or card and requires a winning ticket
or card to be paid by a bingo game operator.
      (7)   It may provide accounting and security features to aid in
accounting for the instant bingo tickets or cards it dispenses.
      (8)   It is not part of an electronic network and is not interactive.
   (ff)   IRC or INTERNAL REVENUE CODE. The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 100
Stat. 2085, 26 U.S.C. §§ 1 et seq., as now or hereafter amended.
   (gg)   MANUFACTURER. Any person who assembles completed bingo supplies from
raw materials, other items or subparts or who modifies, converts, adds to or
removes parts from bingo supplies to further their promotion or sale.
   (hh)   MERCHANDISE PRIZE. Any item of value, but shall not include any of
the following:
      (1)   Cash, gift cards or any equivalent thereof;
      (2)   Plays on games of chance, state lottery tickets, or bingo;
      (3)   Firearms, tobacco or alcoholic beverages; or
      (4)   A redeemable voucher that is redeemable for any of the items listed
in division (1), (2) or (3) of this definition.
   (ii)   NET PROFIT. Gross profit minus expenses.
   (jj)   NET PROFIT FROM THE PROCEEDS OF THE SALE OF INSTANT BINGO OR
ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO. Gross profit minus the ordinary, necessary, and
reasonable expense expended for the purchase of bingo supplies for the purpose
of conducting instant bingo or electronic instant bingo, and, in the case of
instant bingo or electronic instant bingo conducted by a veteran’s, fraternal,
or sporting organization, minus the payment by that organization of real
property taxes and assessments levied on a premises on which instant bingo or
electronic instant bingo is conducted.
   (kk)   PARTICIPANT. Any person who plays bingo.
   (ll)   PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1.59 and includes any firm
or any other legal entity, however organized.
   (mm)   POOL NOT CONDUCTED FOR PROFIT. A scheme in which a participant gives
a valuable consideration for a chance to win a prize and the total amount of
consideration wagered is distributed to a participant or participants.
   (nn)   PUNCH BOARD. A form of instant bingo that uses a board containing a
number of holes or receptacles of uniform size in which are placed,
mechanically and randomly, serially numbered slips of paper that may be punched
or drawn from the hole or receptacle. A player may punch or draw the numbered
slips of paper from the holes or receptacles and obtain the prize established
for the game if the number drawn corresponds to a winning number or, if the
punch board includes the use of a seal card, a potential winning number.
   (oo)   RAFFLE. A form of bingo in which the one or more prizes are won by
one or more persons who have purchased a raffle ticket. The one or more winners
of the raffle are determined by drawing a ticket stub or other detachable
section from a receptacle containing ticket stubs or detachable sections
corresponding to all tickets sold for the raffle. The term does not include the
drawing of a ticket stub or other detachable section of a ticket purchased to
attend a professional sporting event if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The ticket stub or other detachable section is used to select the
winner of a free prize given away at the professional sporting event; and
      (2)   The cost of the ticket is the same as the cost of a ticket to the
professional sporting event on days when no free prize is given away.
   (pp)   REDEEMABLE VOUCHER. Any ticket, token, coupon, receipt or other
noncash representation of value.
   (qq)   RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION. Any church, body of communicants, or group
that is not organized or operated for profit and that gathers in common
membership for regular worship and religious observances.
   (rr)   REVOKE. To void permanently all rights and privileges of the holder
of a license issued under R.C. § 2915.08, 2915.081 or 2915.082 or a charitable
gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
   (ss)   SCHEME OF CHANCE.
      (1)   A slot machine unless authorized under R.C. Chapter 3772, lottery
unless authorized under R.C. Chapter 3770, numbers game, pool conducted for
profit, or other scheme in which a participant gives a valuable consideration
for a chance to win a prize, but does not include bingo, a skill-based
amusement machine, or a pool not conducted for profit. SCHEME OF CHANCE
includes the use of an electronic device to reveal the results of a game entry
if valuable consideration is paid, directly or indirectly, for a chance to win
a prize. Valuable consideration is deemed to be paid for a chance to win a
prize in the following instances:
         A.   Less than 50% of the goods or services sold by a scheme of chance
operator in exchange for game entries are used or redeemed by participants at
any one location;
         B.   Less than 50% of participants who purchase goods or services at
any one location do not accept, use, or redeem the goods or services sold or
purportedly sold;
         C.   More than 50% of prizes at any one location are revealed to
participants through an electronic device simulating a game of chance or a
CASINO GAME as defined in R.C. § 3772.01;
         D.   The good or service sold by a scheme of chance operator in
exchange for a game entry cannot be used or redeemed in the manner advertised;
         E.   A participant pays more than fair market value for goods or
services offered by a scheme of chance operator in order to receive one or more
game entries;
         F.   A participant may use the electronic device to purchase
additional game entries;
         G.   A participant may purchase additional game entries by using
points or credits won as prizes while using the electronic device;
         H.   A scheme of chance operator pays out in prize money more than 20%
of the gross revenue received at one location; or
         I.   A participant makes a purchase or exchange in order to obtain any
good or service that may be used to facilitate play on the electronic device.
      (2)   As used in this division, ELECTRONIC DEVICE means a mechanical,
video, digital, or electronic machine or device that is capable of displaying
information on a screen or other mechanism and that is owned, leased, or
otherwise possessed by any person conducting a scheme of chance, or by that
person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or contractors. ELECTRONIC DEVICE
does not include an electronic instant bingo system.
   (tt)   SEAL CARD. A form of instant bingo that uses instant bingo tickets in
conjunction with a board or placard that contains one or more seals that, when
removed or opened, reveal predesignated winning numbers, letters or symbols.
   (uu)   SECURITY PERSONNEL. Any person who either is a Sheriff, Deputy
Sheriff, Marshal, Deputy Marshal, township constable, or member of an organized
police department of a municipal corporation or has successfully completed a
peace officer’s training course pursuant to R.C. §§ 109.71 to 109.79 and who is
hired to provide security for the premises on which bingo is conducted.
   (vv)   SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINE.
      (1)   A.   A mechanical, video, digital or electronic device that rewards
the player or players, if at all, only with merchandise prizes or with
redeemable vouchers redeemable only for merchandise prizes, provided that with
respect to rewards for playing the game all of the following apply:
            1.   The wholesale value of a merchandise prize awarded as a result
of the single play of a machine does not exceed $10;
            2.   Redeemable vouchers awarded for any single play of a machine
are not redeemable for a merchandise prize with a wholesale value of more than
$10;
            3.   Redeemable vouchers are not redeemable for a merchandise prize
that has a wholesale value of more than $10 times the fewest number of single
plays necessary to accrue the redeemable vouchers required to obtain that
prize; and
            4.   Any redeemable vouchers or merchandise prizes are distributed
at the site of the skill-based amusement machine at the time of play.
         B.   A card for the purchase of gasoline is a redeemable voucher for
purposes of division (1) of this definition even if the skill-based amusement
machine for the play of which the card is awarded is located at a place where
gasoline may not be legally distributed to the public or the card is not
redeemable at the location of, or at the time of playing, the skill-based
amusement machine.
      (2)   A device shall not be considered a skill-based amusement machine
and shall be considered a slot machine if it pays cash or one or more of the
following apply:
         A.   The ability of a player to succeed at the game is impacted by the
number or ratio of prior wins to prior losses of players playing the game;
         B.   Any reward of redeemable vouchers is not based solely on the
player achieving the object of the game or the player’s score;
         C.   The outcome of the game, or the value of the redeemable voucher
or merchandise prize awarded for winning the game, can be controlled by a
source other than any player playing the game;
         D.   The success of any player is or may be determined by a chance
event that cannot be altered by player actions;
         E.   The ability of any player to succeed at the game is determined by
game features not visible or known to the player;
         F.   The ability of the player to succeed at the game is impacted by
the exercise of a skill that no reasonable player could exercise.
      (3)   All of the following apply to any machine that is operated as
described in division (1) of this definition:
         A.   As used in this definition of SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINE, GAME
and PLAY mean one event from the initial activation of the machine until the
results of play are determined without payment of additional consideration. An
individual utilizing a machine that involves a single game, play, contest,
competition or tournament may be awarded redeemable vouchers or merchandise
prizes based on the results of play.
         B.   Advance play for a single game, play, contest, competition or
tournament participation may be purchased. The cost of the contest, competition
or tournament participation may be greater than a single non-contest,
competition or tournament play.
         C.   To the extent that the machine is used in a contest, competition
or tournament, that contest, competition or tournament has a defined starting
and ending date and is open to participants in competition for scoring and
ranking results toward the awarding of redeemable vouchers or merchandise
prizes that are stated prior to the start of the contest, competition, or
tournament.
      (4)   For purposes of division (1) of this definition, the mere presence
of a device, such as a pin-setting, ball-releasing or scoring mechanism, that
does not contribute to or affect the outcome of the play of the game does not
make the device a skill-based amusement machine.
   (ww)   SLOT MACHINE.
      (1)   Either of the following:
         A.   Any mechanical, electronic, video or digital device that is
capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on
behalf of a player who gives the thing of value in the hope of gain;
         B.   Any mechanical, electronic, video or digital device that is
capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on
behalf of a player to conduct bingo or a scheme or game of chance.
      (2)   SLOT MACHINE does not include a skill-based amusement machine, an
instant bingo ticket dispenser, or an electronic instant bingo system.
   (xx)   SPORTING ORGANIZATION. A hunting, fishing or trapping organization,
other than a college or high school fraternity or sorority, that is not
organized for profit, that is affiliated with a state or national sporting
organization, including but not limited to the League of Ohio Sportsmen, and
that has been in continuous existence in this state for a period of three
years.
   (yy)   SUSPEND. To interrupt temporarily all rights and privileges of the
holder of a license issued under R.C. § 2915.08, 2915.081 or 2915.082 or a
charitable gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
   (zz)   SWEEPSTAKES. Any game, contest, advertising scheme or plan, or other
promotion where consideration is not required for a person to enter to win or
become eligible to receive any prize, the determination of which is based upon
chance. SWEEPSTAKES does not include bingo as authorized under R.C. Chapter
2915, pari-mutuel wagering as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3769, lotteries
conducted by the State Lottery Commission as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3770,
and casino gaming as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3772.
   (aaa)   SWEEPSTAKES TERMINAL DEVICE.
      (1)   A mechanical, video, digital, or electronic machine or device that
is owned, leased, or otherwise possessed by any person conducting a
sweepstakes, or by that person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or
contractors, that is intended to be used by a sweepstakes participant, and that
is capable of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism. A device
is a sweepstakes terminal device if any of the following apply:
         A.   The device uses a simulated game terminal as a representation of
the prizes associated with the results of the sweepstakes entries.
         B.   The device utilizes software such that the simulated game
influences or determines the winning of or value of the prize.
         C.   The device selects prizes from a predetermined finite pool of
entries.
         D.   The device utilizes a mechanism that reveals the content of a
predetermined sweepstakes entry.
         E.   The device predetermines the prize results and stores those
results for delivery at the time the sweepstakes entry results are revealed.
         F.   The device utilizes software to create a game result.
         G.   The device reveals the prize incrementally, even though the
device does not influence the awarding of the prize or the value of any prize
awarded.
         H.   The device determines and associates the prize with an entry or
entries at the time the sweepstakes is entered.
      (2)   As used in this definition and in §
630.02:
         A.   ENTER. The act by which a person becomes eligible to receive any
prize offered in a sweepstakes.
         B.   ENTRY. One event from the initial activation of the sweepstakes
terminal device until all the sweepstakes prize results from that activation
are revealed.
         C.   PRIZE. Any gift, award, gratuity, good, service, credit, reward,
or any other thing of value that may be transferred to a person, whether
possession of the prize is actually transferred, or placed on an account or
other record as evidence of the intent to transfer the prize.
         D.   SWEEPSTAKES TERMINAL DEVICE FACILITY. Any location in this state
where a sweepstakes terminal device is provided to a sweepstakes participant,
except as provided in §
630.02(g) and R.C. § 2915.02(G).
   (bbb)   VETERAN’S ORGANIZATION. Any individual post or state headquarters of
a national veteran’s association or an auxiliary unit of any individual post of
a national veteran’s association, which post, state headquarters or auxiliary
unit is incorporated as a nonprofit corporation and either has received a
letter from the state headquarters of the national veteran’s association
indicating that the individual post or auxiliary unit is in good standing with
the national veteran’s association or has received a letter from the national
veteran’s association indicating that the state headquarters is in good
standing with the national veteran’s association. As used in this division,
NATIONAL VETERAN’S ASSOCIATION means any veteran’s association that has been in
continuous existence as such for a period of at least five years and either is
incorporated by an act of the United States Congress or has a national dues-
paying membership of at least 5,000 persons.
   (ccc)   VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER’S ORGANIZATION. Any organization of volunteer
firefighters, as defined in R.C. § 146.01, that is organized and operated
exclusively to provide financial support for a volunteer fire department or a
volunteer fire company and that is recognized or ratified by a county,
municipal corporation or township.
   (ddd)   VOLUNTEER RESCUE SERVICE ORGANIZATION. Any organization of
volunteers organized to function as an emergency medical service organization,
as defined in R.C. § 4765.01.
   (eee)   YOUTH ATHLETIC ORGANIZATION. Any organization, not organized for
profit, that is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial support
to, or to operate, athletic activities for persons who are 21 years of age or
younger by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating or contributing to the
support of an athletic team, club, league or association.
   (fff)   YOUTH ATHLETIC PARK ORGANIZATION. Any organization, not organized
for profit, that satisfies both of the following:
      (1)   It owns, operates and maintains playing fields that satisfy both of
the following:
         A.   The playing fields are used for athletic activities by one or
more organizations, not organized for profit, each of which is organized and
operated exclusively to provide financial support to, or to operate, athletic
activities for persons who are 18 years of age or younger by means of
sponsoring, organizing, operating or contributing to the support of an athletic
team, club, league, or association.
         B.   The playing fields are not used for any profit-making activity at
any time during the year.
      (2)   It uses the proceeds of bingo it conducts exclusively for the
operation, maintenance, and improvement of its playing fields of the type
described in division (1) of this definition.
(R.C. § 2915.01)
§ 630.02 GAMBLING IN GENERAL.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Engage in bookmaking, or knowingly engage in conduct that
facilitates bookmaking.
      (2)   Establish, promote or operate or knowingly engage in conduct that
facilitates any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance.
      (3)   Knowingly procure, transmit, exchange or engage in conduct that
facilitates the procurement, transmission or exchange of information for use in
establishing odds or determining winners in connection with bookmaking or with
any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance.
      (4)   Engage in betting or in playing any scheme or game of chance as a
substantial source of income or livelihood.
      (5)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the
use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility
and either:
         A.   Give to another person any item described in R.C. § 2915.01(VV)
(1), (VV)(2), (VV)(3), or (VV)(4) as a prize for playing or participating in a
sweepstakes; or
         B.   Give to another person any merchandise prize, or a redeemable
voucher for a merchandise prize, the wholesale value of which is in excess of
$10 and which is awarded as a single entry for playing or participating in a
sweepstakes. Redeemable vouchers shall not be redeemable for a merchandise
prize that has a wholesale value of more than $10.
      (6)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the
use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility
without first obtaining a current annual “certificate of registration” from the
Attorney General as required by R.C. § 2915.02(F).
      (7)   With purpose to violate division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4),
(a)(5), or (a)(6) of this section, acquire, possess, control or operate any
gambling device.
   (b)   For purposes of division (a)(1) of this section, a person facilitates
bookmaking if the person in any way knowingly aids an illegal bookmaking
operation, including without limitation placing a bet with a person engaged in
or facilitating illegal bookmaking. For purposes of division (a)(2) of this
section, a person facilitates a game of chance conducted for profit or a scheme
of chance if the person in any way knowingly aids in the conduct or operation
of any such game or scheme, including without limitation playing any such game
or scheme.
   (c)   This section does not prohibit conduct in connection with gambling
expressly permitted by law.
   (d)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   Games of chance, if all of the following apply:
         A.   The games of chance are not craps for money or roulette for
money.
         B.   The games of chance are conducted by a charitable organization
that is and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a determination
letter that is currently in effect, stating that the organization is exempt
from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3).
         C.   The games of chance are conducted at festivals of the charitable
organization that are conducted not more than a total of five days a calendar
year, and are conducted on premises owned by the charitable organization for a
period of no less than one year immediately preceding the conducting of the
games of chance, on premises leased from a governmental unit, or on premises
that are leased from a veteran’s or fraternal organization and that have been
owned by the lessor veteran’s or fraternal organization for a period of no less
than one year immediately preceding the conducting of the games of chance. A
charitable organization shall not lease premises from a veteran’s or fraternal
organization to conduct a festival described in this division, if the veteran’s
or fraternal organization already has leased the premises 12 times during the
preceding year to charitable organizations for that purpose. If a charitable
organization leases premises from a veteran’s or fraternal organization to
conduct a festival described in this division, the charitable organization
shall not pay a rental rate for the premises per day of the festival that
exceeds the rental rate per bingo session that a charitable organization may
pay under R.C. § 2915.09(B)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance when it leases premises from another charitable organization to
conduct bingo games.
         D.   All of the money or assets received from the games of chance
after deduction only of prizes paid out during the conduct of the games of
chance are used by, given, donated or otherwise transferred to any organization
that is described in IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) and is either a
governmental unit or an organization that is tax exempt under IRC 501(a) and
described in IRC 501(c)(3).
         E.   The games of chance are not conducted during or within ten hours
of a bingo game conducted for amusement purposes only pursuant to R.C. §
2915.12 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance. No person shall
receive any commission, wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity or other
form of compensation, directly or indirectly, for operating or assisting in the
operation of any game of chance.
      (2)   Any tag fishing tournament, as defined in R.C. § 1531.01, operated
under a permit issued under R.C. § 1533.92.
      (3)   Bingo conducted by a charitable organization that holds a license
issued under R.C. § 2915.08.
   (e)   Division (d) of this section shall not be construed to authorize the
sale, lease or other temporary or permanent transfer of the right to conduct
games of chance, as granted by that division, by any charitable organization
that is granted that right.
   (f)   Any person desiring to conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a
sweepstakes with the use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes
terminal device facility shall first register with the Office of the Attorney
General and obtain an annual certificate of registration by providing a filing
fee of $200 and all information as required by rule adopted under R.C. §
2915.02(H). Not later than the tenth day of each month, each sweepstakes
terminal device operator shall file a sweepstakes terminal device monthly
report with the Attorney General and provide a filing fee of $50 and all
information required by rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.02(H). All information
provided to the Attorney General under this division shall be available to law
enforcement upon request.
   (g)   (1)   A person may apply to the Attorney General, on a form prescribed
by the Attorney General, for a certificate of compliance that the person is not
operating a sweepstakes terminal device facility. The form shall require the
person to include the address of the business location where sweepstakes
terminal devices will be used and to make the following certifications:
         A.   That the person will not use more than two sweepstakes terminal
devices at the business location;
         B.   That the retail value of sweepstakes prizes to be awarded at the
business location using sweepstakes terminal devices during a reporting period
will be less than 3% of the gross revenue received at the business location
during the reporting period;
         C.   That no other form of gaming except lottery ticket sales as
authorized under R.C. Chapter 3770 will be conducted at the business location
or in an adjoining area of the business location;
         D.   That any sweepstakes terminal device at the business location
will not allow any deposit of any money, coin, or token, or the use of any
credit card, debit card, prepaid card, or any other method of similar payment
to be used, directly or indirectly, to participate in a sweepstakes;
         E.   That notification of any prize will not take place on the same
day as a participant’s sweepstakes entry; and
         F.   That the person consents to provide any other information to the
Attorney General as required by rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.02(H).
      (2)   The filing fee for a certificate of compliance is $250. The
Attorney General may charge up to an additional $250 for reasonable expenses
resulting from any investigation related to an application for a certificate of
compliance.
      (3)   A certificate of compliance is effective for one year. The
certificate holder may reapply for a certificate of compliance. A person issued
a certificate of compliance shall file semiannual reports with the Attorney
General stating the number of sweepstakes terminal devices at the business
location and that the retail value of prizes awarded at the business location
using sweepstakes terminal devices is less than 3% of the gross revenue
received at the business location.
   (h)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of gambling, a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling
offense, gambling is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
Notwithstanding this division, failing to file a sweepstakes terminal device
monthly report as required by division (f) of this section or the semiannual
report required by division (g) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 2915.02(A) - (G), (K))
§ 630.03 OPERATING A GAMBLING HOUSE.
   (a)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control or
supervision of premises, shall:
      (1)   Use or occupy the premises for gambling in violation of R.C. §
2915.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   Recklessly permit the premises to be used or occupied for gambling
in violation of R.C. § 2915.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of operating a
gambling house, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously
has been convicted of a gambling offense, operating a gambling house is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (c)   Premises used or occupied in violation of this section constitute a
nuisance subject to abatement under R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2915.03)
§ 630.04 PUBLIC GAMING.
   (a)   No person, while at a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall or
other place of public accommodation, business, amusement or resort shall make a
bet or play any game of chance or scheme of chance.
   (b)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control or
supervision of a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall or other place
of public accommodation, business, amusement or resort shall recklessly permit
those premises to be used or occupied in violation of division (a) of this
section.
   (c)   Divisions (a) and (b) of this section do not prohibit conduct in
connection with gambling expressly permitted by law.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public gaming. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, public gaming is a minor misdemeanor. If
the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling offense, public
gaming is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (e)   Premises used or occupied in violation of division (b) of this section
constitute a nuisance subject to abatement under R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2915.04)
§ 630.05 CHEATING.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome
of any of the following:
      (1)   The subject of a bet.
      (2)   A contest of knowledge, skill or endurance that is not an athletic
or sporting event.
      (3)   A scheme or game of chance.
      (4)   Bingo.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Offer, give, solicit or accept anything of value to corrupt the
outcome of an athletic or sporting event.
      (2)   Engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome of an athletic or
sporting event.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
cheating. Except as otherwise provided in this division, cheating is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the potential gain from the cheating is
$1,000 or more or if the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling
offense or of any theft offense as defined in R.C. § 2913.01, cheating is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
corrupting sports. Corrupting sports is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.05)
§ 630.06 RESPONSIBILITY OF CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION CONDUCTING BINGO GAME.
   (a)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo shall fail to do any of
the following:
      (1)   Own all of the equipment used to conduct bingo or lease that
equipment from a charitable organization that is licensed to conduct bingo, or
from the landlord of a premises where bingo is conducted, for a rental rate
that is not more than is customary and reasonable for that equipment;
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(3) of this section,
use all of the gross receipts from bingo for paying prizes, for reimbursement
of expenses for or for renting premises in which to conduct bingo, for
reimbursement of expenses for or for purchasing or leasing bingo supplies used
in conducting bingo, for reimbursement of expenses for or for hiring security
personnel, for reimbursement of expenses for or for advertising bingo, or for
reimbursement of other expenses or for other expenses listed in the definition
for EXPENSES in R.C. § 2915.01, provided that the amount of the receipts so
spent is not more than is customary and reasonable for a similar purchase,
lease, hiring, advertising or expense. If the building in which bingo is
conducted is owned by the charitable organization conducting bingo and the
bingo conducted includes a form of bingo described in division (1) of the
definition of BINGO in R.C. § 2915.01, the charitable organization may deduct
from the total amount of the gross receipts from each session a sum equal to
the lesser of $600 or 45% of the gross receipts from the bingo described in
that division as consideration for the use of the premises;
      (3)   Use, or give, donate, or otherwise transfer, all of the net profit
derived from bingo described in R.C. § 2915.01(O)(1) for a charitable purpose
listed in its license application and described in R.C. § 2915.01(V), or
distribute all of the net profit from the proceeds of the sale of instant bingo
or electronic instant bingo as stated in its license application and in
accordance with R.C. § 2915.101, as applicable.
   (b)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
division (1) of the definition of BINGO in R.C. § 2915.01 shall fail to do any
of the following:
      (1)   Conduct the bingo game on premises that are owned by the charitable
organization, on premises that are owned by another charitable organization and
leased from that charitable organization for a rental rate not in excess of the
lesser of $650 per bingo session or 45% of the gross receipts of the bingo
session, on premises that are leased from a person other than a charitable
organization for a rental rate that is not more than is customary and
reasonable for premises that are similar in location, size and quality but not
in excess of $450 per bingo session, or on premises that are owned by a person
other than a charitable organization, that are leased from that person by
another charitable organization, and that are subleased from that other
charitable organization by the charitable organization for a rental rate not in
excess of $450 per bingo session. No charitable organization is required to pay
property taxes or assessments on premises that the charitable organization
leases from another person to conduct bingo sessions. If the charitable
organization leases from a person other than a charitable organization the
premises on which it conducts bingo sessions, the lessor of the premises shall
provide only the premises to the organization and shall not provide the
organization with bingo game operators, security personnel, concessions or
concession operators, bingo supplies, or any other type of service. A
charitable organization shall not lease or sublease premises that it owns or
leases to more than three other charitable organizations per calendar week for
the purpose of conducting bingo sessions on the premises. A person that is not
a charitable organization shall not lease premises that it owns, leases or
otherwise is empowered to lease to more than three charitable organizations per
calendar week for conducting bingo sessions on the premises. In no case shall
more than nine bingo sessions be conducted on any premises in any calendar
week;
      (2)   Display its license conspicuously at the premises where the bingo
session is conducted;
      (3)   Conduct the bingo session in accordance with division (1) of the
definition of BINGO in R.C. § 2915.01.
   (c)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
division (1) of the definition of BINGO in R.C. § 2915.01 shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for operating a bingo
session that is conducted by the charitable organization or for preparing,
selling or serving food or beverages at the site of the bingo session, permit
any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to pay
compensation to any bingo game operator who prepares, sells or serves food or
beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable organization, or
permit any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to prepare,
sell or serve food or beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable
organization, if the auxiliary unit or society pays any compensation to the
bingo game operators who prepare, sell or serve the food or beverages;
      (2)   Pay consulting fees to any person for any services performed in
relation to the bingo session;
      (3)   Pay concession fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in the bingo session;
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(4) of this section,
conduct more than three bingo sessions in any seven-day period. A volunteer
firefighter’s organization or a volunteer rescue service organization that
conducts not more than five bingo sessions in a calendar year may conduct more
than three bingo sessions in a seven-day period after notifying the Attorney
General when it will conduct the sessions;
      (5)   Pay out more than $6,000 in prizes for bingo games described in
R.C. § 2915.01(S)(1) during any bingo session that is conducted by the
charitable organization. PRIZES does not include awards from the conduct of
instant bingo;
      (6)   Conduct a bingo session at any time during the eight-hour period
between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., at any time during, or within ten hours of, a
bingo game conducted for amusement only pursuant to R.C. § 2915.12 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, at any premises not specified on
its license, or on any day of the week or during any time period not specified
on its license. This division does not prohibit the sale of instant bingo
tickets beginning at 9:00 a.m. for a bingo session that begins at 10:00 a.m. If
circumstances make it impractical for the charitable organization to conduct a
bingo session at the premises, or on the day of the week or at the time
specified on its license or if a charitable organization wants to conduct bingo
sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than the day or time specified
on its license, the charitable organization may apply in writing to the
Attorney General for an amended license pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08(J). A
charitable organization may apply twice in each calendar year for an amended
license to conduct bingo sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than
the day or time specified on its license. If the amended license is granted,
the organization may conduct bingo sessions at the premises, on the day of the
week, and at the time specified on its amended license;
      (7)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, is under the age of 18 to work as a bingo game operator;
      (8)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any
jurisdiction to be a bingo game operator;
      (9)   Permit the lessor of the premises on which the bingo session is
conducted, if the lessor is not a charitable organization, to provide the
charitable organization with bingo game operators, security personnel,
concessions, bingo supplies or any other type of service;
      (10)   Purchase or lease bingo supplies from any person except a
distributor issued a license under R.C. § 2915.081;
      (11)   A.   Use or permit the use of electronic bingo aids except under
the following circumstances:
            1.   For any single participant, not more than 90 bingo faces can
be played using an electronic bingo aid or aids.
            2.   The charitable organization shall provide a participant using
an electronic bingo aid with corresponding paper bingo cards or sheets.
            3.   The total price of bingo faces played with an electronic bingo
aid shall be equal to the total price of the same number of bingo faces played
with a paper bingo card or sheet sold at the same bingo session but without an
electronic bingo aid.
            4.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be part of an electronic
network other than a network that includes only bingo aids and devices that are
located on the premises at which the bingo is being conducted or be interactive
with any device not located on the premises at which the bingo is being
conducted.
            5.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to participate in bingo
that is conducted at a location other than the location at which the bingo
session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used.
            6.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to provide for the
input of numbers and letters announced by a bingo caller other than the bingo
caller who physically calls the numbers and letters at the location at which
the bingo session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used.
         B.   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 119 that govern the use of electronic bingo aids. The rules may include
a requirement that an electronic bingo aid be capable of being audited by the
Attorney General to verify the number of bingo cards or sheets played during
each bingo session.
      (12)   Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, to be under 18 years of age to play bingo described in division (1)
of the definition of BINGO in R.C. § 2915.01.
   (d)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (d)(3) of this section,
no charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator, and no bingo
game operator shall receive or accept, any commission, wage, salary, reward,
tip, donation, gratuity or other form of compensation, directly or indirectly,
regardless of the source, for conducting bingo or providing other work or labor
at the site of bingo during a bingo session.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (d)(3) of this section, no
charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator any commission,
wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation,
directly or indirectly regardless of the source, for conducting instant bingo,
electronic instant bingo, or both other than at a bingo session at the site of
instant bingo, electronic instant bingo, or both other than at a bingo session.
      (3)   Nothing in this division (d) of this section prohibits an employee
of a fraternal organization, veteran’s organization or sporting organization
from selling instant bingo tickets or cards to the organization’s members or
invited guests, as long as no portion of the employee’s compensation is paid
from any receipts of bingo.
   (e)   Notwithstanding division (b)(1) of this section, a charitable
organization that, prior to December 6, 1977, has entered into written
agreements for the lease of premises it owns to another charitable organization
or other charitable organizations for the conducting of bingo sessions so that
more than two bingo sessions are conducted per calendar week on the premises,
and a person that is not a charitable organization and that, prior to December
6, 1977, has entered into written agreements for the lease of premises it owns
to charitable organizations for the conducting of more than two bingo sessions
per calendar week on the premises, may continue to lease the premises to those
charitable organizations, provided that no more than four sessions are
conducted per calendar week, that the lessor organization or person has
notified the Attorney General in writing of the organizations that will conduct
the sessions and the days of the week and the times of the day on which the
sessions will be conducted, that the initial lease entered into with each
organization that will conduct the sessions was filed with the Attorney General
prior to December 6, 1977, and that each organization that will conduct the
sessions was issued a license to conduct bingo games by the Attorney General
prior to December 6, 1977.
   (f)   This section does not prohibit a bingo licensed charitable
organization or a game operator from giving any person an instant bingo ticket
as a prize.
   (g)   Whoever violates division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of
illegally conducting a bingo game, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a)(1), (a)(3), (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3), (c)(1) to (c)(11), or (d) of
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of division (a)(1), (a)(3), (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)
(3), (c)(1) to (c)(11), or (d) of this section, a violation of division (a)(1),
(a)(3), (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3), (c)(1) to (c)(11), or (d) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever violates division (c)(12) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of division (c)(12) of this
section, a violation of division (c)(12) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.09)
§ 630.07 MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS BY CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS.
   (a)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo or a game of chance
pursuant to R.C. § 2915.02(D), or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, shall fail to maintain the following records for at least three
years from the date on which the bingo or game of chance is conducted:
      (1)   An itemized list of the gross receipts of each bingo session, each
game of instant bingo by serial number, each electronic instant bingo game by
serial number, each raffle, each punch board game, and each game of chance, and
an itemized list of the gross profits of each game of instant bingo by serial
number and each electronic instant bingo game by serial number;
      (2)   An itemized list of all expenses, other than prizes, that are
incurred in conducting bingo, the name of each person to whom the expenses are
paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses;
      (3)   A list of all prizes awarded during each bingo session, each
raffle, each punch board game, and each game of chance conducted by the
charitable organization, the total prizes awarded from each game of instant
bingo by serial number and each electronic instant bingo game by serial number,
and the name, address, and social security number of all persons who are
winners of prizes of $600 or more in value;
      (4)   An itemized list of the recipients of the net profit of bingo or
game of chance, including the name and address of each recipient to whom the
money is distributed, and if the organization uses the net profit of bingo, or
the money or assets received from a game of chance, for any charitable or other
purpose set forth in R.C. §§ 2915.01(V), 2915.02(D) or 2915.101, a list of each
purpose and an itemized list of each expenditure for each purpose;
      (5)   The number of persons who participate in any bingo session or game
of chance that is conducted by the charitable organization;
      (6)   A list of receipts from the sale of food and beverages by the
charitable organization or one of its auxiliary units or societies, if the
receipts were excluded from GROSS RECEIPTS under R.C. § 2915.01(T);
      (7)   An itemized list of all expenses incurred at each bingo session,
each raffle, each punch board game or each game of instant bingo or electronic
instant bingo conducted by the charitable organization in the sale of food and
beverages by the charitable organization or by an auxiliary unit or society of
the charitable organization, the name of each person to whom the expenses are
paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses.
   (b)   A charitable organization shall keep the records that it is required
to maintain pursuant to division (a) of this section at its principal place of
business in this state or at its headquarters in this state and shall notify
the Attorney General of the location at which those records are kept.
   (c)   The gross profit from each bingo session or game described in division
(1) or (2) of the definition of BINGO in R.C. § 2915.01 shall be deposited into
a checking account devoted exclusively to the bingo session or game. Payments
for allowable expenses incurred in conducting the bingo session or game and
payments to recipients of some or all of the net profit of the bingo session or
game shall be made only by checks or electronic fund transfers drawn on the
bingo session or game account.
   (d)   Each charitable organization shall conduct and record an inventory of
all of its bingo supplies as of the first day of November of each year.
   (e)   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with R.C. Chapter
119 that establish standards of accounting, record keeping and reporting to
ensure that gross receipts from bingo or games of chance are properly accounted
for.
   (f)   A distributor shall maintain, for a period of three years after the
date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling
or otherwise providing to another person bingo supplies for use in this state.
The record shall include all of the following for each instance:
      (1)   The name of the manufacturer from which the distributor purchased
the bingo supplies and the date of the purchase;
      (2)   The name and address of the charitable organization or other
distributor to which the bingo supplies were sold or otherwise provided;
      (3)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies;
      (4)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of all paper
bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided
to each charitable organization.
   (g)   A manufacturer shall maintain, for a period of three years after the
date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling
or otherwise providing bingo supplies for use in this state. The record shall
include all of the following for each instance:
      (1)   The name and address of the distributor to whom the bingo supplies
were sold or otherwise provided;
      (2)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies, including
serial numbers;
      (3)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of all paper
bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided
to each distributor.
   (h)   (1)   The Attorney General or any law enforcement agency may do all of
the following:
         A.   Investigate any charitable organization, distributor, or
manufacturer or any officer, agent, trustee, member, or employee of the
organization, distributor, or manufacturer;
         B.   Examine the accounts and records of the charitable organization,
distributor, or manufacturer or of any officer, agent, trustee, member, or
employee of the organization, distributor, or manufacturer;
         C.   Conduct inspections, audits and observations of bingo or games of
chance;
         D.   Conduct inspections of the premises where bingo or games of
chance are conducted or where bingo supplies are manufactured or distributed;
         E.   Take any other necessary and reasonable action to determine if a
violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 has occurred
and to determine whether R.C. § 2915.11, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, has been complied with.
      (2)   If any law enforcement agency has reasonable grounds to believe
that a charitable organization, distributor, or manufacturer or an officer,
agent, trustee, member, or employee of the organization, distributor, or
manufacturer has violated any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915,
the law enforcement agency may proceed by action in the proper court to enforce
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915, provided that the law enforcement agency
shall give written notice to the Attorney General when commencing an action as
described in this division.
   (i)   No person shall destroy, alter, conceal, withhold, or deny access to
any accounts or records of a charitable organization, distributor, or
manufacturer that have been requested for examination, or obstruct, impede, or
interfere with any inspection, audit, or observation of bingo or a game of
chance, of premises where bingo or a game of chance is conducted, or of
premises where bingo supplies are manufactured or distributed, or refuse to
comply with any reasonable request of, or obstruct, impede, or interfere with
any other reasonable action undertaken by, the Attorney General or a law
enforcement agency pursuant to division (h) of this section.
   (j)   Whoever violates division (a) or (i) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2915.10)
§ 630.08 QUALIFICATIONS OF BINGO GAME OPERATOR.
   (a)   No person shall be a bingo game operator unless the person is 18 years
of age or older.
   (b)   No person who has been convicted of a felony or a gambling offense in
any jurisdiction shall be a bingo game operator.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. Whoever violates division (b) of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2915.11)
§ 630.09 EXEMPTION FOR BINGO GAMES CONDUCTED FOR AMUSEMENT.
   (a)   Sections
630.06 to
630.13 and
630.15 do not apply to bingo games that are conducted for the purpose of
amusement only. A bingo game is conducted for the purpose of amusement only if
it complies with all of the requirements specified in either division (a)(1) or
(a)(2) of this section.
      (1)   A.   The participants do not pay any money or any other thing of
value, including an admission fee or any fee, for bingo cards or sheets,
objects to cover the spaces, or other devices used in playing bingo, for the
privilege of participating in the bingo game, or to defray any costs of the
game, or pay tips or make donations during or immediately before or after the
bingo game.
         B.   All prizes awarded during the course of the game are non-
monetary, and in the form of merchandise, goods or entitlement to goods or
services only, and the total value of all prizes awarded during the game is
less than $100.00.
         C.   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity or
other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of
the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at
the site of the bingo game.
         D.   The bingo game is not conducted either during or within ten hours
of any of the following:
            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is
conducted pursuant to R.C. §§ 2915.07 through 2915.11 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
            2.   A scheme or game of chance, or bingo described in R.C. §
2915.01(O)(2).
         E.   The number of players participating in the bingo game does not
exceed 50.
      (2)   A.   The participants do not pay money or any other thing of value
as an admission fee, and no participant is charged more than $0.25 to purchase
a bingo card or sheet, objects to cover the spaces or other devices used in
playing bingo.
         B.   The total amount of money paid by all of the participants for
bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover the spaces or other devices used in
playing bingo does not exceed $100.00.
         C.   All of the money paid for bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover
spaces or other devices used in playing bingo is used only to pay winners
monetary and nonmonetary prizes and to provide refreshments.
         D.   The total value of all prizes awarded during the game does not
exceed $100.00.
         E.   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity or
other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of
the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at
the site of the bingo game.
         F.   The bingo game is not conducted during or within ten hours of
either of the following:
            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is
conducted pursuant to R.C. §§ 2915.07 through 2915.15 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance;
            2.   A scheme of chance or a game of chance, or bingo described in
R.C. § 2915.01(O)(2).
         G.   All of the participants reside at the premises where the bingo
game is conducted.
         H.   The bingo games are conducted on different days of the week and
not more than twice in a calendar week.
   (b)   The Attorney General or any local law enforcement agency may
investigate the conduct of a bingo game that purportedly is conducted for
purposes of amusement only if there is reason to believe that the purported
amusement bingo game does not comply with the requirements of either division
(a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section. A local law enforcement agency may proceed by
action in the proper court to enforce this section if the local law enforcement
agency gives written notice to the Attorney General when commencing the action.
(R.C. § 2915.12)
§ 630.10 PROHIBITIONS WHERE INSTANT BINGO GAME IS CONDUCTED.
   (a)   No charitable organization that conducts instant bingo shall do any of
the following:
      (1)   Fail to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 2915.09(A)(1), (A)
(2) and (A)(3), or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (2)   Conduct instant bingo unless either of the following applies:
         A.   That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the
organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under I.R.C. § 501(a), is
described in I.R.C. § 501(c)(3), is a charitable organization as defined in
R.C. § 2915.01, is in good standing in the state pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08,
and is in compliance with R.C. Chapter 1716;
         B.   That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the
organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under I.R.C. § 501(a), is
described in I.R.C. § 501(c)(7), (c)(8), (c)(10) or (c)(19) or is a veteran’s
organization described in I.R.C. § 501(c)(4), and conducts instant bingo under
R.C. § 2915.13.
      (3)   Conduct instant bingo on any day, at any time, or at any premises
not specified on the organization’s license issued pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08;
      (4)   Permit any person whom the organization knows or should have known
has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any jurisdiction to be a
bingo game operator in the conduct of instant bingo;
      (5)   Purchase or lease supplies used to conduct instant bingo or punch
board games from any person except a distributor licensed under R.C. §
2915.081;
      (6)   Sell or provide any instant bingo ticket or card for a price
different from the price printed on it by the manufacturer on either the
instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare;
      (7)   Sell an instant bingo ticket or card to a person under 18 years of
age;
      (8)   Fail to keep unsold instant bingo tickets or cards for less than
three years;
      (9)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for conducting
instant bingo that is conducted by the organization or for preparing, selling
or serving food or beverages at the site of the instant bingo game, permit any
auxiliary unit or society of the organization to pay compensation to any bingo
game operator who prepares, sells or serves food or beverages at an instant
bingo game conducted by the organization, or permit any auxiliary unit or
society of the organization to prepare, sell or serve food or beverages at an
instant bingo game conducted by the organization, if the auxiliary unit or
society pays any compensation to the bingo game operators who prepare, sell or
serve the food or beverages;
      (10)   Pay fees to any person for any services performed in relation to
an instant bingo game, except as provided in R.C. § 2915.093(D);
      (11)   Pay fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in an instant bingo game;
      (12)   A.   Allow instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold to bingo game
operators at a premises at which the organization sells instant bingo tickets
or cards or to be sold to employees of a D permit holder who are working at a
premises at which instant bingo tickets or cards are sold;
         B.   Division (a)(12)A. of this section does not prohibit a licensed
charitable organization or a bingo game operator from giving any person an
instant bingo ticket as a prize in place of a cash prize won by a participant
in an instant bingo game. In no case shall an instant bingo ticket or card be
sold or provided for a price different from the price printed on it by the
manufacturer on either the instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare.
      (13)   Fail to display its bingo license, and the serial numbers of the
deal of instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold, conspicuously at each
premises at which it sells instant bingo tickets or cards;
      (14)   Possess a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards that was not
purchased from a distributor licensed under R.C. § 2915.081 as reflected on an
invoice issued by the distributor that contains all of the information required
by R.C. § 2915.10(E);
      (15)   Fail, once it opens a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards, to
continue to sell the tickets or cards in that deal until the tickets or cards
with the top two highest tiers of prizes in that deal are sold;
      (16)   Possess bingo supplies that were not obtained in accordance with
R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (b)   A charitable organization may purchase, lease, or use instant bingo
ticket dispensers to sell instant bingo tickets or cards.
   (c)   Pursuant to R.C. § 2915.091(C), the Attorney General may adopt rules
in accordance with R.C. Chapter 119 that govern the conduct of instant bingo by
charitable organizations.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section or a rule adopted under
division (c) of this section is guilty of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, illegal instant bingo conduct is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of a violation of division (a) of this section or of such a rule adopted under
division (c) of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.091)
§ 630.11 RAFFLE DRAWINGS.
   (a)   (1)   Subject to division (a)(2) of this section, a person or entity
may conduct a raffle to raise money for the person or entity and does not need
a license to conduct bingo in order to conduct a raffle drawing that is not for
profit if the person or entity is any of the following:
         A.   Exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c)(3);
         B.   A school district, community school established under R.C.
Chapter 3314, STEM school established under R.C. Chapter 3326, college-
preparatory boarding school established under R.C. Chapter 3328, or chartered
nonpublic school;
         C.   Exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c)(4), 501(c)(6), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), or
501(c)(19).
      (2)   If a person or entity that is described in division (a)(1)C. of
this section conducts a raffle, the person or entity shall distribute at least
50% of the net profit from the raffle to a charitable purpose described in R.C.
§ 2915.01(V) or to a department or agency of the federal government, the state,
or any political subdivision.
   (b)   Except as provided in division (a) of this section, no person shall
conduct a raffle drawing that is for profit or a raffle drawing that is not for
profit.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of illegal
conduct of a raffle. Except as otherwise provided in this division, illegal
conduct of a raffle is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of division (b) of this section,
illegal conduct of a raffle is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2915.092)
§ 630.12 INSTANT BINGO OTHER THAN AT BINGO SESSIONS.
   (a)   As used in this section, RETAIL INCOME FROM ALL COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY
means the income that a person receives from the provision of goods, services
or activities that are provided at the location where instant bingo other than
at a bingo session is conducted, including the sale of instant bingo tickets. A
religious organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under I.R.C.
§ 501(a) and described in I.R.C. § 501(c)(3), at not more than one location at
which it conducts its charitable programs, may include donations from its
members and guests as retail income.
   (b)   (1)   If a charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant
bingo other than at a bingo session under a type III license issued under R.C.
§ 2915.08, the charitable instant bingo organization shall enter into a written
contract with the owner or lessor of the location at which the instant bingo is
conducted to allow the owner or lessor to assist in the conduct of instant
bingo other than at a bingo session, identify each location where the instant
bingo other than at a bingo session is being conducted, and identify the owner
or lessor of each location.
      (2)   A charitable instant bingo organization that conducts instant bingo
other than at a bingo session under a type III license issued under R.C. §
2915.08 is not required to enter into a written contract with the owner or
lessor of the location at which the instant bingo is conducted, provided that
the owner or lessor is not assisting in the conduct of the instant bingo other
than at a bingo session and provided that the conduct of the instant bingo
other than at a bingo session at that location is not more than five days per
calendar year and not more than ten hours per day.
   (c)   Except as provided in division (f) of this section, no charitable
instant bingo organization shall conduct instant bingo other than at a bingo
session at a location where the primary source of retail income from all
commercial activity at that location is the sale of instant bingo tickets.
   (d)   (1)   The owner or lessor of a location that enters into a contract
pursuant to division (b) of this section shall pay the full gross profit to the
charitable instant bingo organization, in return for the deal of instant bingo
tickets. The owner or lessor may retain the money that the owner or lessor
receives for selling the instant bingo tickets, provided, however, that after
the deal has been sold, the owner or lessor shall pay to the charitable instant
bingo organization the value of any unredeemed instant bingo prizes remaining
in the deal of instant bingo tickets. As used in this division, FULL GROSS
PROFIT means the amount by which the total receipts of all instant bingo
tickets, if the deal has been sold in full, exceeds the amount that would be
paid out if all prizes were redeemed.
      (2)   The charitable instant bingo organization shall pay 6% of the total
gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets for the purpose of
reimbursing the owner or lessor for expenses described in this division.
      (3)   As used in this division, EXPENSES means those items provided for
in R.C. § 2915.01(GG)(4), (GG)(5), (GG)(6), (GG)(7), (GG)(8), (GG)(12), and
(GG)(13) and that percentage of the owner’s or lessor’s rent for the location
where instant bingo is conducted. Expenses, in the aggregate, shall not exceed
6% of the total gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets.
   (e)   A charitable instant bingo organization shall provide the Attorney
General with all of the following information:
      (1)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has terminated a
contract entered into pursuant to division (b) of this section with an owner or
lessor of a location;
      (2)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has entered into a
written contract pursuant to division (b) of this section with a new owner or
lessor of a location;
      (3)   That the charitable instant bingo organization is aware of conduct
by the owner or lessor of a location at which instant bingo is conducted that
is in violation of R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (f)   Division (c) of this section does not apply to a volunteer
firefighter’s organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under
I.R.C. § 501(a) and described in I.R.C. § 501(c)(3), that conducts instant
bingo other than at a bingo session on the premises where the organization
conducts firefighter training, that has conducted instant bingo continuously
for at least five years prior to July 1, 2003, and that, during each of those
five years, had gross receipts of at least $1,500,000.
(R.C. § 2915.093)
   (g)   (1)   Subject to the requirements of R.C. §§ 2915.14 and 2915.15
concerning electronic instant bingo, a veteran’s organization, a fraternal
organization, or a sporting organization authorized to conduct a bingo session
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2915 may conduct instant bingo, electronic instant
bingo, or both other than at a bingo session under a type III license issued
under R.C. § 2915.08 if all of the following apply:
         A.   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization or sporting
organization limits the sale of instant bingo or electronic instant bingo to 12
hours during any day, provided that the sale does not begin earlier than 10:00
a.m. and ends not later than 2:00 a.m.
         B.   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization or sporting
organization limits the sale of instant bingo or electronic instant bingo to
its own premises and to its own members and invited guests.
         C.   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization is raising money for an organization that is described in I.R.C. §
509(a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an
organization that maintains its principal place of business in this state, that
is exempt from federal income taxation under I.R.C. § 501(a) and described in
I.R.C. § 501(c)(3), and that is in good standing in this state and executes a
written contract with that organization as required in division (g)(2) of this
section.
      (2)   If a veteran’s organization, fraternal organization or sporting
organization authorized to conduct instant bingo or electronic instant bingo
pursuant to division (g)(1) of this section is raising money for another
organization that is described in I.R.C. § 509(a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) and is
either a governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal
place of business in this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation
under I.R.C. § 501(a) and described in I.R.C. § 501(c), and that is in good
standing in this state, the veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or
sporting organization shall execute a written contract with the organization
that is described in I.R.C. § 509(a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) and is either a
governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of
business in this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation under
I.R.C. § 501(a) and described in I.R.C. § 501(c), and that is in good standing
in this state in order to conduct instant bingo or electronic instant bingo.
That contract shall include a statement of the percentage of the net proceeds
that the veteran’s, fraternal or sporting organization will be distributing to
the charitable organization that is described in I.R.C. § 509(a)(1), (a)(2) or
(a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an organization that maintains its
principal place of business in this state, that is exempt from federal income
taxation under I.R.C. § 501(a) and described in I.R.C. § 501(c), and that is in
good standing in this state.
      (3)   A.   If a veteran’s organization, fraternal organization or
sporting organization authorized to conduct instant bingo or electronic instant
bingo pursuant to division (g)(1) of this section has been issued a liquor
permit under R.C. Chapter 4303, that permit may be subject to suspension,
revocation or cancellation if the veteran’s organization, fraternal
organization or sporting organization violates a provision of this chapter or
R.C. Chapter 2915.
         B.   No veteran’s organization, fraternal organization or sporting
organization that enters into a written contract pursuant to division (g)(2) of
this section shall violate any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915,
or permit, aid or abet any other person in violating any provision of this
chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.
      (4)   A veteran’s organization, fraternal organization or sporting
organization shall give all required proceeds earned from the conduct of
instant bingo or electronic instant bingo to the organization with which the
veteran’s organization, fraternal organization or sporting organization has
entered into a written contract.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (g) of this section is guilty of illegal
instant bingo or electronic instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided
in this division, illegal instant bingo or electronic instant bingo conduct is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of division (g) of this section, illegal instant bingo
or electronic instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.13)
§ 630.13 RESTRICTIONS ON OWNER OR LESSOR OF LOCATION AT INSTANT BINGO.
   (a)   No owner or lessor of a location shall assist a charitable instant
bingo organization in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo
session at that location unless the owner or lessor has entered into a written
contract, as described in R.C. § 2915.093, with the charitable instant bingo
organization to assist in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo
session.
   (b)   The location of the lessor or owner shall be designated as a location
where the charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant bingo other
than at a bingo session.
   (c)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract
as prescribed in division (a) of this section shall violate any provision of
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915, or permit, aid or abet any other person in
violating any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (d)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract
as prescribed in division (a) of this section shall violate the terms of the
contract.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates division (c) or (d) of this section is guilty
of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, illegal instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of division (c) or
(d) of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If an owner or lessor of a location knowingly, intentionally, or
recklessly violates division (c) or (d) of this section, any license that the
owner or lessor holds for the retail sale of any goods on the owner’s or
lessor’s premises that is issued by the state or a political subdivision is
subject to suspension, revocation or payment of a monetary penalty at the
request of the Attorney General.
(R.C. § 2915.094)
§ 630.14 SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINES; PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (a)   No person shall give to another person any item described in division
(ff)(1), (ff)(2), (ff)(3) or (ff)(4) of § 630.01 in exchange for a noncash
prize, toy or novelty received as a reward for playing or operating a skill-
based amusement machine or for a free or reduced-price game won on a skill-
based amusement machine.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of skill-based
amusement machine prohibited conduct. A violation of division (a) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree for each redemption of a prize
that is involved in the violation. If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of division (a) of this section, a violation of that
division is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.06)
   (c)   Any regulation of skill-based amusement machines shall be governed by
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 and not by R.C. Chapter 1345.
(R.C. § 2915.061)
§ 630.15 ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO; PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (a)   No charitable organization shall conduct electronic instant bingo
unless all of the following are true:
      (1)   The organization is a veteran’s organization described in R.C. §
2915.01(J), or is a fraternal organization described in R.C. § 2915.01(L), and
the organization qualified as a veteran’s organization or fraternal
organization, as applicable, on or before June 30, 2021.
      (2)   The organization is a veteran’s organization described in I.R.C. §
501(c)(4) or is, and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a
determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the organization
is, exempt from federal income taxation under I.R.C. § 501(a), and is described
in I.R.C. § 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), or 501(c)(19).
      (3)   The organization has not conducted a raffle in violation of R.C. §
2915.092(B) using an electronic raffle machine, as described in Ohio Veterans
and Fraternal Charitable Coalition v. DeWine, Case No. 13-CV-13610 (C.P.
Franklin Co. February 23, 2018), at any time on or after January 1, 2022.
   (b)   No charitable organization that conducts electronic instant bingo
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Possess an electronic instant bingo system that was not obtained in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 2915 or with any rule adopted under R.C. Chapter
2915;
      (2)   Conduct electronic instant bingo on any day, at any time, or on any
premises not specified on the organization’s type II or type III license issued
under R.C. § 2915.08;
      (3)   Hold more than one valid license to conduct electronic instant
bingo at any one time;
      (4)   Conduct electronic instant bingo on more than one premises or on
any premises other than the charitable organization’s principal place of
business;
      (5)   Operate more than ten electronic bingo systems at the premises on
which the charitable organization conducts electronic instant bingo under its
license;
      (6)   Fail to display both of the following conspicuously at the premises
on which the charitable organization conducts electronic instant bingo:
         A.   The charitable organization’s bingo license;
         B.   The serial number of each deal of electronic instant bingo
tickets being sold.
      (7)   Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or should have
known, to be under 18 years of age to play electronic instant bingo;
      (8)   Sell or provide to any person an electronic instant bingo ticket
for a price different from the price displayed on the game flare for that deal,
except that the charitable organization may give a participant who wins an
electronic instant bingo game an electronic instant bingo ticket as a prize in
place of a cash prize;
      (9)   Fail, once an electronic instant bingo deal is begun, to continue
to sell tickets in that deal until all prizes have been awarded;
      (10)   Permit any person whom the organization knows, or should have
known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any jurisdiction
to be a bingo game operator in the conduct of electronic instant bingo;
      (11)   Permit a bingo game operator to play electronic instant bingo;
      (12)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(12)B. of this
section, pay compensation to a bingo game operator for conducting electronic
instant bingo.
         B.   Division (b)(12)A. of this section does not prohibit an employee
of a veteran’s organization or fraternal organization from redeeming electronic
instant bingo tickets or vouchers for the organization’s members or invited
guests, so long as no portion of the employee’s compensation is paid from any
bingo receipts.
      (13)   Pay consulting fees to any person in relation to electronic
instant bingo.
   (c)   No person shall sell, offer to sell, or otherwise provide or offer to
provide an electronic instant bingo system to any person for use in this
municipality unless the electronic instant bingo system has been approved under
R.C. § 2915.15.
   (d)   Whoever knowingly violates division (a), (b), or (c) of this section
or a rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.14(D) is guilty of illegal electronic
instant bingo conduct. Illegal electronic instant bingo conduct is a
misdemeanor of the first degree, except that if the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of division (a) or (b) of this section, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or state law, or of a rule adopted
under R.C. § 2915.14(D), illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.14)
CHAPTER 636: OFFENSES RELATING TO PERSONS
Section
   
636.01   Definitions
   
636.02   Negligent homicide
   
636.03   Assault
   
636.04   Negligent assault
   
636.05   Aggravated menacing
   
636.06   Menacing by stalking
   
636.07   Menacing
   
636.08   Unlawful restraint
   
636.09   Unlawful collection of bodily substances
   
636.10   Coercion
   
636.11   Nonsupport of dependents
   
636.12   Endangering children
   
636.13   Interference with custody
   
636.14   Contributing to the unruliness or delinquency of a child
   
636.15   Threatening or harassing telecommunications
   
636.16   Placing harmful substance or objects in food or confection
   
636.17   Domestic violence
   
636.18   Safety of crowds attending live entertainment performances
   
636.19   Hazing
   
636.20   Illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products or
alternative nicotine products; transaction scans
   
636.21   Ethnic intimidation
   
636.22   Intimidation in connection with housing
   
636.23   Failing to provide for a person with a functional impairment
   
636.24   Illegal use of a tracking device or application
   
636.25   Curfew
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Disorderly conduct, see §
648.04
   Drugs, see
Ch. 624
   False report of child abuse or neglect, see §
654.02
   Juvenile Court, see R.C. Ch. 2151
   Parents’ liability for destructive acts of their children, see R.C. §
3109.09
   Personal accountability for organizational conduct, see §
606.10
   “Physical harm to persons” defined, see §
606.01
   Sales of alcohol to underage persons; prohibitions and misrepresentations,
see §
612.02
   “Serious physical harm to persons” defined, see §
606.01
   Sex related offenses, see
Ch. 666
   Shelters for victims of domestic violence, see R.C. §§ 3113.33 et seq.
   Vehicular homicide and vehicular manslaughter, see §
434.11
§ 636.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this chapter and any other provision of these
Codified Ordinances, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   ANOTHER’S UNBORN or OTHER PERSON’S UNBORN. A member of the species
homo sapiens who is or was carried in the womb of another during a period that
begins with fertilization and that continues unless and until live birth
occurs.
      (2)   UNLAWFUL TERMINATION OF ANOTHER’S PREGNANCY. Causing the death of
an unborn member of the species homo sapiens who is or was carried in the womb
of another, as a result of injuries inflicted during the period that begins
with fertilization and that continues unless and until live birth occurs.
   (b)   Notwithstanding division (a) of this section, in no case shall the
definitions of the terms ANOTHER’S UNBORN, OTHER PERSON’S UNBORN and UNLAWFUL
TERMINATION OF ANOTHER’S PREGNANCY that are set forth in division (a) of this
section be applied or construed in any of the following manners:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(1) of this section, in
a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as prohibiting any
pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion with the consent of
the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant woman implied by law in a
medical emergency, or with the approval of one otherwise authorized by law to
consent to medical treatment on behalf of the pregnant woman. An abortion that
violates the conditions described in the immediately preceding sentence may be
punished as any violation of R.C. § 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04,
2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.14, 2903.21 or
2903.22, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, as applicable. An
abortion that does not violate the conditions described in the second
immediately preceding sentence but that does violate R.C. § 2919.12, 2919.13
(B), 2919.15, 2919.151, 2919.17 or 2919.18, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, may be punished as a violation of the section, as
applicable.
      (2)   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as
applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman that occurs while
she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the following:
         A.   Her delivery of a stillborn baby.
         B.   Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a viable,
unborn human that she is carrying.
         C.   Her causing the death of her child who is born alive but who dies
from one or more injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable,
unborn human.
         D.   Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more
injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human.
         E.   Her causing, threatening to cause, or attempting to cause, in any
other manner, an injury, illness or other psychological illness or condition,
regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable, unborn human that she is
carrying.
(R.C. § 2903.09)
§ 636.02 NEGLIGENT HOMICIDE.
   (a)   No person shall negligently cause the death of another or the unlawful
termination of another’s pregnancy by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance, as defined in R.C. § 2923.11.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent homicide, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2903.05)
Statutory reference:
   Reckless homicide, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.041]
§ 636.03 ASSAULT.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm to
another or to another’s unborn.
   (b)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to another or
to another’s unborn.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of
assault. Except as provided in R.C. § 2903.13(C), assault is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
   (d)   If an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to assault when it
is a misdemeanor also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a specification as
described in R.C. § 2941.1423 (victim of the offense was a woman whom the
defendant knew was pregnant at the time of the offense) that was included in
the indictment, count in the indictment or information charging the offense,
the court shall sentence the offender to a mandatory jail term as provided in
R.C. § 2929.24(F).
   (e)   A prosecution for a violation of division (a) or (b) of this section
does not preclude a prosecution of a violation of any other section of the Ohio
Revised Code. One or more acts, a series of acts, or a course of behavior that
can be prosecuted under division (a) or (b) of this section or any other
section of the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under division (a) or (b) of
this section, the other section of the Ohio Revised Code, the municipal
ordinance, or both sections. However, if an offender is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of division (a) or (b) of this section and also is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of R.C. § 2903.22, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, based on the same conduct
involving the same victim that was the basis of the violation of division (a)
or (b) of this section, the offenses are allied offenses of similar import
under R.C. § 2941.25.
(R.C. § 2903.13)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated and felonious assault, see R.C. §§ 2903.11 and 2903.12
   Felony offenses: assaulting functionally impaired person, peace officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation,
firefighter, person performing emergency medical service, officer or employee
of a public children services agency or private child placing agency; assault
at a correctional institution; assault on school officials and school bus
drivers; health care professional, worker or security guard at a hospital under
certain circumstances; judge, magistrate, prosecutor or court official or
employee under certain circumstances, see R.C. § 2903.13(C)
   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.15
   Persons who may seek relief under anti-stalking protection order; ex parte
orders, see R.C. § 2903.214
   Protection order as pretrial condition of release, see R.C. § 2903.213
   Vehicular assault and aggravated vehicular assault, felony offenses, see
R.C. § 2903.08
§ 636.04 NEGLIGENT ASSAULT.
   (a)   No person shall negligently, by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance as defined in R.C. § 2923.11, cause physical harm to another or to
another’s unborn.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent assault, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 2903.14)
§ 636.05 AGGRAVATED MENACING.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the offender
will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of the other person,
such other person’s unborn, or a member of that other person’s immediate
family. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief that the
offender will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of the
other person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other person’s
immediate family, the other person’s belief may be based on words or conduct of
the offender that are directed at or identify a corporation, association, or
other organization that employs the other person or to which the other person
belongs.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated menacing. Except
as otherwise provided in this division (b), aggravated menacing is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the victim of the offense is an officer or
employee of a public children services agency or a private child placing agency
and the offense relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or
anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties, aggravated
menacing is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law or, if the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to an offense of
violence, the victim of that prior offense was an officer or employee of a
public children services agency or private child placing agency, and that prior
offense related to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated
performance of official responsibilities or duties, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
   (c)   As used in this section, ORGANIZATION includes an entity that is a
governmental employer.
(R.C. § 2903.21)
§ 636.06 MENACING BY STALKING.
   (a)   Prohibited conduct.
      (1)   A.   No person by engaging in a pattern of conduct shall knowingly
cause another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to
the other person or a family or household member of the other person or cause
mental distress to the other person or a family or household member of the
other person. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief that
the offender will cause physical harm to the other person or the other person’s
family or household member or mental distress to the other person or the other
person’s family or household member, the other person’s belief or mental
distress may be based on words or conduct of the offender that are directed at
or identify a corporation, association, or other organization that employs the
other person or to which the other person belongs.
         B.   No person, through the use of any form of written communication
or any electronic method of remotely transferring information, including but
not limited to any computer, computer network, computer program, computer
system, or telecommunication device, shall post a message or use any
intentionally written or verbal graphic gesture with purpose to do either of
the following:
            1.   Violate division (a)(1)A. of this section;
            2.   Urge or incite another to commit a violation of division (a)
(1)A. of this section.
         C.   No person, with a sexual motivation, shall violate division (a)
(1)A. or (a)(1)B. of this section.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) of this section is guilty of
menacing by stalking.
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(2)B. of this
section, menacing by stalking is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   Menacing by stalking is a felony, to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law, if any of the following applies:
            1.   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of R.C. § 2903.211 or a violation of R.C. § 2911.211, or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to either of these offenses.
            2.   In committing the offense under division (a)(1)A., (a)(1)B. or
(a)(1)C. of this section, the offender made a threat of physical harm to or
against the victim, or as a result of an offense committed under division (a)
(1)B. or (a)(1)C. of this section, a third person induced by the offender’s
posted message made a threat of physical harm to or against the victim.
            3.   In committing the offense under division (a)(1)A., (a)(1)B. or
(a)(1)C. of this section, the offender trespassed on the land or premises where
the victim lives, is employed or attends school, or as a result of an offense
committed under division (a)(1)B. or (a)(1)C. of this section, a third person
induced by the offender’s posted message trespassed on the land or premises
where the victim lives, is employed or attends school.
            4.   The victim of the offense is a minor.
            5.   The offender has a history of violence towards the victim or
any other person or a history of other violent acts towards the victim or any
other person.
            6.   While committing the offense under division (a)(1)A. of this
section or a violation of division (a)(1)C. of this section based on conduct in
violation of division (a)(1)A. of this section, the offender had a deadly
weapon on or about the offender’s person or under the offender’s control.
Division (a)(2)B.6. of this section does not apply in determining the penalty
for a violation of division (a)(1)B. of this section or a violation of division
(a)(1)C. of this section based on conduct in violation of division (a)(1)B. of
this section.
            7.   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
the subject of a protection order issued under R.C. § 2903.213 or 2903.214,
regardless of whether or not the person to be protected under the order is the
victim of the offense or another person.
            8.   In committing the offense under division (a)(1)A., (a)(1)B. or
(a)(1)C. of this section, the offender caused serious physical harm to the
premises at which the victim resides, to the real property on which that
premises is located, or to any personal property located on that premises, or
as a result of an offense committed under division (a)(1)B. of this section or
an offense committed under division (a)(1)C. of this section based on a
violation of division (a)(1)B. of this section, a third person induced by the
offender’s posted message caused serious physical harm to that premises, that
real property or any personal property on that premises.
            9.   Prior to committing the offense, the offender had been
determined to represent a substantial risk of physical harm to others as
manifested by evidence of then-recent homicidal or other violent behavior,
evidence of then-recent threats that placed another in reasonable fear of
violent behavior and serious harm, or other evidence of then-present
dangerousness.
            10.   The victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a
public children services agency or a private child placing agency and the
offense relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated
performance of official responsibilities or duties.
            11.   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an
officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child
placing agency, and that prior offense related to the officer’s or employee’s
performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties.
      (3)   R.C. § 2919.271 applies in relation to a defendant charged with a
violation of this section.
      (4)   For the purpose of division (a) of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         A.   COMPUTER, COMPUTER NETWORK, COMPUTER PROGRAM, COMPUTER SYSTEM,
and TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
         B.   EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. The singular of EMERGENCY FACILITY
PERSONNEL as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.
         C.   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. The singular of EMERGENCY
MEDICAL SERVICES PERSONNEL as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.
         D.   FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Any of the following:
            1.   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
person against whom the act prohibited in division (a)(1) of this section is
committed:
               a.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a former spouse
of the person;
               b.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the person, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the person;
               c.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse,
or former spouse of the person, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
person.
            2.   The natural parent of any child of whom the person against
whom the act prohibited in division (a)(1) of this section is committed is the
other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.
         E.   MENTAL DISTRESS. Any of the following:
            1.   Any mental illness or condition that involves some temporary
substantial incapacity;
            2.   Any mental illness or condition that would normally require
psychiatric treatment, psychological treatment or other mental health services,
whether or not any person requested or received psychiatric treatment,
psychological treatment, or other mental health services.
         F.   ORGANIZATION. Includes an entity that is a governmental employer.
         G.   PATTERN OF CONDUCT. Two or more actions or incidents closely
related in time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based on any
of those actions or incidents, or two or more actions or incidents closely
related in time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based on any
of those actions or incidents, directed at one or more persons employed by or
belonging to the same corporation, association, or other organization. Actions
or incidents that prevent, obstruct or delay the performance by a public
official, firefighter, rescuer, emergency medical services person or emergency
facility person of any authorized act within the public official’s,
firefighter’s, rescuer’s, emergency medical services person’s or emergency
facility person’s official capacity, or the posting of messages, use of
intentionally written or verbal graphic gestures, or receipt of information or
data through the use of any form of written communication or an electronic
method of remotely transferring information, including but not limited to a
computer, computer network, computer program, computer system or
telecommunications device, may constitute a PATTERN OF CONDUCT.
         H.   PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. A person who is living or has lived
with the person against whom the act prohibited in division (a)(1) of this
section is committed in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise is
cohabiting with that person, or who otherwise has cohabited with the person
within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in
question.
         I.   POST A MESSAGE. Transferring, sending, posting, publishing,
disseminating or otherwise communicating, or attempting to transfer, send,
post, publish, disseminate or otherwise communicate, any message or
information, whether truthful or untruthful, about an individual, and whether
done under one’s own name, under the name of another or while impersonating
another.
         J.   PUBLIC OFFICIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.01.
         K.   SEXUAL MOTIVATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2971.01.
         L.   THIRD PERSON. In relation to conduct as described in division (a)
(1)B. of this section, an individual who is neither the offender nor the victim
of the conduct.
      (5)   The prosecution does not need to prove in a prosecution under
division (a) of this section that a person requested or received psychiatric
treatment, psychological treatment or other mental health services in order to
show that the person was caused mental distress as described in division (a)
(4)E.2. of this section.
      (6)   A.   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a person solely
because the person provided access or connection to or from an electronic
method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control,
including having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing access
or connection to or from the electronic method of remotely transferring the
information, and that do not include the creation of the content of the
material that is the subject of the access or connection. In addition, any
person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control shall not be
liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the receipt or
transmission through its service of any information that it believes is or will
be sent in violation of division (a) of this section.
         B.   Division (a)(6)A. of this section does not create an affirmative
duty for any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic
method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control to
block the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that
it believes is or will be sent in violation of division (a) of this section
except as otherwise provided by law.
         C.   Division (a)(6)A. of this section does not apply to a person who
conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of division (a) of this section or who
knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.
(R.C. § 2903.211)
   (b)   Protection order. Consult R.C. § 2903.213 for current provisions
regarding protection orders, consent agreements, anti-stalking protection
orders and orders issued by a court of another state.
   (c)   Violating a protection order, consent agreement, anti-stalking
protection order or order issued by a court of another state.
      (1)   No person shall recklessly violate the terms of any of the
following:
         A.   A protection order issued or consent agreement approved pursuant
to R.C. § 2919.26 or 3113.31;
         B.   A protection order issued pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34, 2903.213 or
2903.214;
         C.   A protection order issued by a court of another state.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of
violating a protection order.
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(2)C. or (c)(2)D. of
this section, violating a protection order is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
         C.   Violating a protection order is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the offender previously has been convicted of, pleaded
guilty to, or been adjudicated a delinquent child for any of the following:
            1.   A violation of a protection order issued or consent agreement
approved pursuant to R.C. §§ 2151.34, 2903.213, 2903.214, 2919.26, or 3113.31,
or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance;
            2.   Two or more violations of R.C. § 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22,
or 2911.211, or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
or any combination of those offenses, that involved the same person who is the
subject of the protection order or consent agreement;
            3.   One or more violations of this section, or any substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance.
         D.   If the offender violates a protection order or consent agreement
while committing a felony offense, violating a protection order is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         E.   If the protection order violated by the offender was an order
issued pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34 or 2903.214 that required electronic
monitoring of the offender pursuant to that section, the court may require in
addition to any other sentence imposed upon the offender that the offender be
electronically monitored for a period not exceeding five years by a law
enforcement agency designated by the court. If the court requires under this
division that the offender be electronically monitored, unless the court
determines that the offender is indigent, the court shall order that the
offender pay the costs of the installation of the electronic monitoring device
and the cost of monitoring the electronic monitoring device.
      (3)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (c)(1)C. of
this section that the protection order issued by a court of another state does
not comply with the requirements specified in 18 U.S.C. § 2265(b) for a
protection order that must be accorded full faith a credit by a court of this
state or that it is not entitled to full faith and credit under 18 U.S.C. §
2265(c).
      (4)   In a prosecution for a violation of this section, it is not
necessary for the prosecution to prove that the protection order or consent
agreement was served on the defendant if the prosecution proves that the
defendant was shown the protection order or consent agreement or a copy of
either or a judge, magistrate, or law enforcement officer informed the
defendant that a protection order or consent agreement had been issued, and
proves that the defendant recklessly violated the terms of the order or
agreement.
      (5)   As used in this section, PROTECTION ORDER ISSUED BY A COURT OF
ANOTHER STATE means an injunction or another order issued by a criminal court
of another state for the purpose of preventing violent or threatening acts or
harassment against, contact or communication with, or physical proximity to
another person including a temporary order, and means an injunction or order of
that nature issued by a civil court of another state, including a temporary
order and a final order issued in an independent action or as a pendente lite
order in a proceeding for other relief, if the court issued it in response to a
complaint, petition or motion filed by or on behalf of a person seeking
protection. The term does not include an order for support or for custody of a
child issued pursuant to the divorce and child custody laws of another state,
except to the extent that the order for support or for custody of a child is
entitled to full faith and credit under the laws of the United States.
(R.C. § 2919.27)
§ 636.07 MENACING.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the
offender will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other
person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other person’s immediate
family. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief that the
offender will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other
person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other person’s immediate
family, the other person’s belief may be based on words or conduct of the
offender that are directed at or identify a corporation, association, or other
organization that employs the other person or to which the other person
belongs.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly place or attempt to place another in
reasonable fear of physical harm or death by displaying a deadly weapon,
regardless of whether the deadly weapon displayed is operable or inoperable, if
either of the following applies:
         A.   The other person is an emergency service responder, the person
knows or reasonably should know that the other person is an emergency service
responder, and it is the person’s specific purpose to engage in the specified
conduct against an emergency service responder.
         B.   The other person is a family or household member or co-worker of
an emergency service responder, the person knows or reasonably should know that
the other person is a family or household member or co-worker of an emergency
service responder, and it is the person’s specific purpose to engage in the
specified conduct against a family or household member or co-worker of an
emergency service responder.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of menacing. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, menacing is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If the victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a public
children services agency or a private child placing agency and the offense
relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated performance
of official responsibilities or duties or if the victim of the offense is an
emergency service responder in the performance of the responder’s official
duties, menacing is one of the following:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(2) of this section, a
misdemeanor of the first degree;
      (2)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an officer or
employee of a public children services agency or private child placing agency
or an emergency service responder, and that prior offense related to the
officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated performance of official
responsibilities or duties or to the responder’s performance of the responder’s
official duties, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (c)   A prosecution for a violation of this section does not preclude a
prosecution of a violation of any other section of the Ohio Revised Code. One
or more acts, a series of acts, or a course of behavior that can be prosecuted
under this section or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code may be
prosecuted under this section, the other section of the Ohio Revised Code, or
both sections. However, if an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of this section and also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of R.C. § 2903.13, or any substantially similar municipal ordinance,
based on the same conduct involving the same victim that was the basis of the
violation of this section, the offenses are allied offenses of similar import
under R.C. § 2941.25.
   (d)   As used in this section:
      (1)   CO-WORKER. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 2903.13.
      (2)   EMERGENCY SERVICE RESPONDER. Has the same meanings as in R.C. §
2903.13.
      (3)   FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Has the same meanings as in R.C. §
2903.13.
      (4)   ORGANIZATION. Includes an entity that is a governmental employer.
(R.C. § 2903.22)
§ 636.08 UNLAWFUL RESTRAINT.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly restrain
another of the other person’s liberty.
   (b)   No person, without privilege to do so and with a sexual motivation,
shall knowingly restrain another of the other person’s liberty.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful restraint, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   As used in this section, SEXUAL MOTIVATION has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2971.01.
(R.C. § 2905.03)
§ 636.09 UNLAWFUL COLLECTION OF BODILY SUBSTANCES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly collect any blood, urine, tissue, or other
bodily substance of another person without privilege or consent to do so.
   (b)   (1)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
         A.   The collection of any bodily substance of a person by a law
enforcement officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction or advice
of a law enforcement officer, for purposes of a chemical test or tests of the
substance under R.C. § 1547.111(A)(1) or 4511.191(A)(2) to determine the
alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination content of the bodily substance;
         B.   The collection of any bodily substance of a person by a peace
officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction or advice of a peace
officer, for purposes of a test or tests of the substance as provided in R.C. §
4506.17(A) to determine the person’s alcohol concentration or the presence of
any controlled substance or metabolite of a controlled substance.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section shall not be construed as implying
that the persons identified in divisions (b)(1)A. and B. of this section do not
have privilege to collect the bodily substance of another person as described
in those divisions or as limiting the definition of “privilege” set forth in
R.C. § 2901.01.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of unlawful
collection of a bodily substance. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, unlawful collection of a bodily substance is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (a) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, unlawful collection of a bodily
substance is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2927.15)
§ 636.10 COERCION.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to coerce another into taking or refraining
from action concerning which the other person has a legal freedom of choice,
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Threaten to commit any offense.
      (2)   Utter or threaten any slander against any person.
      (3)   Expose or threaten to expose any matter tending to subject any
person to hatred, contempt or ridicule, or to damage any person’s personal or
business repute, or to impair any person’s credit.
      (4)   Institute or threaten criminal proceedings against any person.
      (5)   Take or withhold, or threaten to take or withhold official action,
or cause or threaten to cause official action to be taken or withheld.
   (b)   Divisions (a)(4) and (a)(5) of this section shall not be construed to
prohibit a prosecutor or court from doing any of the following in good faith
and in the interests of justice:
      (1)   Offering or agreeing to grant, or granting immunity from
prosecution pursuant to R.C. § 2945.44.
      (2)   In return for a plea of guilty to one or more offenses charged or
to one or more other or lesser offenses, or in return for the testimony of the
accused in a case to which the accused is not a party, offering or agreeing to
dismiss, or dismissing one or more charges pending against an accused, or
offering or agreeing to impose, or imposing a certain sentence or modification
of sentence.
      (3)   Imposing a community control sanction on certain conditions,
including without limitation requiring the offender to make restitution or
redress to the victim of the offense.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (a)(3), (a)(4)
or (a)(5) of this section that the actor’s conduct was a reasonable response to
the circumstances which occasioned it, and that the actor’s purpose was limited
to any of the following:
      (1)   Compelling another to refrain from misconduct or to desist from
further misconduct.
      (2)   Preventing or redressing a wrong or injustice.
      (3)   Preventing another from taking action for which the actor
reasonably believed the other person to be disqualified.
      (4)   Compelling another to take action which the actor reasonably
believed the other person to be under a duty to take.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of coercion, a misdemeanor of
the second degree.
   (e)   As used in this section:
      (1)   COMMUNITY CONTROL SANCTION has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2929.01.
      (2)   THREAT includes a direct threat and a threat by innuendo.
(R.C. § 2905.12)
§ 636.11 NONSUPPORT OF DEPENDENTS.
   (a)   No person shall abandon, or fail to provide adequate support to:
      (1)   The person’s spouse, as required by law;
      (2)   The person’s child who is under age 18, or the persons’s child with
a mental or physical disability who is under age 21;
      (3)   The person’s aged or infirm parent or adoptive parent, who from
lack of ability and means is unable to provide adequately for the parent’s own
support.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall abandon, or fail to provide support as
established by a court order to, another person whom, by court order or decree,
the person:
         A.   Is legally obligated to support; or
         B.   Was legally obligated to support, and an amount for support:
            1.   Was due and owing prior to the date the person’s duty to pay
current support terminated; and
            2.   Remains unpaid.
      (2)   The period of limitation under R.C. § 2901.13 applicable to
division (b)(1)B. of this section shall begin to run on the date the person’s
duty to pay current support terminates.
   (c)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage or contribute to a
child or a ward of the juvenile court becoming a dependent child, as defined in
R.C. § 2151.04, or a neglected child, as defined in R.C. § 2151.03.
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of failure to provide
adequate support under division (a) of this section or a charge of failure to
provide support established by a court order under division (b) of this section
that the accused was unable to provide adequate support or the established
support, but did provide the support that was within his or her ability and
means.
   (e)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(3) of this
section that the parent abandoned the accused or failed to support the accused
as required by law, while the accused was under age 18, or had a mental or
physical disability and was under age 21.
   (f)   It is not a defense to a charge under division (b) of this section
that the person whom a court has ordered the accused to support is being
adequately supported by someone other than the accused.
   (g)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of nonsupport of dependents, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (a)(2) or (b) of this section
or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or if the
offender has failed to provide support under division (a)(2) or (b) of this
section for a total accumulated period of 26 weeks out of 104 consecutive
weeks, whether or not the 26 weeks were consecutive, then a violation of
division (a)(2) or (b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a felony violation of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (a)(2) or
(b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the offender is guilty of nonsupport of dependents by reason of
failing to provide support to his or her child as required by a child support
order issued on or after April 15, 1985, pursuant to R.C. § 2151.23, 2151.231,
2151.232, 2151.33, 3105.21, 3109.05, 3111.13, 3113.04, 3113.31, 3115.401, or
former R.C. § 3115.31, the court, in addition to any other sentence imposed,
shall assess all court costs arising out of the charge against the person and
require the person to pay any reasonable attorney’s fees of any adverse party
other than the state, as determined by the court, that arose in relation to the
charge.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of
contributing to the nonsupport of dependents, a misdemeanor of the first
degree. Each day of a violation of division (c) of this section is a separate
offense.
(R.C. § 2919.21)
§ 636.12 ENDANGERING CHILDREN.
   (a)   No person, who is the parent, guardian, custodian, person having
custody or control, or person in loco parentis of a child under 18 years of age
or a child with a mental or physical disability under 21 years of age, shall
create a substantial risk to the health or safety of the child by violating a
duty of care, protection, or support. It is not a violation of a duty of care,
protection, or support under this division when the parent, guardian,
custodian, or person having custody or control of a child treats the physical
or mental illness or disability of the child by spiritual means through prayer
alone, in accordance with the tenets of a recognized religious body.
   (b)   No person shall do any of the following to a child under 18 years of
age or a child with a mental or physical disability under 21 years of age:
      (1)   Abuse the child.
      (2)   Torture or cruelly abuse the child.
      (3)   Administer corporal punishment or other physical disciplinary
measure, or physically restrain the child in a cruel manner or for a prolonged
period, which punishment, discipline or restraint is excessive under the
circumstances and creates a substantial risk of serious physical harm to the
child.
      (4)   Repeatedly administer unwarranted disciplinary measures to a child
when there is a substantial risk that this conduct, if continued, will
seriously impair or retard the child’s mental health or development.
      (5)   Entice, coerce, permit, encourage, compel, hire, employ, use or
allow the child to act, model or in any other way participate in, or be
photographed for, the production, presentation, dissemination or advertisement
of any material or performance that the offender knows or reasonably should
know is obscene, is sexually oriented matter or is nudity-oriented matter.
      (6)   Allow the child to be on the same parcel of real property and
within 100 feet of, or, in the case of more than one housing unit on the same
parcel of real property, in the same housing unit and within 100 feet of, any
act in violation of R.C. § 2925.04 or 2925.041 when the person knows that the
act is occurring, whether or not any person is prosecuted for or convicted of
the violation of R.C. § 2925.04 or 2925.041 that is the basis of the violation
of this division.
   (c)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle, as defined by R.C. § 4511.01,
within the municipality and in violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, when one or more children under
18 years of age are in the vehicle. Notwithstanding any other provision of law,
a person may be convicted at the same trial or proceeding of a violation of
this division and a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that constitutes the basis of the charge of the
violation of this division. For purposes of R.C. §§ 4511.191 to 4511.197 and
all related provisions of law, a person arrested for a violation of this
division shall be considered to be under arrest for operating a vehicle while
under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, a combination of them or for
operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, or urine.
      (2)   For the purpose of division (c)(1) of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:
         A.   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
         B.   VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   (d)   (1)   Division (b)(5) of this section does not apply to any material
or performance that is produced, presented or disseminated for a bona fide
medical, scientific, educational, religious, governmental, judicial or other
proper purpose, by or to a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist,
teacher, person pursuing bona fide studies for research, librarian, member of
the clergy, prosecutor, judge or other person having a proper interest in the
material or performance.
      (2)   Mistake of age is not a defense to a charge under division (b)(5)
of this section.
      (3)   In a prosecution under division (b)(5) of this section, the trier
of fact may infer that an actor, model or participant in the material or
performance involved is a juvenile if the material or performance, through its
title, text, visual representation or otherwise, represents or depicts the
actor, model or participant as a juvenile.
      (4)   For the purpose of this division and division (b)(5) of this
section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   MATERIAL, PERFORMANCE, OBSCENE and SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 2907.01.
         B.   NUDITY-ORIENTED MATTER. Any material or performance that shows a
minor in a state of nudity and that, taken as a whole by the average person
applying contemporary community standards, appeals to the prurient interest.
         C.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED MATTER. Any material or performance that shows
a minor participating or engaging in sexual activity, masturbation or
bestiality.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of endangering children.
      (1)   If the offender violates division (a) or (b)(1) of this section,
endangering children is one of the following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (e)(1)B., (e)(1)C. or
(e)(1)D., a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of an offense under
this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or
of any offense involving neglect, abandonment or contributing to the
delinquency of or physical abuse of a child, except as otherwise provided in
division (e)(1)C. or (e)(1)D. of this section, endangering children is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         C.   If the violation is a violation of division (a) of this section
and results in serious physical harm to the child involved, endangering
children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         D.   If the violation is a violation of division (b)(1) of this
section and results in serious physical harm to the child involved, endangering
children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the offender violates division (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(5) or
(b)(6) of this section, endangering children is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the offender violates division (c) of this section, the offender
shall be punished as follows:
         A.   Except as provided in (e)(3)B. or (e)(3)C., endangering children
in violation of division (c) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
         B.   If the violation results in serious physical harm to the child or
if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this section or
a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any offense
involving neglect, abandonment or contributing to the delinquency of or
physical abuse of a child, except as otherwise provided in division (e)(3)C. of
this section, endangering children in violation of division (c) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         C.   If the violation results in serious physical harm to the child
and if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this
section, R.C. § 2903.06, 2903.08, 2919.22(C) or former R.C. § 2903.07 as it
existed prior to March 23, 2000, or R.C. § 2903.04, in a case in which the
offender was subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that
section, endangering children in violation of division (c) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         D.   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine or other sentence,
penalty or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to divisions (e)
(3)A., (e)(3)B. or (e)(3)C. of this section or pursuant to any other provision
of law and in addition to any suspension of the offender’s driver’s license or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege under
R.C. Chapter 4506, Chapter 4509, Chapter 4510 or Chapter 4511, or any other
provision of law, the court also may impose upon the offender a class seven
suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit
or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02
(A)(7).
         E.   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine, or other sentence,
penalty or sanction imposed upon the offender pursuant to division (e)(3)A.,
(e)(3)B., (e)(3)C. or (e)(3)D. of this section or pursuant to any other
provision of law for the violation of division (c) of this section, if as a
part of the same trial or proceeding the offender also is convicted of or
pleads guilty to a separate charge charging the violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A),
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the
charge of the violation of division (c) of this section, the offender also
shall be sentenced in accordance with R.C. § 4511.19, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, for that violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (f)   (1)   If a person violates division (c) of this section and if, at the
time of the violation, there were two or more children under 18 years of age in
the motor vehicle involved in the violation, the offender may be convicted of a
violation of division (c) of this section for each of the children, but the
court may sentence the offender for only one of the violations.
      (2)   A.   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (c) of this section but the person is not also convicted of and does
not also plead guilty to a separate charge of violating R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the charge
of the violation of division (c) of this section, both the following apply:
            1.   For purposes of the provisions of R.C. § 4511.19, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that set forth the penalties and
sanctions for a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the violation of
division (c) of this section shall not constitute a violation of R.C. § 4511.19
(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
            2.   For purposes of the provisions of law that refers to a
conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and that is not described in
division (f)(2)A.1. of this section, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the
violation of division (c) of this section shall constitute a conviction or plea
of guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
         B.   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (c) of this section and the person also is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a separate charge of violating R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the charge of the
violation of division (c) of this section, the conviction of or plea of guilty
to the violation of division (c) of this section shall not constitute, for the
purposes of any provision of law that refers to a conviction of or a plea of
guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, a conviction of or a plea of guilty to a violation of R.C.
§ 4511.19(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 2919.22(A) - (E), (H))
Statutory reference:
   Community service, requirements, see R.C. § 2919.22(F)
   License suspension, requirements, see R.C. § 2919.22(G)
   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.15
§ 636.13 INTERFERENCE WITH CUSTODY.
   (a)   No person, knowing that he or she is without privilege to do so or
being reckless in that regard, shall entice, take, keep or harbor a person
identified in division (a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section from the
parent, guardian or custodian of the person identified in division (a)(1), (a)
(2) or (a)(3) of this section:
      (1)   A child under the age of 18, or a child with a mental or physical
disability under the age of 21;
      (2)   A person committed by law to an institution for delinquent, unruly,
neglected, abused or dependent children;
      (3)   A person committed by law to an institution for persons with mental
illnesses or an institution for persons with intellectual disabilities.
   (b)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause or encourage a child or a
ward of the juvenile court who has been committed to the custody of any person,
department or public or private institution to leave the custody of that
person, department or institution without legal consent.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of enticing or taking under
division (a)(1) of this section that the actor reasonably believed that his or
her conduct was necessary to preserve the child’s health or safety. It is an
affirmative defense to a charge of keeping or harboring under division (a) of
this section that the actor in good faith gave notice to law enforcement or
judicial authorities within a reasonable time after the child or committed
person came under his or her shelter, protection, or influence.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with custody.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subdivision, a violation of
division (a)(1) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the child who is
the subject of a violation of division (a)(1) is removed from the state or if
the offender previously has been convicted of an offense under this section or
a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of
division (a)(1) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. If the child who is the subject of a violation of division (a)(1)
suffers physical harm as a result of the violation, a violation of division (a)
(1) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   A violation of division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. Each day of a violation of division (b) is a separate offense.
(R.C. § 2919.23)
§ 636.14 CONTRIBUTING TO THE UNRULINESS OR DELINQUENCY OF A CHILD.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   DELINQUENT CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2152.02.
      (2)   UNRULY CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.022.
   (b)   No person, including a parent, guardian, or other custodian of a
child, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage, or contribute to a child or a
ward of the juvenile court becoming an unruly child or a delinquent child;
      (2)   Act in a way tending to cause a child or a ward of the juvenile
court to become an unruly child or a delinquent child;
      (3)   Act in a way that contributes to an adjudication of the child as a
delinquent child based on the child’s violation of a court order adjudicating
the child an unruly child for being an habitual truant;
      (4)   If the person is the parent, guardian, or custodian of a child who
has the duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950 to register, register a new
residence address, and periodically verify a residence address, and, if
applicable, to send a notice of intent to reside, and if the child is not
emancipated, as defined in R.C. § 2919.121, fail to ensure that the child
complies with those duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of contributing to the
unruliness or delinquency of a child, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each
day of violation of this section is a separate offense.
(R.C. § 2919.24)
§ 636.15 THREATENING OR HARASSING TELECOMMUNICATIONS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a
telecommunication, or knowingly permit a telecommunication to be made from a
telecommunications device under the person’s control, to another, if the caller
does any of the following:
      (1)   Makes the telecommunication with purpose to harass, intimidate, or
abuse any person at the premises to which the telecommunication is made,
whether or not actual communication takes place between the caller and a
recipient;
      (2)   Describes, suggests, requests or proposes that the caller, the
recipient of the telecommunication, or any other person engage in sexual
activity, and the recipient or another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made has requested, in a previous telecommunication or in
the immediate telecommunication, that the caller not make a telecommunication
to the recipient or to the premises to which the telecommunication is made;
      (3)   During the telecommunication, violates R.C. § 2903.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (4)   Knowingly states to the recipient of the telecommunication that the
caller intends to cause damage to or destroy public or private property, and
the recipient, any member of the recipient’s family or any other person who
resides at the premises to which the telecommunication is made owns, leases,
resides or works in, will at the time of the destruction or damaging be near or
in, has the responsibility of protecting, or insures the property that will be
destroyed or damaged;
      (5)   Knowingly makes the telecommunication to the recipient of the
telecommunication, to another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made, or to those premises, and the recipient or another
person at those premises previously has told the caller not to make a
telecommunication to those premises or to any persons at those premises;
      (6)   Knowingly makes any comment, request, suggestion, or proposal to
the recipient of the telecommunication that is threatening, intimidating,
menacing, coercive, or obscene with the intent to abuse, threaten, or harass
the recipient;
      (7)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly interrupts the
telecommunication service of any person;
      (8)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly transmits to any
person, regardless of whether the telecommunication is heard in its entirety,
any file, document, or other communication that prevents that person from using
the person’s telephone service or electronic communication device;
      (9)   Knowingly makes any false statement concerning the death, injury,
illness, disfigurement, reputation, indecent conduct, or criminal conduct of
the recipient of the telecommunication or family or household member of the
recipient with purpose to abuse, threaten, intimidate, or harass the recipient;
      (10)   Knowingly incites another person through a telecommunication or
other means to harass or participate in the harassment of a person;
      (11)   Knowingly alarms the recipient by making a telecommunication
without a lawful purpose at an hour or hours known to be inconvenient to the
recipient and in an offensive or repetitive manner.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall make or cause to be made a telecommunication or
permit a telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under
the person’s control, with purpose to abuse, threaten or harass another person.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly post a text or audio statement or an
image on an internet web site or web page for the purpose of abusing,
threatening, or harassing another person.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of telecommunications
harassment.
      (2)   A violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(5), (a)(6), (a)
(7), (a)(8), (a)(9), (a)(10), or (a)(11) or (b) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a felony on each
subsequent offense, which shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(3), a violation
of division (a)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree on a
first offense and a felony on each subsequent offense, to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If a violation of division (a)(4) of this section
results in economic harm of $1,000 or more, telecommunications harassment is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (d)   No cause of action may be asserted in any court of this municipality
against any provider of a telecommunications service, interactive computer
service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, or against any
officer, employee or agent of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, for any
injury, death or loss to person or property that allegedly arises out of the
provider’s, officer’s, employee’s or agent’s provision of information,
facilities or assistance in accordance with the terms of a court order that is
issued in relation to the investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation
of this section. A provider of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, or an
officer, employee or agent of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, is
immune from any civil or criminal liability for injury, death or loss to person
or property that allegedly arises out of the provider’s, officer’s, employee’s
or agent’s provision of information, facilities or assistance in accordance
with the terms of a court order that is issued in relation to the investigation
or prosecution of an alleged violation of this section.
   (e)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person solely because the
person provided access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control, including
having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing access or
connection to or from the electronic method of remotely transferring the
information, and that do not include the creation of the content of the
material that is the subject of the access or connection. In addition, any
person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control shall not be
liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the receipt or
transmission through its service of any information that the person believes
is, or will be sent, in violation of this section.
      (2)   Division (e)(1) of this section does not create an affirmative duty
for any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method
of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control to block
the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that it
believes is, or will be sent, in violation of this section except as otherwise
provided by law.
      (3)   Division (e)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of this section or who knowingly
advertises the availability of material of that nature.
      (4)   A provider or user of an interactive computer service, as defined
in 47 U.S.C. § 230, shall neither be treated as the publisher or speaker of any
information provided by another information content provider, as defined in 47
U.S.C. § 230, nor held civilly or criminally liable for the creation or
development of information provided by another information content provider, as
defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230. Nothing in this division shall be construed to
protect a person from liability to the extent that the person developed or
created any content in violation of this section.
   (f)   Divisions (a)(5) to (a)(11) and (b)(2) of this section do not apply to
a person who, while employed or contracted by a newspaper, magazine, press
association, news agency, news wire service, cable channel or cable operator,
or radio or television station, is gathering, processing, transmitting,
compiling, editing, or disseminating information for the general public within
the scope of the person’s employment in that capacity or the person’s
contractual authority in that capacity.
   (g)   For the purpose of divisions (a) through (d) of this section, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CABLE OPERATOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
      (2)   CALLER. The person described in division (a) of this section who
makes or causes to be made a telecommunication or who permits a
telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under that
person’s control.
      (3)   ECONOMIC HARM. All direct, incidental and consequential pecuniary
harm suffered by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct. The term
includes but is not limited to all of the following:
         A.   All wages, salaries or other compensation lost as a result of the
criminal conduct;
         B.   The cost of all wages, salaries or other compensation paid to
employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of
the criminal conduct;
         C.   The overhead costs incurred from the time that a business is shut
down as a result of the criminal conduct;
         D.   The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was
damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.
      (4)   FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Means any of the following:
         A.   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in division
(a)(9) of this section is committed:
            1.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a former spouse of
the recipient;
            2.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the recipient, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the recipient;
            3.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse, or
former spouse of the recipient, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
recipient.
         B.   The natural parent of any child of whom the recipient of the
telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in division (a)(9) of this
section is committed is the other natural parent or is the putative other
natural parent.
      (5)   PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. Means a person who is living or has
lived with the recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act
prohibited in division (a)(9) of this section is committed in a common law
marital relationship, who otherwise is cohabiting with the recipient, or who
otherwise has cohabited with the recipient within five years prior to the date
of the alleged commission of the act in question.
      (6)   SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
      (7)   TELECOMMUNICATION and TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   (h)   Nothing in this section prohibits a person from making a
telecommunication to a debtor that is in compliance with the “Fair Debt
Collection Practices Act”, 15 U.S.C. § 1692, as amended, or the “Telephone
Consumer Protection Act”, 47 U.S.C. § 227, as amended.
(R.C. § 2917.21)
§ 636.16 PLACING HARMFUL SUBSTANCE OR OBJECTS IN FOOD OR CONFECTION.
   (a)   No person shall do either of the following, knowing or having
reasonable cause to believe that any person may suffer physical harm or be
seriously inconvenienced or annoyed thereby:
      (1)   Place a pin, razor blade, glass, laxative, drug of abuse or other
harmful or hazardous object or substance in any food or confection.
      (2)   Furnish to any person any food or confection which has been
adulterated in violation of division (a)(1) of this section.
(R.C. § 3716.11)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 3716.99(C))
§ 636.17 DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.
   (a)   Prohibited conduct.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm
to a family or household member.
      (2)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to a family
or household member.
      (3)   No person, by threat of force, shall knowingly cause a family or
household member to believe that the offender will cause imminent physical harm
to the family or household member.
      (4)   A.   Whoever violates this section is guilty of domestic violence,
and the court shall sentence the offender as provided in divisions (a)(4)B. to
(a)(4)E. of this section.
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(4)C., (a)(4)D. or
(a)(4)E. of this section, a violation of division (a)(3) is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree and a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
         C.   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(4)D. of this
section, if the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of
domestic violence, a violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or
law of this or any other state or the United States that is substantially
equivalent to domestic violence, a violation of R.C. §§ 2903.14, 2909.06,
2909.07, 2911.12, 2911.211 or 2919.22 if the victim of the violation was a
family or household member at the time of the violation, a violation of an
existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the
United States that is substantially equivalent to any of those sections if the
victim of the violation was a family or household member at the time of the
commission of the violation, or any offense of violence if the victim of the
offense was a family or household member at the time of the commission of the
offense, a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law, and a violation of division (a)(3) is a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
         D.   If the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been
convicted of two or more offenses of domestic violence or two or more
violations or offenses of the type described in division (a)(4)C. of this
section involving a person who was a family or household member at the time of
the violations or offenses, a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation
of division (a)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two or more
offenses of domestic violence or two or more violations or offenses of the type
described in division (a)(4)C. of this section involving a person who was a
family or household member at the time of the violations or offenses, and the
offender knew that the victim of the violation was pregnant at the time of the
violation, a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         E.   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(4)C. or (a)(4)D. of
this section, if the offender knew that the victim of the violation was
pregnant at the time of the violation, a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2)
of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a
violation of division (a)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
      (5)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no court or
unit of state or local government shall charge any fee, cost, deposit or money
in connection with the filing of charges against a person alleging that the
person violated this section or a municipal ordinance substantially equivalent
to this section or in connection with the prosecution of any charges so filed.
      (6)   As used in this section:
         A.   FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Any of the following:
            1.   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
offender:
               a.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse as defined below, or
a former spouse of the offender;
               b.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the offender, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the offender;
               c.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse,
or former spouse of the offender, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
offender.
            2.   The natural parent of any child of whom the offender is the
other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.
         B.   PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. A person who is living or has lived
with the offender in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise is
cohabiting with the offender, or who otherwise has cohabited with the offender
within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in
question.
(R.C. § 2919.25)
   (b)   Temporary protection order. Consult R.C. § 2919.26 for current
provisions regarding protection orders.
   (c)   Violating a protection order, consent agreement, anti-stalking
protection order or order issued by a court of another state. See §
636.06(c) for current provisions.
§ 636.18 SAFETY OF CROWDS ATTENDING LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCES.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CONCERT. A musical performance of which the primary component is a
presentation by persons singing or playing musical instruments, that is
intended by its sponsors mainly, but not necessarily exclusively, for the
listening enjoyment of the audience, and that is held in a facility. A CONCERT
does not include any performance in which music is a part of the presentation
and the primary component of which is acting, dancing, a motion picture, a
demonstration of skills or talent other than singing or playing an instrument,
an athletic event, an exhibition or a speech.
      (2)   FACILITY. Any structure that has a roof or partial roof and that
has walls that wholly surround the area on all sides, including but not limited
to a stadium, hall, arena, armory, auditorium, ballroom, exhibition hall,
convention center or music hall.
      (3)   LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCE. Any live speech; any live musical
performance, including a concert; any live dramatic performance; any live
variety show; and any other live performance with respect to which the primary
intent of the audience can be construed to be viewing the performers. A LIVE
ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCE does not include any form of entertainment with
respect to which the person purchasing a ticket routinely participates in
amusements as well as views performers.
      (4)   PERSON. Includes, in addition to an individual or entity specified
in R.C. § 1.59(C), any governmental entity.
      (5)   RESTRICTED ENTERTAINMENT AREA. Any wholly or partially enclosed
area, whether indoors or outdoors, that has limited access through established
entrances or established turnstiles or similar devices.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall sell, offer to sell, or offer in return for a
donation, any ticket that is not numbered and that does not correspond to a
specific seat for admission to either of the following:
         A.   A live entertainment performance that is not exempted under
division (d) of this section, that is held in a restricted entertainment area,
and for which more than 8,000 tickets are offered to the public;
         B.   A concert that is not exempted under division (d) of this section
and for which more than 3,000 tickets are offered to the public.
      (2)   No person shall advertise any live entertainment performance as
described in division (b)(1)A. of this section or any concert as described in
division (b)(1)B. of this section, unless the advertisement contains the words
“Reserved Seats Only.”
   (c)   Unless exempted by division (d)(1) of this section, no person who owns
or operates any restricted entertainment area shall fail to open, maintain and
properly staff at least the number of entrances designated under division (e)
of this section for a minimum of 90 minutes prior to the scheduled start of any
live entertainment performance that is held in the restricted entertainment
area and for which more than 3,000 tickets are sold, offered for sale or
offered in return for a donation.
   (d)   (1)   A live entertainment performance, other than a concert, is
exempted from the provisions of divisions (b) and (c) of this section if both
of the following apply:
         A.   The restricted entertainment area in which the performance is
held has at least eight entrances or, if both entrances and separate admission
turnstiles or similar devices are used, has at least eight turnstiles or
similar devices.
         B.   The eight entrances or, if applicable, the eight turnstiles or
similar devices, are opened, maintained and properly staffed at least one hour
prior to the scheduled start of the performance.
      (2)   A.   1.   The officer responsible for public safety in the
municipality may, upon application of the sponsor of a concert covered by
division (b) of this section, exempt the concert from the provisions of that
division if the officer finds that the health, safety and welfare of the
participants and spectators would not be substantially affected by failure to
comply with the provisions of that division. In determining whether to grant an
exemption, the officer shall consider the following factors:
               a.   The size and design of the facility in which the concert is
scheduled;
               b.   The size, age and anticipated conduct of the crowd expected
to attend the concert;
               c.   The ability of the sponsor to manage and control the
expected crowd.
            2.   If the sponsor of any concert desires to obtain an exemption
under this division, the sponsor shall apply to the appropriate official on a
form prescribed by that official. The official shall issue an order that grants
or denies the exemption within five days after receipt of the application. The
sponsor may appeal any order that denies an exemption to the Court of Common
Pleas of the county in which the facility is located.
         B.   If an official grants an exemption under division (d)(2)A. of
this section, the official shall designate an on-duty law enforcement officer
to be present at the concert. The designated officer has authority to issue
orders to all security personnel at the concert to protect the health, safety
and welfare of the participants and spectators.
      (3)   Notwithstanding division (d)(2) of this section, in the case of a
concert held in a facility located on the campus of an educational institution
covered by R.C. § 3345.04, a state university law enforcement officer appointed
pursuant to R.C. §§ 3345.04 and 3345.21 shall do both of the following:
         A.   Exercise the authority to grant exemptions provided by division
(d)(2)A. of this section in lieu of an official designated in that division;
         B.   If the officer grants an exemption under division (d)(3)A. of
this section, designate an on-duty state university law enforcement officer to
be present at the concert. The designated officer has authority to issue orders
to all security personnel at the concert to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the participants and spectators.
   (e)   (1)   Unless a live entertainment performance is exempted by division
(d)(1) of this section, the officer responsible for public safety within the
municipality shall designate, for purposes of division (c) of this section, the
minimum number of entrances required to be opened, maintained and staffed at
each live entertainment performance so as to permit crowd control and reduce
congestion at the entrances. The designation shall be based on such factors as
the size and nature of the crowd expected to attend the live entertainment
performance, the length of time prior to the live entertainment performance
that crowds are expected to congregate at the entrances and the amount of
security provided at the restricted entertainment area.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (e)(1) of this section, a state university
law enforcement officer appointed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3345.04 and 3345.21 shall
designate the number of entrances required to be opened, maintained and staffed
in the case of a live entertainment performance that is held at a restricted
entertainment area located on the campus of an educational institution covered
by R.C. § 3345.04.
   (f)   No person shall enter into any contract for a live entertainment
performance that does not permit or require compliance with this section.
   (g)   (1)   This section does not apply to a live entertainment performance
held in a restricted entertainment area if one admission ticket entitles the
holder to view or participate in three or more different games, rides,
activities or live entertainment performances occurring simultaneously at
different sites within the restricted entertainment area and if the initial
admittance entrance to the restricted entertainment area, for which the ticket
is required, is separate from the entrance to any specific live entertainment
performance and an additional ticket is not required for admission to the
particular live entertainment performance.
      (2)   This section does not apply to a symphony orchestra performance, a
ballet performance, horse races, dances or fairs.
   (h)   This section does not prohibit the Council from imposing additional
requirements, not in conflict with the section, for the promotion or holding of
live entertainment performances.
   (i)   Whoever violates division (b), (c) or (f) of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If any individual suffers physical harm to
his or her person as a result of a violation of this section, the sentencing
court shall consider this factor in favor of imposing a term of imprisonment
upon the offender.
(R.C. § 2917.40)
§ 636.19 HAZING.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   HAZING. Means doing any act or coercing another, including the
victim, to do any act of initiation into any student or other organization or
any act to continue or reinstate membership in or affiliation with any student
or other organization that causes or creates a substantial risk of causing
mental or physical harm to any person, including coercing another to consume
alcohol or a drug of abuse, as defined in R.C. § 3719.011.
      (2)   ORGANIZATION. Includes a national or international organization
with which a fraternity or sorority is affiliated.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall recklessly participate in the hazing of another.
      (2)   No administrator, employee, faculty member, teacher, consultant,
alumnus, or volunteer of any organization, including any primary, secondary, or
post-secondary school or any other educational institution, public or private,
shall recklessly permit the hazing of any person associated with the
organization.
   (c)   (1)   No person shall recklessly participate in the hazing of another
when the hazing includes coerced consumption of alcohol or drugs of abuse
resulting in serious physical harm to the other person.
      (2)   No administrator, employee, faculty member, teacher, consultant,
alumnus, or volunteer of any organization, including any primary, secondary, or
post-secondary school or any other educational institution, public or private,
shall recklessly permit the hazing of any person associated with the
organization when the hazing includes coerced consumption of alcohol or drugs
of abuse resulting in serious physical harm to that person.
   (d)   Whoever violates divisions (b) or (c) of this section is guilty of
hazing. A violation of division (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the second degree. A violation of division (c)(1) or (c)(2) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.31)
   (e)   Reckless failure to immediately report knowledge of hazing.
      (1)   No administrator, employee, faculty member, teacher, consultant,
alumnus, or volunteer of any organization, including any primary, secondary, or
post-secondary school or any other public or private educational institution,
who is acting in an official and professional capacity shall recklessly fail to
immediately report the knowledge of hazing to a law enforcement agency in the
county in which the victim of hazing resides or in which the hazing is
occurring or has occurred.
      (2)   A violation of division (e)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree, except that the violation is a misdemeanor of the first
degree if the hazing causes serious physical harm.
(R.C. § 2903.311(B), (C))
Statutory reference:
   Civil liability for hazing, see R.C. § 2307.44
§ 636.20 ILLEGAL DISTRIBUTION OF CIGARETTES, OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS OR
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS; TRANSACTION SCANS.
   (a)   Illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products.
      (1)   As used in this section:
         A.   AGE VERIFICATION. A service provided by an independent third
party (other than a manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or
retailer of cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products,
or papers used to roll cigarettes) that compares information available from a
commercially available database, or aggregate of databases, that regularly are
used by government and businesses for the purpose of age and identity
verification to personal information provided during an internet sale or other
remote method of sale to establish that the purchaser is 21 years of age or
older.
         B.   ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT.
            1.   Subject to division 2. of this definition, an electronic
smoking device, vapor product, or any other product or device that consists of
or contains nicotine that can be ingested into the body by any means,
including, but not limited to, chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, or
inhaling.
            2.   The phrase does not include any of the following:
               a.   Any cigarette or other tobacco product;
               b.   Any product that is a DRUG as that term is defined in 21
U.S.C. § 321(g)(1);
               c.   Any product that is a DEVICE as that term is defined in 21
U.S.C. § 321(h);
               d.   Any product that is a COMBINATION PRODUCT as described in
21 U.S.C. § 353(g).
         C.   CIGARETTE. Includes clove cigarettes and hand-rolled cigarettes.
         D.   DISTRIBUTE. To furnish, give, or provide cigarettes, other
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes to the ultimate consumer of the cigarettes, other tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes.
         E.   ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE. Any device that can be used to deliver
aerosolized or vaporized nicotine or any other substance to the person inhaling
from the device including an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic
hookah, vaping pen, or electronic pipe. The phrase includes any component,
part, or accessory of such a device, whether or not sold separately, and
includes any substance intended to be aerosolized or vaporized during the use
of the device. The phrase does not include any product that is a drug, device,
or combination product, as those terms are defined or described in 21 U.S.C. §§
321 and 353(g).
         F.   PROOF OF AGE. A driver’s license, a commercial driver’s license,
a military identification card, a passport, or an identification card issued
under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows that a person is 21 years of age or
older.
         G.   TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any product that is made or derived from tobacco
or that contains any form of nicotine, if it is intended for human consumption
or is likely to be consumed, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed,
dissolved, inhaled, or ingested by any other means, including, but not limited
to, a cigarette, an electronic smoking device, a cigar, pipe tobacco, chewing
tobacco, snuff, or snus. The phrase also means any component or accessory used
in the consumption of a tobacco product, such as filters, rolling papers,
pipes, blunt or hemp wraps, and liquids used in electronic smoking devices,
whether or not they contain nicotine. The phrase does not include any product
that is a drug, device, or combination product, as those terms are defined or
described in 21 U.S.C. §§ 321 and 353(g).
         H.   VAPOR PRODUCT. A product, other than a cigarette or other tobacco
product as defined in R.C. Chapter 5743, that contains or is made or derived
from nicotine and that is intended and marketed for human consumption,
including by smoking, inhaling, snorting, or sniffing. The phrase includes any
component, part, or additive that is intended for use in an electronic smoking
device, a mechanical heating element, battery, or electronic circuit and is
used to deliver the product. The phrase does not include any product that is a
drug, device, or combination product, as those terms are defined or described
in 21 U.S.C. §§ 321 and 353(g). The phrase includes any product containing
nicotine, regardless of concentration.
         I.   VENDING MACHINE. Has the same meaning as COIN MACHINE in R.C. §
2913.01.
      (2)   No manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of
cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers
used to roll cigarettes, no agent, employee, or representative of a
manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of cigarettes,
other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes, and no other person shall do any of the following:
         A.   Give, sell, or otherwise distribute cigarettes, other tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes:
            1.   To any person under 21 years of age; or
            2.   Without first verifying proof of age.
         B.   Give away, sell, or distribute cigarettes, other tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes in
any place that does not have posted in a conspicuous place a legibly printed
sign in letters at least one-half inch high stating that giving, selling, or
otherwise distributing cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or papers used to roll cigarettes to a person under 21 years of age
is prohibited by law;
         C.   Knowingly furnish any false information regarding the name, age,
or other identification of any person under 21 years of age with purpose to
obtain cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or
papers used to roll cigarettes for that person;
         D.   Manufacture, sell, or distribute in this state any pack or other
container of cigarettes containing fewer than 20 cigarettes or any package of
roll-your-own tobacco containing less than six-tenths of one ounce of tobacco;
         E.   Sell cigarettes or alternative nicotine products in a smaller
quantity than that placed in the pack or other container by the manufacturer;
         F.   Give, sell, or otherwise distribute alternative nicotine
products, papers used to roll cigarettes, or tobacco products other than
cigarettes over the internet or through another remote method without age
verification;
         G.   Allow an employee under 18 years of age to sell any tobacco
product;
         H.   Give away or otherwise distribute free samples of cigarettes,
other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or coupons redeemable
for cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alterative tobacco products.
      (3)   No person shall sell or offer to sell cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products by or from a vending machine, except
in the following locations:
         A.   An area within a factory, business, office, or other place not
open to the general public;
         B.   An area to which persons under 21 years of age are not generally
permitted access;
         C.   Any other place not identified in division (a)(3)A. or (a)(3)B.
of this section, upon all of the following conditions:
            1.   The vending machine is located within the immediate vicinity,
plain view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place, or an
employee of that person, so that all cigarettes, other tobacco product, and
alternative nicotine product purchases from the vending machine will be readily
observed by the person who owns or operates the place or an employee of that
person. For the purpose of this section, a vending machine located in any
unmonitored area, including an unmonitored coatroom, restroom, hallway, or
outer waiting area, shall not be considered located within the immediate
vicinity, plain view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place,
or an employee of that person.
            2.   The vending machine is inaccessible to the public when the
place is closed.
            3.   A clearly visible notice is posted in the area where the
vending machine is located that states the following in letters that are
legibly printed and at least one-half inch high: “It is illegal for any person
under the age of 21 to purchase tobacco or alternative nicotine products.”
      (4)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under division
(a)(2)A. of this section:
         A.   The person under 21 years of age was accompanied by a parent,
spouse who is 21 years of age or older, or legal guardian of the person under
21 years of age.
         B.   The person who gave, sold, or distributed cigarettes, other
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes to a person under 21 years of age under division (a)(2)A. of this
section is a parent, spouse who is 21 years of age or older, or legal guardian
of the person under 21 years of age.
      (5)   A.   It is not a violation of division (a)(2)A. or (a)(2)B. of this
section for a person to give or otherwise distribute to a person under 21 years
of age cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or
papers used to roll cigarettes while the person under 21 years of age is
participating in a research protocol if all of the following apply:
            1.   The parent, guardian, or legal custodian of the person under
21 years of age has consented in writing to the person under 21 years of age
participating in the research protocol.
            2.   An institutional human subjects protection review board, or an
equivalent entity, has approved the research protocol.
            3.   The person under 21 years of age is participating in the
research protocol at the facility or location specified in the research
protocol.
         B.   It is not a violation of division (a)(2)A. or (a)(2)B. of this
section for an employer to permit an employee 18, 19, or 20 years of age to
sell a tobacco product.
      (6)   A.   No delivery service shall accept from, transport or deliver
to, or allow pick-up by, a person under 21 years of age with respect to any of
the following:
            1.   Alternative nicotine products;
            2.   Papers used to roll cigarettes;
            3.   Tobacco products other than cigarettes.
         B.   A delivery service shall require proof of age as a condition of
accepting, transporting, delivering, or allowing pickup of the items described
in divisions (a)(6)A.1. to 3. of this section.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (a)(2)A., (a)(2)B., (a)(2)D., (a)(2)E.,
(a)(2)F., (a)(2)G., (a)(2)H., (a)(3) or (a)(6) of this section is guilty of
illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative
nicotine products. Except as otherwise provided in this division, illegal
distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to illegal distribution of cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of
the third degree.
      (8)   A.   Notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2), if an offender is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (a)(2)A. of this
section, the court shall impose a fine in the following amount:
            1.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (a)(8)A.2., (a)
(8)A.3., (a)(8)A.4., and (a)(8)A.5. of this section, not more than $250;
            2.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (a)(8)A.3., (a)
(8)A.4., and (a)(8)A.5. of this section, if an offender has previously been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (a)(2)A. of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, not
more than $500;
            3.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (a)(8)A.4. and (a)
(8)A.5. of this section, if an offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (a)(2)A. of this section
or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, $500;
            4.   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(8)A.5. of this
section, if an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
three or more violations of division (a)(2)A. of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, $1,000;
            5.   If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to four or more violations of division (a)(2)A. of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, $1,500.
         B.   The financial sanctions required by division (a)(8)A. of this
section are in lieu of the financial sanctions described in R.C. § 2929.28(A)
(2), but are in addition to any other sanctions or penalties that may apply to
the offender, including other financial sanctions under that section or a jail
term under R.C. § 2929.24.
      (9)   Whoever violates division (a)(2)C. of this section is guilty of
permitting a person under 21 years of age to use cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, permitting a person under 21 years of age to use cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of division (a)(2)C. of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, permitting a person under 21 years of age to use
cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (10)   Any cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or papers used to roll cigarettes that are given, sold, or otherwise
distributed to a person under 21 years of age in violation of this section and
that are used, possessed, purchased, or received by a person under 21 years of
age in violation of R.C. § 2151.87 are subject to seizure and forfeiture as
contraband under R.C. Chapter 2981.
(R.C. § 2927.02)
   (b)   Transaction scan.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division and division (c) of this section,
the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
         A.   CARD HOLDER. Any person who presents a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card to a seller, or an agent or employee
of a seller, to purchase or receive cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products from a seller, agent or employee.
         B.   IDENTIFICATION CARD. An identification card issued under R.C. §§
4507.50 to 4507.52.
         C.   SELLER. A seller of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products and includes any person whose gift of or other
distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products is subject to the prohibitions of division (a) of this section.
         D.   TRANSACTION SCAN. The process by which a seller or an agent or
employee of a seller checks, by means of a transaction scan device, the
validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card
that is presented as a condition for purchasing or receiving cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products.
         E.   TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE. Any commercial device or combination of
devices used at a point of sale that is capable of deciphering in an
electronically readable format the information encoded on the magnetic strip or
bar code of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification
card.
      (2)   A.   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may perform a
transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check the validity of
a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a
card holder as a condition for selling, giving away or otherwise distributing
to the card holder cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products.
         B.   If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed
under division (b)(2)A. of this section fails to match the information printed
on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by the card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the information
so printed is false or fraudulent, neither the seller nor any agent or employee
of the seller shall sell, give away or otherwise distribute any cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products to the card holder.
         C.   Division (b)(2)A. of this section does not preclude a seller or
an agent or employee of a seller from using a transaction scan device to check
the validity of a document other than a driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or identification card, if the document includes a bar code or magnetic strip
that may be scanned by the device, as a condition for selling, giving away or
otherwise distributing cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative
nicotine products to the person presenting the document.
      (3)   Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. §
4301.61(C) apply to the use of transaction scan devices for purposes of this
division (b) and division (c) of this section.
      (4)   A.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information derived from
a transaction scan, except for the following:
            1.   The name and date of birth of the person listed on the
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the
card holder;
            2.   The expiration date and identification number of the driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the card
holder.
         B.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use the
information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is permitted to be
recorded and maintained under division (b)(4)A. of this section, except for
purposes of division (c) of this section.
         C.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use a
transaction scan device for a purpose other than the purpose specified in
division (c)(2)A. of this section.
         D.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall sell or
otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan to any
third party, including but not limited to selling or otherwise disseminating
that information for any marketing, advertising or promotional activities, but
a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant
to a court order or as specifically authorized by division (c) of this section
or another section of these Codified Ordinances or the Ohio Revised Code.
      (5)   Nothing in this division (b) or division (c) of this section
relieves a seller or an agent or employee of a seller of any responsibility to
comply with any other applicable local, state or federal laws or rules
governing the sale, giving away or other distribution of cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (b)(2)B. or (b)(4) of this section is
guilty of engaging in an illegal tobacco product or alternative nicotine
product transaction scan, and the court may impose upon the offender a civil
penalty of up to $1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of the Court shall pay
each collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for deposit into the
County Treasury.
(R.C. § 2927.021)
   (c)   Affirmative defenses.
      (1)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be found
guilty of a charge of a violation of division (a) of this section in which the
age of the purchaser or other recipient of cigarettes, other tobacco products,
or alternative nicotine products is an element of the alleged violation, if the
seller, agent or employee raises and proves as an affirmative defense that all
of the following occurred:
         A.   A card holder attempting to purchase or receive cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products presented a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or an identification card.
         B.   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or identification card that the card holder presented indicated that the
license or card was valid.
         C.   The cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products were sold, given away or otherwise distributed to the card holder in
reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and the completed
transaction scan.
      (2)   In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee of a seller
has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (c)(1) of this section,
the trier of fact in the action for the alleged violation of division (a) of
this section shall consider any written policy that the seller has adopted and
implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of division (a) of this
section. For purposes of division (c)(1)C. of this section, the trier of fact
shall consider that reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and
the completed transaction scan may require a seller or an agent or employee of
a seller to exercise reasonable diligence to determine, and that the use of a
transaction scan device does not excuse a seller or an agent or employee of a
seller from exercising reasonable diligence to determine, the following:
         A.   Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or employee of a
seller sells, gives away or otherwise distributes cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products is 21 years of age or older;
         B.   Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a card holder
is that of the card holder.
      (3)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by
division (c)(1) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a
Deputy Registrar who issued an identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to
4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of that
issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with the
Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.
(R.C. § 2927.022)
   (d)   Shipment of tobacco products.
      (1)   As used in this division (d):
         A.   AUTHORIZED RECIPIENT OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS.
            1.   In the case of cigarettes, a person who is:
               a.   Licensed as a cigarette wholesale dealer under R.C. §
5743.15;
               b.   Licensed as a retail dealer as long as the person purchases
cigarettes with the appropriate tax stamp affixed;
               c.   An export warehouse proprietor as defined in Internal
Revenue Code § 5702;
               d.   An operator of a customs bonded warehouse under 19 U.S.C. §
1311 or 19 U.S.C. § 1555;
               e.   An officer, employee, or agent of the federal government or
of this state acting in the person’s official capacity;
               f.   A department, agency, instrumentality, or political
subdivision of the federal government or of this state;
               g.   A person having a consent for consumer shipment issued by
the Ohio Tax Commissioner under R.C. § 5743.71.
            2.   In the case of electronic smoking devices or vapor products, a
person who is:
               a.   Licensed as a distributor of tobacco or vapor products
under R.C. § 5743.61;
               b.   A retail dealer of vapor products, as defined in R.C. §
5741.01(C)(3), that is not licensed as a vapor distributor, as long as the tax
levied by R.C. § 5743.51, 5743.62, or 5743.63, as applicable, has been paid;
               c.   An operator of a customs bonded warehouse under 19 U.S.C. §
1311 or 19 U.S.C. § 1555;
               d.   An officer, employee, or agent of the federal government or
of this state acting in the person’s official capacity;
               e.   A department, agency, instrumentality, or political
subdivision of the federal government or of this state.
         B.   MOTOR CARRIER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4923.01.
      (2)   The purpose of this section is to prevent the sale of cigarettes,
electronic smoking devices, and vapor products to minors and to ensure
compliance with the Master Settlement Agreement, as defined in R.C. § 1346.01.
      (3)   A.   No person shall cause to be shipped any cigarettes, electronic
smoking devices, and vapor products to any person in this municipality other
than an authorized recipient of tobacco products.
         B.   No motor carrier, or other person shall knowingly transport
cigarettes, electronic smoking devices, and vapor products to any person in
this municipality that the carrier or other person reasonably believes is not
an authorized recipient of tobacco products. If cigarettes, electronic smoking
devices, and vapor products are transported to a home or residence, it shall be
presumed that the motor carrier, or other person knew that the person to whom
the cigarettes, electronic smoking devices, and vapor products were delivered
was not an authorized recipient of tobacco products.
      (4)   No person engaged in the business of selling cigarettes, electronic
smoking devices, and vapor products who ships or causes to be shipped
cigarettes, electronic smoking devices, and vapor products to any person in
this municipality in any container or wrapping other than the original
container or wrapping shall fail to plainly and visibly mark the exterior of
the container or wrapping in which the cigarettes, electronic smoking devices,
and vapor products are shipped with the words “cigarettes”, “electronic smoking
devices”, or “vapor products”, as applicable.
      (5)   A court shall impose a fine of up to $1,000 for each violation of
division (d)(3)A., (d)(3)B. or (d)(4) of this section.
(R.C. § 2927.023)
   (e)   Furnishing false information to obtain tobacco products.
      (1)   No person who is 18 years of age or older but younger than 21 years
of age shall knowingly furnish false information concerning that person’s name,
age, or other identification for the purpose of obtaining tobacco products.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (e)(1) of this section is guilty of
furnishing false information to obtain tobacco products. Except as otherwise
provided in this division, furnishing false information to obtain tobacco
products is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (e)(1) of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
furnishing false information to obtain tobacco products is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
(R.C. § 2927.024)
§ 636.21 ETHNIC INTIMIDATION.
   (a)   No person shall violate R.C. §§ 2903.21, 2903.22, 2909.06 or 2909.07,
or 2917.21(A)(3), (A)(4) or (A)(5), or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance to any of these sections, by reason of the race, color, religion or
national origin of another person or group of persons.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of ethnic intimidation. Ethnic
intimidation is an offense of the next higher degree than the offense the
commission of which is a necessary element of ethnic intimidation. In the case
of an offense that is a misdemeanor of the first degree, ethnic intimidation is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2927.12)
§ 636.22 INTIMIDATION IN CONNECTION WITH HOUSING.
   (a)   No person, whether or not acting under color of law, shall by force or
threat of force willfully injure, intimidate or interfere with, or attempt to
injure, intimidate or interfere with any of the following:
      (1)   Any person because of race, color, religion, sex, familial status,
as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, national origin, military status as defined in
that section, disability as defined in that section, or ancestry and because
that person is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying,
contracting or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or
occupation of any housing accommodations, or applying for or participating in
any service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or
renting housing accommodations.
      (2)   Any person because that person is or has been doing, or in order to
intimidate that person or any other person or any class of persons from doing
either of the following:
         A.   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, familial status, as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, national origin,
military status as defined in that section, disability as defined in that
section, or ancestry, in any of the activities, services, organizations, or
facilities described in division (a)(1) of this section;
         B.   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate.
      (3)   Any person because that person is or has been, or in order to
discourage that person or any other person from, lawfully aiding or encouraging
other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, familial status as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, national origin,
military status as defined in that section, disability as defined in that
section, or ancestry, in any of the activities, services, organizations or
facilities described in division (a)(1) of this section, or participating
lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity
to so participate.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2927.03)
§ 636.23 FAILING TO PROVIDE FOR A PERSON WITH A FUNCTIONAL IMPAIRMENT.
   (a)   No caretaker shall knowingly fail to provide a person with a
functional impairment under the caretaker’s care with any treatment, care,
goods, or service that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of the
person with a functional impairment when this failure results in physical harm
or serious physical harm to the person with a functional impairment.
   (b)   No caretaker shall recklessly fail to provide a person with a
functional impairment under the caretaker’s care with any treatment, care,
goods, or service that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of the
person with a functional impairment when this failure results in serious
physical harm to the person with a functional impairment.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
knowingly failing to provide for a person with a functional impairment, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the person with a functional impairment
under the offender’s care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the
violation of this section, a violation of division (a) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
recklessly failing to provide for a person with a functional impairment, a
misdemeanor of the second degree. If the person with a functional impairment
under the offender’s care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the
violation of this section, a violation of division (b) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.16)
   (d)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CARETAKER. A person who assumes the duty to provide for the care
and protection of a person with a functional impairment on a voluntary basis,
by contract, through receipt of payment for care and protection, as a result of
a family relationship, or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. The
term does not include a person who owns, operates, or administers, or who is an
agent or employee of, a care facility, as defined in R.C. § 2903.33.
      (2)   PERSON WITH A FUNCTIONAL IMPAIRMENT. Any person who has a physical
or mental impairment that prevents the person from providing for the person’s
own care or protection or whose infirmities caused by aging prevent the person
from providing for the person’s own care or protection.
(R.C. § 2903.10)
§ 636.24 ILLEGAL USE OF A TRACKING DEVICE OR APPLICATION.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   BUSINESS ENTITY. Any form of corporation, partnership, association,
cooperative, joint venture, business trust, or sole proprietorship that
conducts business in this state.
      (2)   BUSINESS OF PRIVATE INVESTIGATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 4749.01.
      (3)   DISABLED ADULT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (4)   ELDERLY PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (5)   ELECTRONIC MONITORING. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      (6)   ELECTRONIC MONITORING DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2929.01.
      (7)   LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Any organization or unit comprised of law
enforcement officers, and also includes any federal or military law enforcement
agency.
      (8)   OHIO PROTECTION ORDER. Means a protection order filed or issued or
a consent agreement approved pursuant to R.C. § 2919.26 or 3113.31, a
protection order filed or issued pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34, 2903.213, or
2903.214, or a no contact order issued as any of the following:
         A.   As part of a person's sentence under a community control sanction
imposed under R.C. § 2929.16, 2929.17, 2929.26, or 2929.27;
         B.   As a term or condition of a person's release under R.C. §
2929.20;
         C.   As a post-release control sanction imposed as a condition of a
person's post-release control under R.C. § 2967.28;
         D.   As a term of supervision for a person transferred to transitional
control under R.C. § 2967.26;
         E.   As a term or condition of the intervention plan of a person
granted intervention in lieu of conviction under R.C. § 2951.041.
      (9)   PERSON. An individual, but does not include a business entity.
      (10)   PRIVATE INVESTIGATOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4749.01.
      (11)   PROTECTION ORDER ISSUED BY A COURT OF ANOTHER STATE. Has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2919.27.
      (12)   TRACKING APPLICATION. Any software program that permits a person
to remotely determine or track the position or movement of another person or
another person's property.
      (13)   TRACKING DEVICE. Means an electronic or mechanical device that
permits a person to remotely determine or track the position or movement of
another person or another person's property, including an electronic monitoring
device.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in division (d) of this section, no
person shall knowingly do either of the following:
      (1)   Install a tracking device or tracking application on another
person's property without the other person's consent or cause a tracking device
or tracking application to track the position or movement of another person or
another person's property without the other person's consent;
      (2)   If the person installed a tracking device or tracking application
on another's property with the other person's consent and the other person
subsequently revokes that consent, fail to remove or ensure the removal of the
device or application after the other person revokes the consent.
   (c)   (1)   For purposes of this section, if a person has given consent for
another to install a tracking device or tracking application on the consenting
person's property, it is presumed that the consenting person has revoked that
consent if any of the following applies:
         A.   The consenting person and the person to whom consent was given
are lawfully married and one of them files a complaint for divorce or a
petition for dissolution of marriage from the other. Not later than 72 hours
after being served with a complaint for divorce or a petition for dissolution
of marriage, the person to whom consent was given shall lawfully uninstall or
discontinue use of the tracking device or tracking application. If the person
to whom consent was given cannot lawfully uninstall or discontinue use of the
tracking device or tracking application, the person to whom consent was given
shall notify the court in which the complaint for divorce or the petition for
dissolution of marriage was filed in writing.
         B.   The consenting person or the person to whom consent was given
files an Ohio protection order against the other person or an Ohio protection
order is issued against the other person, and the person to be protected under
the order is the consenting person. Not later than 72 hours after being served
with the Ohio protection order, the person to whom consent was given shall
lawfully uninstall or discontinue use of the tracking device or tracking
application. If the person to whom consent was given cannot lawfully uninstall
or discontinue use of the tracking device or tracking application, the person
to whom consent was given shall notify the court that issued the Ohio
protection order in writing that the person to whom consent was given has
installed or is using a tracking device or tracking application on the
previously consenting person's person or the person's property and cannot
uninstall or discontinue its use without violating the Ohio protection order.
      (2)   Revocation of consent under this division is effective upon the
service of the petition or motion or an Ohio protection order.
   (d)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   A law enforcement officer, or any law enforcement agency, that
installs a tracking device or tracking application on another person's property
or causes a tracking device or tracking application to track the position or
movement of another person or another person's property as part of a criminal
investigation, or a probation officer, parole officer, or employee of the
Department of Rehabilitation and Correction, a halfway house, or a community-
based correctional facility when engaged in the lawful performance of the
officer's or employee's official duties;
      (2)   A parent or legal guardian of a minor child who installs or uses a
tracking device or tracking application to track the minor child if any of the
following applies:
         A.   The parents or legal guardians of the child are lawfully married
to each other and are not separated or otherwise living apart, and either of
those parents or legal guardians consents to the installation of the tracking
device or tracking application;
         B.   The parent or legal guardian of the child is the sole surviving
parent or legal guardian of the child;
         C.   The parent or legal guardian of the child has sole custody of the
child;
         D.   The parents or legal guardians of the child are divorced,
separated, or otherwise living apart and neither parent has sole custody of the
child, and both consent to the installation of the tracking device or tracking
application;
         E.   The parents or legal guardians of the child are divorced,
separated, or otherwise living apart, neither parent has sole custody of the
child, and either only one parent consents to the installation of the tracking
device or tracking application or one parent revokes consent, if the consenting
parent only uses the tracking device or tracking application during that
parent's parenting or custodial time and disables or removes the tracking
device or application during the nonconsenting parent's parenting or custodial
time.
      (3)   A caregiver of an elderly person or disabled adult, if the elderly
person's or disabled adult's treating physician certifies that the installation
of a tracking device or tracking application onto the elderly person's or
disabled adult's property is necessary to ensure the safety of the elderly
person or disabled adult;
      (4)   A person acting in good faith on behalf of a business entity for a
legitimate business purpose, provided that this division does not apply to a
private investigator engaged in the business of private investigation on behalf
of another person;
      (5)   A.   A private investigator or other person licensed under R.C. §
4749.03, who is acting in the normal course of the investigator's business of
private investigation on behalf of another person and who has the consent of
the owner of the property upon which the tracking device or tracking
application is installed, for the purpose of obtaining information with
reference to any of the following:
            1.   Criminal offenses committed, threatened, or suspected against
the United States, a territory of the United States, a state, or any person or
legal entity;
            2.   Locating an individual known to be a fugitive from justice;
            3.   Locating lost or stolen property or other assets that have
been awarded by the court;
            4.   Investigating claims related to workers' compensation.
         B.   This division does not apply if the person on whose behalf the
private investigator is working is the subject of an Ohio protection order or a
protection order issued by a court of another state or if the private
investigator knows or reasonably should know that the person on whose behalf
the private investigator is working seeks the investigator's services to aid in
the commission of a crime.
      (6)   An owner or lessee of a motor vehicle who installs, or directs the
installation of, a tracking device or tracking application on the vehicle
during the period of ownership or lease, if any of the following applies:
         A.   The tracking device or tracking application is removed before the
vehicle's title is transferred or the vehicle's lease expires;
         B.   The new owner of the vehicle, in the case of a sale, or the
lessor of the vehicle, in the case of an expired lease, consents in writing to
the non-removal of the tracking device or tracking application;
         C.   The owner of the vehicle at the time of the installation of the
tracking device or tracking application was the original manufacturer of the
vehicle.
      (7)   A person who installs a tracking device or application on property
in which the person has an ownership or contractual interest, unless the person
is the subject of a protective order and the property is likely to be used by
the person who obtained the protective order;
      (8)   A person or business entity that installs a tracking device or
tracking application on any fixed wing aircraft or rotorcraft operated or
managed by the person or business entity pursuant to 14 C.F.R. part 91 or part
135 to track the position or movement of the fixed wing aircraft or rotorcraft;
      (9)   A surety bail bond agent, or any employee or contractor of a surety
bail bond agent, that installs a tracking device or tracking application on
another person's property or causes a tracking device or tracking application
to track the position or movement of another person or another person's
property as part of the surety bail bond agent's, employee's, or contractor's
official responsibilities or duties.
   (e)   For purposes of division (d)(1) of this section, a probation officer,
parole officer, or employee of the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction,
a halfway house, or a community-based correctional facility is engaged in the
lawful performance of the officer's or employee's duties if both of the
following apply:
      (1)   The court or the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction
imposes electronic monitoring on a person.
      (2)   The officer or employee installs or uses an electronic monitoring
device on that person in accordance with the court's or Department's imposition
of electronic monitoring of that person.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal use of a tracking
device or application.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (f)(2) of this section,
illegal use of a tracking device or application is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (2)   Illegal use of a tracking device or application is a felony to be
prosecuted under state law if any of the following applies:
         A.   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of this section, R.C. § 2903.216, or R.C. § 2903.211 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
         B.   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
the subject of a protection order issued under R.C. § 2903.213 or 2903.214,
regardless of whether the person to be protected under the order is the victim
of the offense or another person.
         C.   Prior to committing the offense, the offender had been determined
to represent a substantial risk of physical harm to others as manifested by
evidence of then-recent homicidal or other violent behavior, evidence of then-
recent threats that placed another in reasonable fear of violent behavior and
serious physical harm, or other evidence of then-present dangerousness.
         D.   The offender has a history of violence toward the victim or a
history of other violent acts towards the victim.
(R.C. § 2903.216)
§ 636.25 CURFEW.
   (a)   Curfew established.
      (1)   No minor under the age of 16 shall ride in a motor vehicle, or be
on the public streets, other public places, places of amusement and
entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., Sunday through Thursday. All other days and all
periods when school is not officially in session, the curfew is 11:00 p.m.
through 5:00 a.m.
      (2)   No minor age 16 through 17 shall ride in a motor vehicle, or be on
the public streets, other public places, places of amusement and entertainment,
vacant lots or other unsupervised places between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:
00 a.m., Sunday through Thursday. All other days and all periods when school is
not officially in session, the curfew is 11:00 p.m. through 5:00 a.m.
      (3)   However, the provisions of this section do not apply to minors
accompanied by their parents, guardian or other adult person having the care
and custody of the minor or when the minor is upon emergency errand directed by
his or her parents, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody
of the minor.
   (b)   Police to detain. Every member of the police force while on duty is
authorized to detain any minor violating the provisions of this section until
the parent or guardian of the child shall take him or her into custody; but the
officer shall, immediately upon taking custody of the child, make an effort to
communicate with the parents or guardian at their usual place of residence.
   (c)   Parental responsibility.
      (1)   No parent, guardian or other adult person having the care of
custody of any minor under the age of 16 years shall permit the minor to ride
in a motor vehicle, or be on the public streets, other public places, places of
amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places between
the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., Sunday through Thursday. All other days
and all periods when school is not officially in session, the curfew is 11:00
p.m. through 5:00 a.m.
      (2)   No parent, guardian or other adult person having the care of
custody of any minor under the age of 16 through 17 shall permit the minor to
ride in a motor vehicle, or be on the public streets, other public places,
places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., Sunday through Thursday. All
other days and all periods when school is not officially in session, the curfew
is 11:00 p.m. through 5:00 a.m.
      (3)   However, the provisions of this section do not apply to minors
accompanied by their parents, guardian or other adult person having the care
and custody of the minor or when the minor is upon emergency errand directed by
his or her parents, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody
of the minor.
   (d)   Penalty.
      (1)   Any minor violating this section shall be dealt with in accordance
with juvenile court law and procedure.
      (2)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
   (e)   Exemptions. It is an exemption to a violation under this section that
the person engaged in the prohibited conduct while:
      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency;
      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
Police Department about the minor’s presence;
      (7)   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the village, a civic
organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an
official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults
and sponsored by the village, a civic organization or another similar entity
that takes responsibility for the minor;
      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the
right of assembly; or
      (9)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed
in accordance with state law.
(Ord. 704, passed 2-27-2001)
CHAPTER 642: OFFENSES RELATING TO PROPERTY
Section
   
642.01   Definitions
   
642.02   Possession of municipal property
   
642.03   Unauthorized use of property
   
642.04   Injuring vines, bushes, trees or crops
   
642.05   Desecration
   
642.06   Arson
   
642.07   Determining property value in arson
   
642.08   Criminal damaging or endangering; vehicular vandalism
   
642.09   Criminal mischief
   
642.10   Criminal trespass
   
642.11   Aggravated trespass
   
642.12   Assaulting police dog or horse, or assistance dog
   
642.13   Railroad vandalism; criminal trespass; interference with operation of
train; grade crossing device vandalism
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Alteration, injury, removal of traffic-control devices, see §
414.07
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Detention of shoplifters and those committing motion picture piracy;
protection of institutional property, see §
654.17
   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police Department,
see §
654.16
   Endangering aircraft and airport operations, see §
678.13
   Parents’ liability for destructive acts of their children, see R.C. §
3109.09
   “Physical harm to property” defined, see §
606.01
   Possessing criminal tools, see §
678.14
   “Property” defined, see §
606.01
   “Serious physical harm to property” defined, see §
606.01
   Theft and fraud, see
Ch. 672
   Value of written instrument or evidence of debt, see R.C. § 1.07
§ 642.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter and
Chapter 672, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   ACTIVE DUTY SERVICE MEMBER. Any member of the armed forces of the
United States performing active duty under Title 10 of the United States Code.
   (b)   ANHYDROUS AMMONIA. A compound formed by the combination of two gaseous
elements, nitrogen and hydrogen, in the manner described below. ANHYDROUS
AMMONIA is one part nitrogen to three parts hydrogen (NH3). ANHYDROUS AMMONIA
by weight is 14 parts nitrogen to three parts hydrogen, which is approximately
82% nitrogen to 18% hydrogen.
   (c)   ASSISTANCE DOG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.
   (d)   CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE. Any services provided by or through the
facilities of any cable television system or other similar closed circuit
coaxial cable communications system, or any microwave or similar transmission
service used in connection with any cable television system or other similar
closed circuit coaxial cable communications system.
   (e)   COIN MACHINE. Any mechanical or electronic device designed to do both
of the following:
      (1)   Receive a coin or bill, or token made for that purpose;
      (2)   In return for the insertion or deposit of a coin, bill or token,
automatically dispense property, provide a service or grant a license.
   (f)   COMPUTER. An electronic device that performs logical, arithmetic and
memory functions by the manipulation of electronic or magnetic impulses.
COMPUTER includes, but is not limited to, all input, output, processing,
storage, computer program or communication facilities that are connected, or
related, in a computer system or network to an electronic device of that
nature.
   (g)   COMPUTER CONTAMINANT. A computer program that is designed to modify,
damage, destroy, disable, deny or degrade access to, allow unauthorized access
to, functionally impair, record or transmit information within a computer,
computer system, or computer network without the express or implied consent of
the owner or other person authorized to give consent and that is of a type or
kind described in divisions (1) through (4) of this definition or of a type or
kind similar to a type or kind described in divisions (1) through (4) of this
definition:
      (1)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “viruses” and
“worms” that are self- replicating or self-propagating and that are designed to
contaminate other computer programs, compromise computer security, consume
computer resources, modify, destroy, record or transmit data, or disrupt the
normal operation of the computer, computer system or computer network;
      (2)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “Trojans” or “Trojan
horses” that are not self-replicating or self-propagating and that are designed
to compromise computer security, consume computer resources, modify, destroy,
record or transmit data, or disrupt the normal operation of the computer,
computer system or computer network;
      (3)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “zombies” that are
designed to use a computer without the knowledge and consent of the owner, or
other person authorized to give consent, and that are designed to send large
quantities of data to a targeted computer network for the purpose of degrading
the targeted computer’s or network’s performance, or denying access through the
network to the targeted computer or network, resulting in what is commonly
known as “denial of service” or “distributed denial of service” attacks;
      (4)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “trap doors”, “back
doors”, or “root kits” that are designed to bypass standard authentication
software and that are designed to allow access or use of a computer without the
knowledge or consent of the owner, or other person authorized to give consent.
   (h)   COMPUTER HACKING.
      (1)   COMPUTER HACKING means any of the following:
         A.   Gaining access or attempting to gain access to all or part of a
computer, computer system or a computer network without express or implied
authorization with the intent to defraud or with intent to commit a crime;
         B.   Misusing computer or network services, including but not limited
to mail transfer programs, file transfer programs, proxy servers and web
servers, by performing functions not authorized by the owner of the computer,
computer system, or computer network or other person authorized to give
consent. As used in this division, MISUSE OF COMPUTER AND NETWORK SERVICES
includes but is not limited to the unauthorized use of any of the following:
            1.   Mail transfer programs to send mail to persons other than the
authorized users of that computer or computer network;
            2.   File transfer program services or proxy servers to access
other computers, computer systems or computer networks;
            3.   Web servers to redirect users to other web pages or web
servers.
         C.   1.   Subject to division (1)C.2. of this definition, using a
group of computer programs commonly known as “port scanners” or “probes” to
intentionally access any computer, computer system or computer network without
the permission of the owner of the computer, computer system or computer
network or other person authorized to give consent. The group of computer
programs referred to in this division includes but is not limited to those
computer programs that use a computer network to access a computer, computer
system or another computer network to determine any of the following: the
presence or types of computers or computer systems on a network; the computer
network’s facilities and capabilities; the availability of computer or network
services; the presence or versions of computer software including but not
limited to operating systems, computer services or computer contaminants; the
presence of a known computer software deficiency that can be used to gain
unauthorized access to a computer, computer system or computer network; or any
other information about a computer, computer system or computer network not
necessary for the normal and lawful operation of the computer initiating the
access.
            2.   The group of computer programs referred to in division (1)C.1.
of this definition does not include standard computer software used for the
normal operation, administration, management and test of a computer, computer
system or computer network, including but not limited to domain name services,
mail transfer services and other operating system services, computer programs
commonly called “ping”, “tcpdump”, and “traceroute” and other network
monitoring and management computer software, and computer programs commonly
knows as “nslookup” and “whois” and other systems administration computer
software.
         D.   The intentional use of a computer, computer system or a computer
network in a manner that exceeds any right or permission granted by the owner
of the computer, computer system or computer network or other person authorized
to give consent.
      (2)   COMPUTER HACKING does not include the introduction of a computer
contaminant, as defined in this section, into a computer, computer system,
computer program or computer network.
   (i)   COMPUTER NETWORK. A set of related and remotely-connected computers
and communication facilities that includes more than one computer system that
has the capability to transmit among the connected computers and communication
facilities through the use of computer facilities.
   (j)   COMPUTER PROGRAM. An ordered set of data representing coded
instructions or statements that, when executed by a computer, causes the
computer to process data.
   (k)   COMPUTER SERVICES. Includes but is not limited to the use of a
computer system, computer network, computer program, data that is prepared for
computer use, or data that is contained within a computer system or computer
network.
   (l)   COMPUTER SOFTWARE. Computer programs, procedures and other
documentation associated with the operation of a computer system.
   (m)   COMPUTER SYSTEM. A computer and related devices, whether connected or
unconnected, including but not limited to data input, output and storage
devices, data communications links, and computer programs and data that make
the system capable of performing specified special purpose data processing
tasks.
   (n)   COUNTERFEIT TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. A telecommunications device
that, alone or with another telecommunications device, has been altered,
constructed, manufactured or programmed to acquire, intercept, receive or
otherwise facilitate the use of a telecommunications service or information
service without the authority or consent of the provider of the
telecommunications service or information service. The phrase includes but is
not limited to a clone telephone, clone microchip, tumbler telephone or tumbler
microchip; a wireless scanning device capable of acquiring, intercepting,
receiving or otherwise facilitating the use of telecommunications service or
information service without immediate detection; or a device, equipment,
hardware or software designed for, or capable of, altering or changing the
electronic serial number in a wireless telephone.
   (o)   CREATE A SUBSTANTIAL RISK OF SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO ANY PERSON.
Includes the creation of a substantial risk of serious physical harm to any
emergency personnel.
   (p)   CREDIT CARD. Includes but is not limited to a card, code, device or
other means of access to a customer’s account for the purpose of obtaining
money, property, labor or services on credit, or for initiating an electronic
fund transfer at a point-of-sale terminal, an automated teller machine, or a
cash dispensing machine. It also includes a county procurement card issued
under R.C. § 301.29.
   (q)   DANGEROUS DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   (r)   DATA. A representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts or
instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner and
that are intended for use in a computer, computer system or computer network.
   (s)   DECEPTION. To knowingly deceive another or cause another to be
deceived by any false or misleading representation, by withholding information,
by preventing another from acquiring information, or by any other conduct, act
or omission that creates, confirms or perpetuates a false impression in
another, including a false impression as to law, value, state of mind or other
objective or subjective fact.
   (t)   DEFRAUD. To knowingly obtain, by deception, some benefit for oneself
or another, or to knowingly cause, by deception, some detriment to another.
   (u)   DEPRIVE. To do any of the following:
      (1)   To withhold property of another permanently, or for a period that
appropriates a substantial portion of its value or use, or with purpose to
restore it only upon payment of a reward or other consideration;
      (2)   To dispose of property so as to make it unlikely that the owner
will recover it;
      (3)   To accept, use or appropriate money, property or services, with
purpose not to give proper consideration in return for the money, property or
services, and without reasonable justification or excuse for not giving proper
consideration.
   (v)   DISABLED ADULT. A person who is 18 years of age or older and has some
impairment of body or mind that makes the person unable to work at any
substantially remunerative employment that the person otherwise would be able
to perform and that will, with reasonable probability, continue for a period of
at least 12 months without any present indication of recovery from the
impairment, or who is 18 years of age or older and has been certified as
permanently and totally disabled by an agency of this state or the United
States that has the function of so classifying persons.
   (w)   DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
   (x)   ELDERLY PERSON. A person who is 65 years of age or older.
   (y)   ELECTRONIC FUND TRANSFER. Has the same meaning as in 92 Stat. 3728, 15
U.S.C. § 1693a, as amended.
   (z)   EMERGENCY PERSONNEL. Any of the following persons:
      (1)   A peace officer, as defined in R.C. § 2935.01;
      (2)   A member of a fire department or other firefighting agency of a
municipal corporation, township, township fire district, joint fire district,
other political subdivision or combination of political subdivisions;
      (3)   A member of a private fire company, as defined in R.C. § 9.60, or a
volunteer firefighter;
      (4)   A member of a joint ambulance district or joint emergency medical
services district;
      (5)   An emergency medical technician-basic, emergency medical
technician-intermediate, emergency medical technician-paramedic, ambulance
operator or other member of an emergency medical service that is owned of
operated by a political subdivision or a private entity;
      (6)   The State Fire Marshal, the Chief Deputy State Fire Marshal or an
assistant state fire marshal;
      (7)   A fire prevention officer of a political subdivision or an arson,
fire or similar investigator of a political subdivision.
   (aa)   FEDERALLY-LICENSED FIREARMS DEALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5502.63.
   (bb)   FIREARM and DANGEROUS ORDNANCE. Have the same meaning as in R.C. §
2923.11.
   (cc)   FORGE. To fabricate or create, in whole or in part and by any means,
any spurious writing, or to make, execute, alter, complete, reproduce or
otherwise purport to authenticate any writing, when the writing in fact is not
authenticated by that conduct.
   (dd)   GAIN ACCESS. To approach, instruct, communicate with, store data in,
retrieve data from or otherwise make use of any resources of a computer,
computer system or computer network, or any cable service or cable system both
as defined in R.C. § 2913.04.
   (ee)   INFORMATION SERVICE.
      (1)   Subject to division (2) of this definition, the offering of a
capability for generating, acquiring, storing, transforming, processing,
retrieving, utilizing or making available information via telecommunications,
including but not limited to electronic publishing.
      (2)   INFORMATION SERVICE does not include any use of a capability of a
type described in division (1) of this definition for the management, control
or operation of a telecommunications system or the management of a
telecommunications service.
   (ff)   INTERNET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 341.42.
   (gg)   MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   (hh)   OCCUPIED STRUCTURE. Any house, building, outbuilding, watercraft,
aircraft, railroad car, truck, trailer, tent or other structure, vehicle or
shelter, or any portion thereof, to which any of the following applies:
      (1)   It is maintained as a permanent or temporary dwelling, even though
it is temporarily unoccupied and whether or not any person is actually present;
      (2)   At the time, it is occupied as the permanent or temporary
habitation of any person, whether or not any person is actually present;
      (3)   At the time, it is specially adapted for the overnight
accommodation of any person, whether or not any person is actually present;
      (4)   At the time, any person is present or likely to be present in it.
   (ii)   OWNER. Unless the context requires a different meaning, any person,
other than the actor, who is the owner of, who has possession or control of, or
who has any license or interest in property or services, even though the
ownership, possession, control, license or interest is unlawful.
   (jj)   POLICE DOG OR HORSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.321.
   (kk)   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2744.01.
   (ll)   RENTED PROPERTY. Personal property in which the right of possession
and use of the property is for a short and possibly indeterminate term in
return for consideration; the rentee generally controls the duration of
possession of the property within any applicable minimum or maximum term; and
the amount of consideration is generally determined by the duration of
possession of the property.
   (mm)   SERVICES. Includes labor, personal services, professional services,
rental services, public utility services including wireless service as defined
in R.C. § 128.01(F)(1), common carrier services, and food, drink,
transportation, entertainment and cable television services and, for purposes
of R.C. § 2913.04 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, includes
cable services as defined in that section.
   (nn)   SLUG. An object that, by virtue of its size, shape, composition or
other quality, is capable of being inserted or deposited in a coin machine as
an improper substitute for a genuine coin, bill or token made for that purpose.
   (oo)   STATE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2744.01.
   (pp)   TELECOMMUNICATION. The origination, emission, dissemination,
transmission or reception of data, images, signals, sounds or other
intelligence or equivalence or intelligence of any nature over any
communications system by any method, including but not limited to a fiber
optic, electronic, magnetic, optical, digital or analog method.
   (qq)   TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Any instrument, equipment, machine or
other device that facilitates telecommunication, including but not limited to a
computer, computer network, computer chip, computer circuit, scanner,
telephone, cellular telephone, pager, personal communications device,
transponder, receiver, radio, modem or device that enables the use of a modem.
   (rr)   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. The providing, allowing, facilitating or
generating of any form of telecommunication through the use of a
telecommunications device over a telecommunications system.
   (ss)   THEFT OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2911.12, 2911.13,
2911.31, 2911.32, 2913.02, 2913.03, 2913.04, 2913.041, 2913.08, 2913.11,
2913.21, 2913.31, 2913.32, 2913.33, 2913.34, 2913.40, 2913.42, 2913.43,
2913.44, 2913.45, 2913.47, 2913.48, former R.C. § 2913.47 or 2913.48, or R.C. §
2913.51, 2915.05, or 2921.41;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States substantially equivalent to any
section listed in division (1) of this definition, or a violation of R.C. §
2913.41, 2913.81 or 2915.06 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law
of this or any other state or the United States involving robbery, burglary,
breaking and entering, theft, embezzlement, wrongful conversion, forgery,
counterfeiting, deceit or fraud;
      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing any offense under division (1), (2) or (3) of this definition.
   (tt)   UTTER. To issue, publish, transfer, use, put or send into
circulation, deliver or display.
   (uu)   WRITING. Any computer software, document, letter, memorandum, note,
paper, plate, data, film or other thing having in or upon it any written, type-
written or printed matter, and any token, stamp, seal, credit card, badge,
trademark, label or other symbol of value, right, privilege, license or
identification.
(R.C. §§ 2909.01, 2913.01)
§ 642.02 POSSESSION OF MUNICIPAL PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall, without being authorized, have in his or her control
or possession any equipment, tools, implements or other property belonging to
the municipality.
(R.C. § 5589.12)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 5589.99(B))
§ 642.03 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly use or operate the property of another
without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent.
   (b)   No person, in any manner and by any means, including but not limited
to computer hacking, shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to,
or cause access to be gained to any computer, computer system, computer
network, cable service, cable system, telecommunications device,
telecommunications service or information service without the consent of, or
beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of, the owner of the
computer, computer system, computer network, cable service, cable system,
telecommunications device, telecommunications service or information service or
other person authorized to give consent.
   (c)   Except as permitted under R.C. § 5503.101, no person shall knowingly
gain access to, attempt to gain access to, cause access to be granted to, or
disseminate information gained from access to the law enforcement automated
database system created pursuant to R.C. § 5503.10 without the consent of, or
beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of, the chair of the Law
Enforcement Automated Data System Steering Committee.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to,
cause access to be granted to, or disseminate information gained from access to
the Ohio law enforcement gateway established and operated pursuant to R.C. §
109.57(C)(1) without the consent of, or beyond the scope of the express or
implied consent of, the Superintendent of the Bureau of Criminal Identification
and Investigation.
   (e)   The affirmative defenses contained in R.C. § 2913.03(C) are
affirmative defenses to a charge under this section.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of property. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
unauthorized use of property is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (1)   If unauthorized use of property is committed for the purpose of
devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to obtain property or services,
unauthorized use of property is whichever of the following is applicable:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided below, unauthorized use of property
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   If the value of the property or services or the loss to the
victim is $1,000 or more, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (2)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled
adult, unauthorized use of property is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (g)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of computer, cable or telecommunication property, a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (h)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of the law enforcement automated database system, a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (i)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of the Ohio law enforcement gateway, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
   (j)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CABLE OPERATOR. Any person or group of persons that does either of
the following:
         A.   Provides cable service over a cable system and directly through
one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that cable system;
         B.   Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of a cable system.
      (2)   CABLE SERVICE. Any of the following:
         A.   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or
of information that a cable operator makes available to all subscribers
generally;
         B.   Subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the
selection or use of video programming or of information that a cable operator
makes available to all subscribers generally, both as described in division (f)
(2)A. above;
         C.   Any cable television service.
      (3)   CABLE SYSTEM. Any facility, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes video
programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community.
CABLE SYSTEM does not include any of the following:
         A.   Any facility that serves only to retransmit the television
signals of one or more television broadcast stations;
         B.   Any facility that serves subscribers without using any public
right-of-way;
         C.   Any facility of a common carrier that, under 47 U.S.C. § 522(7)
(c), is excluded from the term CABLE SYSTEM as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(7);
         D.   Any open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. § 573;
         E.   Any facility of any electric utility used solely for operating
its electric utility system.
(R.C. § 2913.04)
Statutory reference:
   Telecommunications: fraud and unlawful use of a device, felony offenses, see
R.C. §§ 2913.05 and 2913.06
§ 642.04 INJURING VINES, BUSHES, TREES OR CROPS.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly cut down,
destroy, girdle or otherwise injure a vine, bush, shrub, sapling, tree or crop
standing or growing on the land of another or upon public land.
   (b)   In addition to the penalty provided in division (c) of this section,
whoever violates this section is liable in treble damages for the injury
caused.
(R.C. § 901.51)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 901.99(A))
§ 642.05 DESECRATION.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall purposely deface, damage,
pollute or otherwise physically mistreat any of the following:
      (1)   Any public monument;
      (2)   Any historical or commemorative marker, or any structure, Indian
mound or earthwork, cemetery, thing or site of great historical or
archeological interest;
      (3)   A place of worship, its furnishings or religious artifacts or
sacred texts within the place of worship or within the grounds upon which the
place of worship is located;
      (4)   A work of art or museum piece;
      (5)   Any other object of reverence or sacred devotion.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of desecration. A violation of
division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(4) or (a)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the second degree. A violation of division (a)(3) of this section is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (c)   As used in this section, CEMETERY means any place of burial and
includes burial sites that contain American Indian burial objects placed with
or containing American Indian human remains.
(R.C. § 2927.11)
§ 642.06 ARSON.
   (a)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly do any of
the following:
      (1)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
property of another without the other person’s consent;
      (2)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
property of the offender or another, with purpose to defraud;
      (3)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to the
statehouse or a courthouse, school building, or other building or structure
that is owned or controlled by the state, any political subdivision, or any
department, agency, or instrumentality of the state or a political subdivision,
and that is used for public purposes;
      (4)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm, through the
offer or the acceptance of an agreement for hire or other consideration, to any
property of another without the other person’s consent or to any property of
the offender or another with purpose to defraud;
      (5)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any park,
preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over land, forest, timberland,
greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is owned or controlled by
another person, the state, or a political subdivision without the consent of
the other person, the state, or the political subdivision;
      (6)   With purpose to defraud, cause, or create a substantial risk of,
physical harm to any park, preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over
land, forest, timberland, greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is
owned or controlled by the offender, another person, the state, or a political
subdivision.
   (b)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly do any of
the following:
      (1)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
structure of another that is not an occupied structure;
      (2)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm, through the
offer or the acceptance of an agreement for hire or other consideration, to any
structure of another that is not an occupied structure;
      (3)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
structure that is not an occupied structure and that is in or on any park,
preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over land, forest, timberland,
greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is owned or controlled by
another person, the state, or a political subdivision.
   (c)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (b)(1)
or (b)(2) of this section that the defendant acted with the consent of the
other person.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (b)(3) of
this section that the defendant acted with the consent of the other person, the
state, or the political subdivision.
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of arson.
      (2)   A violation of division (a)(1) or (b)(1) of this section is one of
the following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (d)(2)B. of this
section, a misdemeanor of the first degree;
         B.   If the value of the property or the amount of the physical harm
involved is $1,000 or more, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (3)   A violation of division (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), (a)(5), (a)(6), (b)
(2) or (b)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2909.03)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated arson, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2909.02
   Convicted arsonist to make restitution to public agency, see R.C. § 2929.28
§ 642.07 DETERMINING PROPERTY VALUE IN ARSON.
   (a)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of
property or amount of physical harm involved in a violation of §
642.06(a)(1) or (b)(1):
      (1)   If the property is an heirloom, memento, collector’s item, antique,
museum piece, manuscript, document, record or other thing that is either
irreplaceable or is replaceable only on the expenditure of substantial time,
effort, or money, the value of the property or the amount of physical harm
involved is the amount that would compensate the owner for its loss.
      (2)   If the property is not covered under division (a)(1) of this
section, and the physical harm is such that the property can be restored
substantially to its former condition, the amount of physical harm involved is
the reasonable cost of restoring the property.
      (3)   If the property is not covered under division (a)(1) of this
section, and the physical harm is such that the property cannot be restored
substantially to its former condition, the value of the property, in the case
of personal property, is the cost of replacing the property with new property
of like kind and quality, and in the case of real property or real property
fixtures, is the difference in the fair market value of the property
immediately before and immediately after the offense.
   (b)   As used in this section, FAIR MARKET VALUE has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2913.61.
   (c)   Prima facie evidence of the value of property, as provided in R.C. §
2913.61(D), may be used to establish the value of property pursuant to this
section.
(R.C. § 2909.11(B) - (D))
§ 642.08 CRIMINAL DAMAGING OR ENDANGERING; VEHICULAR VANDALISM.
   (a)   Criminal damaging or endangering.
      (1)   No person shall cause or create a substantial risk of physical harm
to any property of another without the other person’s consent:
         A.   Knowingly, by any means; or
         B.   Recklessly, by means of fire, explosion, flood, poison gas,
poison, radioactive material, caustic or corrosive material, or other
inherently dangerous agency or substance.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (a) is guilty of criminal damaging
or endangering, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If violation of this
division (a) creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging
or endangering is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the property involved
in a violation of this division (a) is an aircraft, an aircraft engine,
propeller, appliance, spare part or any other equipment or implement used or
intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the violation
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging or endangering
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the property
involved in a violation of this division (a) is an aircraft, an aircraft
engine, propeller, appliance, spare part or any other equipment or implement
used or intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the
violation creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person or if the
property involved in a violation of this division (a) is an occupied aircraft,
criminal damaging or endangering is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2909.06)
   (b)   Vehicular vandalism.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division (b), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         A.   ALLEY, STREET, and VEHICLE. Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
4511.01.
         B.   HIGHWAY. Any highway as defined in R.C. § 4511.01 or any lane,
road, street, alley, bridge or overpass.
         C.   VESSEL and WATERS IN THIS STATE. Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 1546.01.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any
object at, onto or in the path of any of the following:
         A.   Any vehicle on a highway;
         B.   Any boat or vessel on any of the waters in this state.
      (3)   Whoever violates this division (b) is guilty of vehicular
vandalism. Except as otherwise provided in this division (b)(3), vehicular
vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of this
division (b) creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person or the
violation of this division (b) causes serious physical harm to property,
vehicular vandalism is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
If the violation of this division (b) causes physical harm to any person or
serious physical harm to any person, vehicular vandalism is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.09)
Statutory reference:
   Disrupting public services, felony offense, see R.C. § 2909.04
   Vandalism, felony offense, see R.C. § 2909.05
§ 642.09 CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.
   (a)   No person shall:
      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage,
destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with the either of the following:
         A.   The property of another;
         B.   One’s own residential real property with the purpose to decrease
the value of or enjoyment of the residential real property, if both of the
following apply:
            1.   The residential real property is subject to a mortgage.
            2.   The person has been served with a summons and complaint in a
pending residential mortgage loan foreclosure action relating to that real
property. As used in this division, PENDING includes the time between judgment
entry and confirmation of sale.
      (2)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of property of
another, employ a tear gas device, stink bomb, smoke generator or other device
releasing a substance that is harmful or offensive to persons exposed, or that
tends to cause public alarm;
      (3)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy
or otherwise improperly tamper with a bench mark, triangulation station,
boundary marker or other survey station, monument or marker;
      (4)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy
or otherwise improperly tamper with any safety device, the property of another,
or the property of the offender when required or placed for the safety of
others, so as to destroy or diminish its effectiveness or availability for its
intended purpose;
      (5)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of the property
of another, set a fire on the land of another or place personal property that
has been set on fire on the land of another, which fire or personal property is
outside and apart from any building, other structure, or personal property that
is on that land;
      (6)   Without privilege to do so, and with intent to impair the
functioning of any computer, computer system, computer network, computer
software or computer program, knowingly do any of the following:
         A.   In any manner or by any means, including but not limited to
computer hacking, alter, damage, destroy or modify a computer, computer system,
computer network, computer software, or computer program or data contained in a
computer, computer system, computer network, computer software or computer
program;
         B.   Introduce a computer contaminant into a computer, computer
system, computer network, computer software or computer program.
      (7)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly destroy or improperly tamper
with a critical infrastructure facility.
   (b)   As used in this section:
      (1)   CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2911.21.
      (2)   IMPROPERLY TAMPER. To change the physical location or the physical
condition of the property.
      (3)   SAFETY DEVICE. Any fire extinguisher, fire hose, or fire axe, or
any fire escape, emergency exit, or emergency escape equipment, or any life
line, life-saving ring, life preserver, or life boat or raft, or any alarm,
light, flare, signal, sign, or notice intended to warn of danger or emergency,
or intended for other safety purposes, or any guard railing or safety
barricade, or any traffic sign or signal, or any railroad grade crossing sign,
signal, or gate, or any first aid or survival equipment, or any other device,
apparatus, or equipment intended for protecting or preserving the safety of
persons or property.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal mischief,
and shall be punished as provided in division (c)(2), (c)(3), or (c)(4) of this
section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), or (a)(5) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree. Except as otherwise provided
in this division, if the violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4),
or (a)(5) of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person,
criminal mischief committed in violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3),
(a)(4), or (a)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
property involved in the violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4),
or (a)(5) of this section is an aircraft, an aircraft engine, propeller,
appliance, spare part, fuel, lubricant, hydraulic fluid, any other equipment,
implement, or material used or intended to be used in the operation of an
aircraft, or any cargo carried or intended to be carried in an aircraft and if
the violation creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or if the
aircraft in question is an occupied aircraft, criminal mischief committed in
violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), or (a)(5) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (a)(6) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the value of the computer, computer system, computer
network, computer software, computer program, or data involved in the violation
of division (a)(6) of this section or the loss to the victim resulting from the
violation is $1,000 or more, or if the computer, computer system, computer
network, computer software, computer program, or data involved in the violation
of division (a)(6) is used or intended to be used in the operation of an
aircraft and the violation creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or
if the aircraft in question is an occupied aircraft, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (a)(6) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   Criminal mischief committed in violation of division (a)(7) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.07)
§ 642.10 CRIMINAL TRESPASS.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another;
      (2)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, the
use of which is lawfully restricted to certain persons, purposes, modes or
hours, when the offender knows the offender is in violation of any such
restriction or is reckless in that regard;
      (3)   Recklessly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, as
to which notice against unauthorized access or presence is given by actual
communication to the offender, or in a manner prescribed by law, or by posting
in a manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential
intruders, or by fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to restrict
access;
      (4)   Being on the land or premises of another, negligently fail or
refuse to leave upon being notified by signage posted in a conspicuous place or
otherwise being notified to do so by the owner or occupant, or the agent or
servant of either;
(5)   Knowingly enter or remain on a critical infrastructure facility.
   (b)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the land or
premises involved was owned, controlled, or in custody of a public agency.
   (c)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the offender was
authorized to enter or remain on the land or premises involved, when the
authorization was secured by deception.
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal trespass.
Criminal trespass in violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), or (a)(4) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Criminal trespass in
violation of division (a)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28, if the person, in committing the
violation of this section, used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle, the court shall impose a fine of two times the usual amount
imposed for the violation.
      (3)   If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to two or more violations of this section, R.C. § 2911.21 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and the offender, in committing each violation,
used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, the court, in
addition to or independent of all other penalties imposed for the violation,
may impound the certificate of registration of that snowmobile or off-highway
motorcycle or the certificate of registration and license plate of that all-
purpose vehicle for not less than 60 days. In such a case, R.C. § 4519.47
applies.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, if the
offender, in committing the violation of this section, used an all-purpose
vehicle, the Clerk of the Court shall pay the fine imposed pursuant to this
section to the State Recreational Vehicle Fund created by R.C. § 4519.11.
   (f)   As used in divisions (a) through (e) of this section:
      (1)   ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE, and SNOWMOBILE. Have
the same meanings as in R.C. § 4519.01.
      (2)   CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY. Means:
         A.   One of the following, if completely enclosed by a fence or other
physical barrier that is obviously designed to exclude intruders, or if clearly
marked with signs that are reasonably likely to come to the attention of
potential intruders and that indicate entry is forbidden without site
authorization:
            1.   A petroleum or alumina refinery;
            2.   An electric generating facility, substation, switching
station, electrical control center, or electric transmission and distribution
lines and associated equipment;
            3.   A chemical, polymer, or rubber manufacturing facility;
            4.   A water intake structure, water treatment facility, waste
water facility, drainage facility, water management facility, or any similar
water or sewage treatment system and its water and sewage piping;
            5.   A natural gas company facility or interstate natural gas
pipeline, including a pipeline interconnection, a natural gas compressor
station and associated facilities, city gate or town border station, metering
station, above-ground piping, regulator station, valve site, delivery station,
fabricated assembly, or any other part of a natural gas storage facility
involved in the gathering, storage, transmission, or distribution of gas;
            6.   A telecommunications central switching office or remote
switching facility or an equivalent network facility that serves a similar
purpose;
            7.   Wireline or wireless telecommunications infrastructure,
including telecommunications towers and telephone poles and lines, including
fiber optic lines;
            8.   A port, trucking terminal, or other freight transportation
facility;
            9.   A gas processing plant, including a plant used in the
processing, treatment, or fractionation of natural gas or natural gas liquids;
10.   A transmission facility used by a federally licensed radio or television
station;
            11.   A steel-making facility that uses an electric arc furnace to
make steel;
            12.   A facility identified and regulated by the United States
Department of Homeland Security’s Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards
Program under 6 C.F.R. part 27;
            13.   A dam that is regulated by the state or federal government;
            14.   A crude oil or refined products storage and distribution
facility, including valve sites, pipeline interconnections, pump station,
metering station, below- or above-ground pipeline, or piping and truck loading
or off-loading facility;
            15.   A video service network and broadband infrastructure,
including associated buildings and facilities, video service headends, towers,
utility poles, and utility lines such as fiber optic lines. As used in this
division, VIDEO SERVICE NETWORK has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
            16.   Any above-ground portion of an oil, gas, hazardous liquid or
chemical pipeline, tank, or other storage facility;
            17.   Any above-ground portion of a well, well pad, or production
operation;
            18.   A laydown area or construction site for pipe and other
equipment intended for use on an interstate or intrastate natural gas or crude
oil pipeline;
            19.   Any mining operation, including any processing equipment,
batching operation, or support facility for that mining operation.
         B.   With respect to a video service network or broadband or wireless
telecommunications infrastructure, the above-ground portion of a facility
installed in a public right-of-way on a utility pole or in a conduit;
         C.   Any railroad property;
         D.   An electronic asset of any of the following:
            1.   An electric light company that is a public utility under R.C.
§ 4905.02;
            2.   An electric cooperative, as defined in R.C. § 4928.01;
            3.   A municipal electric utility, as defined in R.C. § 4928.01;
            4.   A natural gas company that is a public utility under R.C. §
4905.02;
            5.   A telephone company that is a public utility under R.C. §
4905.02;
            6.   A video service provider, including a cable operator, as those
terms are defined in R.C. § 1332.21.
      (3)   ELECTRONIC ASSET. Includes, but is not limited to, the hardware,
software, and data of a programmable electronic device; all communications,
operations, and customer data networks; and the contents of those data
networks.
      (4)   LAND or PREMISES. Includes any land, building, structure, or place
belonging to, controlled by, or in custody of another, and any separate
enclosure or room, or portion thereof.
      (5)   PRODUCTION OPERATION, WELL, and WELL PAD. Have the same meanings as
in R.C. § 1509.01.
(R.C. § 2911.21)
   (g)   Criminal trespass on a place of public amusement.
      (1)   As used in this division (g), PLACE OF PUBLIC AMUSEMENT means a
stadium, theater or other facility, whether licensed or not, at which a live
performance, sporting event or other activity takes place for entertainment of
the public and to which access is made available to the public, regardless of
whether admission is charged.
      (2)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly enter or
remain on any restricted portion of a place of public amusement and, as a
result of that conduct, interrupt or cause the delay of the live performance,
sporting event, or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement
after a printed written notice has been given as provided in division (g)(4)A.
of this section that the general public is restricted from access to that
restricted portion of the place of public amusement. A restricted portion of a
place of public amusement may include but is not limited to a playing field, an
athletic surface or a stage located at the place of public amusement.
      (3)   An owner or lessee of a place of public amusement, an agent of the
owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a place of public amusement
may use reasonable force to restrain and remove a person from a restricted
portion of the place of public amusement if the person enters or remains on the
restricted portion of the place of public amusement and, as a result of that
conduct, interrupts or causes the delay of the live performance, sporting event
or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement. This division
does not provide immunity from criminal liability for any use of force beyond
reasonable force by an owner or lessee of a place of public amusement, an agent
of either the owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a place of
public amusement.
      (4)   A.   Notice has been given that the general public is restricted
from access to a portion of a place of public amusement if a printed written
notice of the restricted access has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at
the entrance to that portion of the place of public amusement. If a printed
written notice is posted or exhibited as described in this division regarding a
portion of a place of public amusement, in addition to that posting or
exhibition, notice that the general public is restricted from access to that
portion of the place of public amusement also may be given, but is not required
to be given, by either of the following means:
            1.   By notifying the person personally, either orally or in
writing, that access to that portion of the place of public amusement is
restricted;
            2.   By broadcasting over the public address system of the place of
public amusement an oral warning that access to that portion of the place of
public amusement is restricted.
         B.   If notice that the general public is restricted from access to a
portion of a place of public amusement is provided by the posting or exhibition
of a printed written notice as described in division (g)(4)A. of this section,
the municipality, in a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (g)(2)
of this section, is not required to prove that the defendant received actual
notice that the general public is restricted from access to a portion of a
place of public amusement.
      (5)   A.   Whoever violates division (g)(2) of this section is guilty of
criminal trespass on a place of public amusement, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
         B.   In addition to any jail term, fine or other sentence, penalty or
sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to division (g)(5)A. of this
section, a court may require an offender who violates this section to perform
not less than 30 and not more than 120 hours of supervised community service
work.
(R.C. § 2911.23)
§ 642.11 AGGRAVATED TRESPASS.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall enter or remain on the land or premises of
another with purpose to commit on that land or those premises a misdemeanor,
the elements of which involve causing physical harm to another person or
causing another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to
that person.
      (2)   No person shall enter or remain on a critical infrastructure
facility with purpose to destroy or tamper with the facility.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated trespass.
Aggravated trespass in violation of division (a)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Aggravated trespass in violation of division
(a)(2) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
   (c)   As used in this section, CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2911.21.
(R.C. § 2911.211)
§ 642.12 ASSAULTING POLICE DOG OR HORSE, OR ASSISTANCE DOG.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to
a police dog or horse in either of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement officer in
the performance of the officer’s official duties at the time the physical harm
is caused or attempted.
      (2)   The police dog or horse is not assisting a law enforcement officer
in the performance of the officer’s official duties at the time the physical
harm is caused or attempted, but the offender has actual knowledge that the dog
or horse is a police dog or horse.
   (b)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Taunt, torment or strike a police dog or horse;
      (2)   Throw an object or substance at a police dog or horse;
      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct a police dog or horse, or interfere with
or obstruct a law enforcement officer who is being assisted by a police dog or
horse, in a manner that does any of the following:
         A.   Inhibits or restricts the law enforcement officer’s control of
the police dog or horse;
         B.   Deprives the law enforcement officer of control of the police dog
or horse;
         C.   Releases the police dog or horse from its area of control;
         D.   Enters the area of control of the police dog or horse without the
consent of the law enforcement officer, including placing food or any other
object or substance into that area;
         E.   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the police dog or horse to
assist a law enforcement officer.
      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical
injury or death to a police dog or horse;
      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog, fail to
reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in
a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or
otherwise endanger a police dog or horse that at the time of the conduct, the
police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement officer in the performance
of the officer’s duties or that the person knows is a police dog or horse.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to
an assistance dog in either of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The dog, at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted, is
assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment.
      (2)   The dog, at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted, is
not assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment, but the offender has actual knowledge that
the dog is an assistance dog.
   (d)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Taunt, torment or strike an assistance dog;
      (2)   Throw an object or substance at an assistance dog;
      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct an assistance dog, or interfere with or
obstruct a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a person with a
mobility impairment who is being assisted or served by an assistance dog, in a
manner that does any of the following:
         A.   Inhibits or restricts the assisted or served person’s control of
the dog;
         B.   Deprives the assisted or served person of control of the dog;
         C.   Releases the dog from its area of control;
         D.   Enters the area of control of the dog without the consent of the
assisted or served person, including placing food or any other object or
substance into that area;
         E.   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the dog to assist the
assisted or served person;
      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical
injury or death to an assistance dog;
      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog, fail to
reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in
a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or
otherwise endanger an assistance dog that at the time of the conduct is
assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment or that the person knows is an assistance
dog.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
assaulting a police dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, assaulting a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. If the violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse
other than death or serious physical harm, assaulting a police dog or horse is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in serious physical
harm to the police dog or horse or results in its death, assaulting a police
dog or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
harassing a police dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided this division,
harassing a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse but does not
result in its death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing a police dog
or horse is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in
serous physical harm to the police dog or horse or results in its death,
harassing a police dog or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of
assaulting an assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog other than death or
serious physical harm, assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the violation results in serious physical harm to the
assistance dog or results in its death, assaulting an assistance dog is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of
harassing an assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
harassing an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog but does not result in
the death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing an assistance dog is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in serious physical
harm to the assistance dog or results in its death, harassing an assistance dog
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   In addition to any other sanctions or penalty imposed for the
offense under this section, R.C. Chapter 2929 or any other provision of the
Revised Code or this code, whoever violates division (a), (b), (c) or (d) of
this section is responsible for the payment of all of the following:
         A.   Any veterinary bill or bill for medication incurred as a result
of the violation by the police department regarding a violation of division (a)
or (b) of this section or by the person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired
or the person with a mobility impairment assisted or served by the assistance
dog regarding a violation of division (c) or (d) of this section;
         B.   The cost of any damaged equipment that results from the
violation;
         C.   If the violation did not result in the death of the police dog or
horse or the assistance dog that was the subject of the violation and if, as a
result of that dog or horse being the subject of the violation, the dog or
horse needs further training or retraining to be able to continue in the
capacity of a police dog or horse or an assistance dog, the cost of any further
training or retraining of that dog or horse by a law enforcement officer or by
the person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or the person with a
mobility impairment assisted or served by the assistance dog;
         D.   If the violation resulted in the death of the assistance dog that
was the subject of the violation or resulted in serious physical harm to the
police dog or horse or the assistance dog or horse that was the subject of the
violation to the extent that the dog or horse needs to be replaced on either a
temporary or a permanent basis, the cost of replacing that dog or horse and of
any further training of a new police dog or horse or a new assistance dog by a
law enforcement officer or by the person who is blind, deaf, or hearing
impaired or the person with a mobility impairment assisted or served by the
assistance dog, which replacement or training is required because of the death
of or the serious physical harm to the dog or horse that was the subject of the
violation.
   (f)   This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian whose conduct
is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4741.
   (g)   This section only applies to an offender who knows or should know at
the time of the violation that the police dog or horse or assistance dog that
is the subject of a violation under this section is a police dog or horse or an
assistance dog.
   (h)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   ASSISTANCE DOG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.
      (2)   BLIND. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.
      (3)   PERSON WITH A MOBILITY IMPAIRMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 955.011.
      (4)   PHYSICAL HARM. Any injury, illness or other psychological
impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.
      (5)   POLICE DOG OR HORSE. A dog or horse that has been trained and may
be used to assist law enforcement officers in the performance of their official
duties.
      (6)   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM. Any of the following:
         A.   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death.
         B.   Any physical harm that causes permanent maiming or that involves
some temporary, substantial maiming.
         C.   Any physical harm that causes acute pain of a duration that
results in substantial suffering.
(R.C. § 2921.321)
§ 642.13 RAILROAD VANDALISM; CRIMINAL TRESPASS; INTERFERENCE WITH OPERATION OF
TRAIN; GRADE CROSSING DEVICE VANDALISM.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any object
at, onto, or in the path of, any railroad rail, railroad track, locomotive,
engine, railroad car, or other vehicle of a railroad company while such vehicle
is on a railroad track.
   (b)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall climb upon or into any
locomotive, engine, railroad car, or other vehicle of a railroad company when
it is on a railroad track.
   (c)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall disrupt, delay, or
prevent the operation of any train or other vehicle of a railroad company while
such vehicle is on a railroad track.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of railroad
vandalism. Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of criminal
trespass on a locomotive, engine, railroad car, or other railroad vehicle.
Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of interference with
the operation of a train. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
railroad vandalism; criminal trespass on a locomotive, engine, railroad car, or
other railroad vehicle; and interference with the operation of a train each is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of division (a), (b), or
(c) of this section causes serious physical harm to property or creates a
substantial risk of physical harm to any person, causes physical harm to any
person, or causes serious physical harm to any person, the violation is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.10)
   (e)   No person shall knowingly deface, damage, obstruct, remove, or
otherwise impair the operation of any railroad grade crossing warning signal or
other protective device, including any gate, bell, light, crossbuck, stop sign,
yield sign, advance warning sign, or advance pavement marking.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (e) of this section is guilty of railroad
grade crossing device vandalism. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
railroad grade crossing device vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the violation of division (e) of this section causes serious physical harm
to property or creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person,
causes physical harm to any person, or causes serious physical harm to any
person, railroad grade crossing device vandalism is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.101)
CHAPTER 648: PEACE DISTURBANCES
Section
   
648.01   Riot
   
648.02   Failure to disperse
   
648.03   Justifiable use of force to suppress riot
   
648.04   Disorderly conduct
   
648.05   Disturbing a lawful meeting
   
648.06   Misconduct at an emergency
   
648.07   Inducing panic
   
648.08   Making false alarms
   
648.09   Inciting to violence
   
648.10   Impeding public passage of an emergency service responder
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Arson, see §
642.06
   Assault, see §§
636.03,
636.04
   Barking or howling dogs, see §
618.07
   Cordoning off riot areas; prohibiting sales of firearms and explosives, see
R.C. § 3761.16
   “Deadly force” defined, see §
606.01
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Desecration, see §
642.05
   Detention of shoplifters and those committing motion picture piracy;
protection of institutional property, see §
654.17
   Fireworks, see §
678.12
   “Force” defined, see §
606.01
   Interfering with civil rights, see §
654.13
   Liquor sale to intoxicated person, see §
612.03
   Menacing, see §§
636.05 et seq.
   Noisy mufflers, see §
438.22
   “Peeling”; cracking exhaust noises, see §
432.38
   Pointing and discharging firearms and other weapons, see §
678.10
   Power to regulate peace disturbances, see R.C. § 715.49
   Resisting arrest, see §
654.08
   Riot and civil disorder assistance by State Highway Patrol, see R.C. §
5503.02
   Sirens, whistles and bells on motor vehicles, see §
438.21
   Suspension of beer and liquor sales during emergency, see R.C. § 4301.251
   Trespass, see §§
642.10,
642.11
§ 648.01 RIOT.
   (a)   No person shall participate with four or more others in a course of
disorderly conduct in violation of R.C. § 2917.11 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance:
      (1)   With purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of a
misdemeanor, other than disorderly conduct;
      (2)   With purpose to intimidate a public official or employee into
taking or refraining from official action, or with purpose to hinder, impede or
obstruct a function of government;
      (3)   With purpose to hinder, impede or obstruct the orderly process of
administration or instruction at an educational institution, or to interfere
with or disrupt lawful activities carried on at the institution.
   (b)   No person shall participate with four or more others with purpose to
do an act with unlawful force or violence, even though the act might otherwise
be lawful.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of riot, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(R.C. § 2917.03)
   (d)   For the purposes of prosecuting violations of this section, the
prosecution is not required to allege or prove that the offender expressly
agreed with four or more others to commit any act that constitutes a violation
this section prior to or while committing those acts.
(R.C. § 2917.031)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated riot, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2917.02
§ 648.02 FAILURE TO DISPERSE.
   (a)   Where five or more persons are participating in a course of disorderly
conduct in violation of R.C. § 2917.11 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, and there are other persons in the vicinity whose presence creates
the likelihood of physical harm to persons or property or of serious public
inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, a law enforcement officer or other public
official may order the participants and the other persons to disperse. No
person shall knowingly fail to obey the order.
   (b)   Nothing in this section requires persons to disperse who are peaceably
assembled for a lawful purpose.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to disperse.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(3) of this section,
failure to disperse is a minor misdemeanor.
      (3)   Failure to disperse is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the
failure to obey the order described in division (a) of this section creates the
likelihood of physical harm to persons or is committed at the scene of a fire,
accident, disaster, riot or emergency of any kind.
(R.C. § 2917.04)
§ 648.03 JUSTIFIABLE USE OF FORCE TO SUPPRESS RIOT.
   A law enforcement officer or firefighter engaged in suppressing a riot or in
protecting persons or property during a riot:
   (a)   Is justified in using force, other than deadly force, when and to the
extent he or she has probable cause to believe such force is necessary to
disperse or apprehend rioters;
   (b)   Is justified in using force, including deadly force, when and to the
extent he or she has probable cause to believe such force is necessary to
disperse or apprehend rioters whose conduct is creating a substantial risk of
serious physical harm to persons.
(R.C. § 2917.05)
§ 648.04 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (a)   No person shall recklessly cause inconvenience, annoyance or alarm to
another, by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Engaging in fighting, in threatening harm to persons or property,
or in violent or turbulent behavior;
      (2)   Making unreasonable noise or an offensively coarse utterance,
gesture or display, or communicating unwarranted and grossly abusive language
to any person;
      (3)   Insulting, taunting or challenging another, under circumstances in
which that conduct is likely to provoke a violent response;
      (4)   Hindering or preventing the movement of persons on a public street,
road, highway or right-of-way, or to, from, within or upon public or private
property, so as to interfere with the rights of others, and by any act that
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender;
      (5)   Creating a condition that is physically offensive to persons or
that presents a risk of physical harm to persons or property, by any act that
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender.
   (b)   No person while voluntarily intoxicated shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   In a public place or in the presence of two or more persons, engage
in conduct likely to be offensive or to cause inconvenience, annoyance or alarm
to persons of ordinary sensibilities, which conduct the offender, if he or she
were not intoxicated, should know is likely to have that effect on others;
      (2)   Engage in conduct or create a condition that presents a risk of
physical harm to himself, herself or another, or to the property of another.
   (c)   Violation of any statute or ordinance of which an element is operating
a motor vehicle, locomotive, watercraft, aircraft or other vehicle while under
the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse is not a violation of division
(b) of this section.
   (d)   If a person appears to an ordinary observer to be intoxicated, it is
probable cause to believe that the person is voluntarily intoxicated for
purposes of division (b) of this section.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disorderly conduct.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (e)(2) and (e)(3) of this
section, disorderly conduct is a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Disorderly conduct is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if any of
the following applies:
         A.   The offender persists in disorderly conduct after reasonable
warning or request to desist.
         B.   The offense is committed in the vicinity of a school or in a
school safety zone.
         C.   The offense is committed in the presence of any law enforcement
officer, firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services
person or other authorized person who is engaged in the person’s duties at the
scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot or emergency of any kind.
         D.   The offense is committed in the presence of any emergency
facility person who is engaged in the person’s duties in an emergency facility.
      (3)   If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to three or more violations of division (b) of this section, R.C. 2917.11(B),
or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation
of division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (f)   For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SCHOOL. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2925.01.
      (2)   EMERGENCY FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.04.
      (3)   EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. The singular of EMERGENCY FACILITY
PERSONNEL as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.
      (4)   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. The singular of EMERGENCY
MEDICAL SERVICES PERSONNEL as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.
(R.C. § 2917.11)
§ 648.05 DISTURBING A LAWFUL MEETING.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting,
procession or gathering, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Do any act which obstructs or interferes with the due conduct of
the meeting, procession or gathering.
      (2)   Make any utterance, gesture or display which outrages the
sensibilities of the group.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disturbing a lawful
meeting. Except as otherwise provided in this division, disturbing a lawful
meeting is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Disturbing a lawful meeting is a
misdemeanor of the first degree if either of the following applies:
      (1)   The violation is committed with the intent to disturb or disquiet
any assemblage of people met for religious worship at a tax-exempt place of
worship, regardless of whether the conduct is within the place at which the
assemblage is held or is on the property on which that place is located and
disturbs the order and solemnity of the assemblage.
      (2)   The violation is committed with the intent to prevent, disrupt, or
interfere with a virtual meeting or gathering of people for religious worship,
through use of a computer, computer system, telecommunications device, or other
electronic device or system, or in any other manner.
   (c)   As used in this section:
      (1)   COMPUTER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (2)   COMPUTER SYSTEM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (3)   TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2913.01.
      (4)   VIRTUAL MEETING OR GATHERING. A meeting or gathering by interactive
video conference or teleconference, or by a combination thereof.
(R.C. § 2917.12)
§ 648.06 MISCONDUCT AT AN EMERGENCY.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Hamper the lawful operations of any law enforcement officer,
firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services person or
other authorized person engaged in the person’s duties at the scene of a fire,
accident, disaster, riot or emergency of any kind;
      (2)   Hamper the lawful activities of any emergency facility person who
is engaged in the person’s duties in an emergency facility;
      (3)   Fail to obey the lawful order of any law enforcement officer
engaged in the law enforcement officer’s duties at the scene of or in
connection with a fire, accident, disaster, riot or emergency of any kind.
   (b)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit access or deny
information to any news media representative in the lawful exercise of the news
media representative’s duties.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misconduct at an emergency.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, misconduct at an emergency is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If violation of this section creates a risk
of physical harm to persons or property, misconduct at an emergency is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   EMERGENCY FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.04.
      (2)   EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. The singular of EMERGENCY FACILITY
PERSONNEL as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.
      (3)   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. The singular of EMERGENCY
MEDICAL SERVICES PERSONNEL as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.
(R.C. § 2917.13)
§ 648.07 INDUCING PANIC.
   (a)   No person shall cause the evacuation of any public place, or otherwise
cause serious public inconvenience or alarm, by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Initiating or circulating a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false.
      (2)   Threatening to commit any offense of violence.
      (3)   Committing any offense, with reckless disregard of the likelihood
that its commission will cause serious public inconvenience or alarm.
   (b)   Division (a)(1) of this section does not apply to any person
conducting an authorized fire or emergency drill.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inducing panic.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(3), inducing panic is
a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   If a violation of this section results in physical harm to any
person, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law. If a violation of this section results in economic harm of $1,000 or more,
inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the
public place involved in a violation of division (a)(1) is a school or an
institution of higher education, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law. If a violation of this section pertains to a
purported, threatened or actual use of a weapon of mass destruction, inducing
panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (d)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section that pertains
to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass destruction that the
offender did not possess or have the ability to use a weapon of mass
destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of mass destruction was
not a weapon of mass destruction.
      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section
of the Ohio Revised Code or these Codified Ordinances may be prosecuted under
this section, the other section, or both sections.
   (e)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   BIOLOGICAL AGENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2917.33.
      (2)   ECONOMIC HARM. Any of the following:
         A.   All direct, incidental and consequential pecuniary harm suffered
by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct. ECONOMIC HARM as described in
this division includes but is not limited to all of the following:
            1.   All wages, salaries or other compensation lost as a result of
the criminal conduct;
            2.   The cost of all wages, salaries or other compensation paid to
employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of
the criminal conduct;
            3.   The overhead costs incurred from the time that a business is
shut down as a result of the criminal conduct;
            4.   The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was
damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.
         B.   All costs incurred by the state or any political subdivision as a
result of, or in making any response to, the criminal conduct that constituted
the violation of this section or R.C. § 2917.32, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, including but not limited to all costs so
incurred by any law enforcement officers, firefighters, rescue personnel or
emergency medical services personnel of the state or the political subdivision.
      (3)   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSONNEL. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2133.21.
      (4)   INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION. Any of the following:
         A.   A state university or college as defined in R.C. § 3345.12(A)(1),
community college, state community college, university branch or technical
college;
         B.   A private, nonprofit college, university or other post-secondary
institution located in this state that possesses a certificate of authorization
issued by the Chancellor of Higher Education pursuant to R.C. Chapter 1713;
         C.   A post-secondary institution with a certificate of registration
issued by the State Board of Career Colleges and Schools pursuant to R.C.
Chapter 3332.
      (5)   SCHOOL. Any school operated by a board of education or any school
for which the Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum standards
under R.C. § 3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular
activities or training provided by the school is being conducted at the time a
violation of this section is committed.
      (6)   WEAPON OF MASS DESTRUCTION. Any of the following:
         A.   Any weapon that is designed or intended to cause death or serious
physical harm through the release, dissemination or impact of toxic or
poisonous chemicals, or other precursors;
         B.   Any weapon involving a disease organism or biological agent;
         C.   Any weapon that is designed to release radiation or radioactivity
at a level dangerous to human life;
         D.   Any of the following, except to the extent that the item or
device in question is expressly excepted from the definition of “destructive
device” pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(4) and regulations issued under that
section:
            1.   Any explosive, incendiary or poison gas bomb, grenade, rocket
having a propellant charge of more than four ounces, missile having an
explosive or incendiary charge of more than one-quarter ounce, mine or similar
device;
            2.   Any combination of parts either designed or intended for use
in converting any item or device into any item or device described in division
D.1. of this definition and from which an item or device described in that
division may be readily assembled.
(R.C. § 2917.31)
§ 648.08 MAKING FALSE ALARMS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false and likely to cause public inconvenience or alarm.
      (2)   Knowingly cause a false alarm of fire or other emergency to be
transmitted to or within any organization, public or private, for dealing with
emergencies involving a risk of physical harm to persons or property.
      (3)   Report to any law enforcement agency an alleged offense or other
incident within its concern, knowing that the offense did not occur;
      (4)   Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false and likely to impede the operation of a critical
infrastructure facility.
   (b)   This section does not apply to any person conducting an authorized
fire or emergency drill.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making false alarms. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, making false alarms is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If a violation of this section results in economic harm of
$1,000 or more, making false alarms is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If a violation of this section pertains to a purported,
threatened, or actual use of a weapon of mass destruction, making false alarms
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (d)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section that pertains
to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass destruction that the
offender did not possess or have the ability to use a weapon of mass
destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of mass destruction was
not a weapon of mass destruction.
      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section
of the Ohio Revised Code or these Codified Ordinances may be prosecuted under
this section, the other section, or both sections.
   (e)   As used in this section:
(1)   CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2911.21.
      (2)   ECONOMIC HARM and WEAPON OF MASS DESTRUCTION. Have the same meaning
as in R.C. § 2917.31.
(R.C. § 2917.32)
§ 648.09 INCITING TO VIOLENCE.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly engage in conduct designed to urge or incite
another to commit any offense of violence when either of the following apply:
      (1)   The conduct takes place under circumstances that create a clear and
present danger that any offense of violence will be committed.
      (2)   The conduct proximately results in the commission of any offense of
violence.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inciting to violence. If
the offense of violence that the other person is being urged or incited to
commit is a misdemeanor, inciting to violence is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offense of violence that the other person is being urged or
incited to commit is a felony, inciting to violence is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2917.01)
§ 648.10 IMPEDING PUBLIC PASSAGE OF AN EMERGENCY SERVICE RESPONDER.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly obstruct any
highway, street, sidewalk, or any other public passage in such a manner as to
render the highway, street, sidewalk, or passage impassable without
unreasonable inconvenience or hazard if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The obstruction prevents an emergency vehicle from accessing a
highway or street, prevents an emergency service responder from responding to
an emergency, or prevents an emergency vehicle or an emergency service
responder from having access to an exit from an emergency.
      (2)   Upon receipt of a request or order from an emergency service
responder to remove or cease the obstruction, the person refuses to remove or
cease the obstruction.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not limit or affect the application
of R.C. § 2921.31 or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code. Any conduct
that is a violation of division (a) of this section and that also is a
violation of R.C. § 2921.31 or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code may
be prosecuted under this section, the other section of the Ohio Revised Code,
or both sections.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawfully impeding public
passage of an emergency service responder, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   As used in this section, “emergency service responder” has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2903.13.
(R.C. § 2917.14)
CHAPTER 654: PUBLIC SERVICE, ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section
   
654.01   Falsification
   
654.02   False report of child abuse or neglect
   
654.03   Compounding a crime
   
654.04   Failure to report a crime or death
   
654.05   Failure to aid a law enforcement officer
   
654.06   Obstructing official business
   
654.07   Obstructing justice
   
654.08   Resisting arrest
   
654.09   Compliance with lawful order of police officer; fleeing
   
654.10   Having an unlawful interest in a public contract
   
654.11   Soliciting or receiving improper compensation
   
654.12   Dereliction of duty
   
654.13   Interfering with civil rights
   
654.14   Impersonating an officer
   
654.15   Display of law enforcement agency emblem
   
654.16   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police
Department
   
654.17   Detention of shoplifters and those committing motion picture piracy;
protection of institutional property
   
654.18   Failure to disclose personal information
   
654.19   Misuse of 9-1-1 system
   
654.20   Using sham legal process
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Arrest without warrant for misdemeanor, see R.C. § 2935.03
   Criteria for probation; conditions of probation, see R.C. § 2951.02
   Declaratory judgment in sex related offenses, see §
666.15
   Degree of offense; charge and verdict; prior conviction, see R.C. § 2945.75
   Discharge for delay in trial, see R.C. § 2945.73
   Extension of time for hearing or trial, see R.C. § 2945.72
   Injunction and abatement of nuisance in sex related offenses, see §
666.16
   Justifiable use of force to suppress riot, see §
648.03
   License or permit to possess dangerous ordnance, see §
678.06    
   Making false alarms, see §
648.08
   Misconduct at an emergency, see §
648.06
   Penalties and sentencing, see
Ch. 698
   Procedure on affidavit or complaint; withdrawal of unexecuted warrants, see
R.C. § 2935.10
   Rabies quarantine, see §
618.12
   Registration of dogs, see §
618.08
   Registration of sex offenders in cities and counties, see R.C. §§ 2950.01 et
seq.
   Right of trial by jury, see R.C. § 2945.17
   Rules of evidence in sex related offenses, see §
666.10
   Satisfaction of fine; credit for time served, see R.C. § 2947.14
   Time within which hearing or trial must be held, see R.C. § 2945.71
   Treatment of drug dependent persons in lieu of conviction, see R.C. §
2951.041
§ 654.01 FALSIFICATION.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement, or knowingly swear
or affirm the truth of a false statement previously made, when any of the
following applies.
      (1)   The statement is made in any official proceeding.
      (2)   The statement is made with purpose to incriminate another.
      (3)   The statement is made with purpose to mislead a public official in
performing his or her official function.
      (4)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the payment of
unemployment compensation; Ohio Works First; prevention, retention and
contingency benefits and services; disability financial assistance; retirement
benefits or health care coverage from a state retirement system; economic
development assistance as defined in R.C. § 9.66; or other benefits
administered by a governmental agency or paid out of a public treasury.
      (5)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the issuance by a
governmental agency of a license, permit, authorization, certificate,
registration, release or provider agreement.
      (6)   The statement is sworn or affirmed before a notary public or
another person empowered to administer oaths.
      (7)   The statement is in writing on or in connection with a report or
return that is required or authorized by law.
      (8)   The statement is in writing, and is made with purpose to induce
another to extend credit to or employ the offender, or to confer any degree,
diploma, certificate of attainment, award of excellence or honor on the
offender, or to extend to or bestow upon the offender any other valuable
benefit or distinction, when the person to whom the statement is directed
relies upon it to his or her detriment.
      (9)   The statement is made with purpose to commit or facilitate the
commission of a theft offense.
      (10)   The statement is knowingly made to a probate court in connection
with any action, proceeding or other matter within its jurisdiction, either
orally or in a written document, including but not limited to an application,
petition, complaint or other pleading, or an inventory, account or report.
      (11)   The statement is made on an account, form, record, stamp, label or
other writing that is required by law.
      (12)   The statement is made in connection with the purchase of a
firearm, as defined in R.C. § 2923.11, and in conjunction with the furnishing
to the seller of the firearm of a fictitious or altered driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit, a fictitious or altered identification card, or any
other document that contains false information about the purchaser’s identity.
      (13)   The statement is made in a document or instrument of writing that
purports to be a judgment, lien or claim of indebtedness and is filed or
recorded with the Secretary of State, a County Recorder, or the clerk of a
court of record.
      (14)   The statement is made in an application filed with a county
sheriff pursuant to R.C. § 2923.125 in order to obtain or renew a concealed
handgun license or is made in an affidavit submitted to a county sheriff to
obtain a concealed handgun license on a temporary emergency basis under R.C. §
2923.1213.
      (15)   The statement is required under R.C. § 5743.71 in connection with
the person’s purchase of cigarettes or tobacco products in a delivery sale.
   (b)   No person, in connection with the purchase of a firearm as defined in
R.C. § 2923.11, shall knowingly furnish to the seller of the firearm a
fictitious or altered driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit, a
fictitious or altered identification card, or any other document that contains
false information about the purchaser’s identity.
   (c)   No person, in an attempt to obtain a concealed handgun license under
R.C. § 2923.125, shall knowingly present to a sheriff a fictitious or altered
document that purports to be certification of the person’s competence in
handling a handgun as described in division (B)(3) of that section.
   (d)   It is no defense to a charge under division (a)(6) of this section
that the oath or affirmation was administered or taken in an irregular manner.
   (e)   If contradictory statements relating to the same fact are made by the
offender within the period of the statute of limitations for falsification, it
is not necessary for the prosecution to prove which statement was false, but
only that one or the other was false.
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), (a)
(5), (a)(6), (a)(7), (a)(8), (a)(10), (a)(11), (a)(13) or (a)(15) of this
section is guilty of falsification. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, falsification is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(9) of this section is guilty of
falsification in a theft offense. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, falsification in a theft offense is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the value of the property or services stolen is $1,000 or more,
falsification in a theft offense is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (a)(12) or (b) of this section is guilty
of falsification to purchase a firearm, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (a)(14) or (c) of this section is guilty
of falsification to obtain a concealed handgun license, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section in removal
proceedings under R.C. § 319.26, 321.37, 507.13 or 733.78 is guilty of
falsification regarding a removal proceeding, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.13)
   (g)   (1)   No person who has knowingly failed to maintain proof of
financial responsibility in accordance with R.C. § 4509.101 shall produce any
document or present to a peace officer an electronic wireless communications
device that is displaying any text or images with the purpose to mislead a
peace officer upon the request of a peace officer for proof of financial
responsibility made in accordance with R.C. § 4509.101(D)(2).
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (g) is guilty of falsification, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4509.102)
Statutory reference:
   Civil liability for violations of this section, see R.C. § 2921.13(G)
§ 654.02 FALSE REPORT OF CHILD ABUSE OR NEGLECT.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make or cause another person to make a false
report under R.C. § 2151.421(B) alleging that any person has committed an act
or omission that resulted in a child being an abused child as defined in R.C. §
2151.031 or a neglected child as defined in R.C. § 2151.03.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or causing a false
report of child abuse or child neglect, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2921.14)
§ 654.03 COMPOUNDING A CRIME.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly demand, accept or agree to accept anything
of value in consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon a pending
criminal prosecution.
   (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section when both
of the following apply:
      (1)   The pending prosecution involved is for a violation of R.C. §
2913.02, 2913.11, 2913.21(B)(2) or 2913.47, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, of which the actor under this section was the victim.
      (2)   The thing of value demanded, accepted or agreed to be accepted, in
consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon the prosecution, did not
exceed an amount that the actor reasonably believed due him or her as
restitution for the loss caused him or her by the offense.
   (c)   When a prosecuting witness abandons or agrees to abandon a prosecution
under division (b) of this section, the abandonment or agreement in no way
binds the state to abandoning the prosecution.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of compounding a crime, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2921.21)
§ 654.04 FAILURE TO REPORT A CRIME OR DEATH.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2) of this section, no
person, knowing that a felony has been or is being committed, shall knowingly
fail to report the information to law enforcement authorities.
      (2)   No person, knowing that a violation of R.C. § 2913.04(B) has been
or is being committed or that the person has received information derived from
such a violation, shall knowingly fail to report the violation to law
enforcement authorities.
   (b)   Except for conditions that are within the scope of division (e) of
this section, no person giving aid to a sick or injured person shall
negligently fail to report to law enforcement authorities any gunshot or stab
wound treated or observed by the person, or any serious physical harm to
persons that the person knows or has reasonable cause to believe resulted from
an offense of violence.
   (c)   No person who discovers the body or acquires the first knowledge of
the death of a person shall fail to report the death immediately to a physician
or advanced practice registered nurse whom the person knows to be treating the
deceased for a condition from which death at such time would not be unexpected,
or to a law enforcement officer, an ambulance service, an emergency squad, or
the coroner in a political subdivision in which the body is discovered, the
death is believed to have occurred, or knowledge concerning the death is
obtained. For purposes of this division, “advanced practice registered nurse”
does not include a certified registered nurse anesthetist.
   (d)   No person shall fail to provide upon request of the person to whom a
report required by division (c) of this section was made, or to any law
enforcement officer who has reasonable cause to assert the authority to
investigate the circumstances surrounding the death, any facts within his or
her knowledge that may have a bearing on the investigation of the death.
   (e)   (1)   As used in this section, BURN INJURY means any of the following:
         A.   Second or third degree burns;
         B.   Any burns to the upper respiratory tract or laryngeal edema due
to the inhalation of super-heated air;
         C.   Any burn injury or wound that may result in death;
         D.   Any physical harm to persons caused by or as the result of the
use of fireworks, novelties and trick noisemakers, and wire sparklers, as each
is defined by R.C. § 3743.01.
      (2)   No physician, nurse, physician assistant, or limited practitioner
who, outside a hospital, sanitarium or other medical facility, attends or
treats a person who has sustained a burn injury inflicted by an explosion or
other incendiary device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a
violent, malicious or criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury
immediately to the local arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the
jurisdiction in which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to local
law enforcement authorities.
      (3)   No manager, superintendent or other person in charge of a hospital,
sanitarium or other medical facility in which a person is attended or treated
for any burn injury inflicted by an explosion or other incendiary device, or
that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a violent, malicious or
criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury immediately to the local
arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the jurisdiction in which the person
is attended or treated, or otherwise to local law enforcement authorities.
      (4)   No person who is required to report any burn injury under division
(e)(2) or (e)(3) of this section shall fail to file, within three working days
after attending or treating the victim, a written report of the burn injury
with the office of the State Fire Marshal. The report shall be made on a form
provided by the State Fire Marshal.
      (5)   Anyone participating in the making of reports under division (e) of
this section or anyone participating in a judicial proceeding resulting from
the reports is immune from any civil or criminal liability that otherwise might
be incurred or imposed as a result of such actions. Notwithstanding R.C. §
4731.22, the physician-patient relationship or advanced practice registered
nurse-patient relationship is not a ground for excluding evidence regarding a
person’s burn injury or the cause of the burn injury in any judicial proceeding
resulting from a report submitted under division (e) of this section.
   (f)   (1)   No person who knows that a licensed medical professional has
committed an offense under R.C. Chapter 2907, a violation of a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to such offense, or a substantially
equivalent criminal offense in another jurisdiction, against a patient of the
licensed medical professional shall fail to report such knowledge to law
enforcement authorities within 30 days of obtaining the knowledge.
      (2)   Except for a self-report or participation in the offense or
violation being reported, any person who makes a report within the 30-day
period provided in division (f)(1) of this section or any person who
participates in a judicial proceeding that results from such report is immune
from civil or criminal liability that otherwise might be incurred or imposed as
a result of making that report or participating in that proceeding so long as
the person is acting in good faith without fraud or malice.
      (3)   The physician-patient relationship or physician assistant-patient
relationship is not a ground for excluding evidence regarding the person's
knowledge of a licensed medical professional's commission of an offense or
violation reported under division (f)(1) of this section, against that licensed
medical professional in any judicial proceeding resulting from a report made
under that division.
      (4)   As used in division (f) of this section, LICENSED MEDICAL
PROFESSIONAL has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
   (g)   (1)   Any doctor of medicine or osteopathic medicine, hospital intern
or resident, nurse, psychologist, social worker, independent social worker,
social work assistant, licensed professional clinical counselor, licensed
professional counselor, independent marriage and family therapist, or marriage
and family therapist who knows or has reasonable cause to believe that a
patient or client has been the victim of domestic violence, as defined in R.C.
§ 3113.31, shall note that knowledge or belief and the basis for it in the
patient’s or client’s records.
      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 4731.22, the physician-patient privilege or
advanced practice registered nurse-patient privilege shall not be a ground for
excluding any information regarding the report containing the knowledge or
belief noted under division (g)(1) of this section, and the information may be
admitted as evidence in accordance with the Rules of Evidence.
   (h)   Division (a) or (d) of this section does not require disclosure of
information, when any of the following applies:
      (1)   The information is privileged by reason of the relationship between
attorney and client; physician and patient; advanced practice registered nurse
and patient; licensed psychologist or licensed school psychologist and client;
licensed professional clinical counselor, licensed professional counselor,
independent social worker, social worker, independent marriage and family
therapist, or marriage and family therapist and client; member of the clergy,
rabbi, minister, or priest and any person communicating information
confidentially to the member of the clergy, rabbi, minister, or priest for a
religious counseling purpose of a professional character; husband and wife; or
a communications assistant and those who are a party to a telecommunications
relay service call.
      (2)   The information would tend to incriminate a member of the actor’s
immediate family.
      (3)   Disclosure of the information would amount to revealing a news
source, privileged under R.C. § 2739.04 or 2739.12.
      (4)   Disclosure of the information would amount to disclosure by a
member of the ordained clergy of an organized religious body of a confidential
communication made to that member of the clergy in that member’s capacity as a
member of the clergy by a person seeking the aid or counsel of that member of
the clergy.
      (5)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the
actor in the course of the actor’s duties in connection with a bona fide
program of treatment or services for persons with drug dependencies or persons
in danger of drug dependence, which program is maintained or conducted by a
hospital, clinic, person, agency, or community addiction services provider
whose alcohol and drug addiction services are certified pursuant to R.C. §
5119.36.
      (6)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the
actor in the course of the actor’s duties in connection with a bona fide
program for providing counseling services to victims of crimes that are
violations of R.C. § 2907.02 or R.C. § 2907.05 or to victims of felonious
sexual penetration in violation of former R.C. § 2907.12. As used in this
division, “counseling services” include services provided in an informal
setting by a person who, by education or experience, is competent to provide
those services.
   (i)   No disclosure of information pursuant to this section gives rise to
any liability or recrimination for a breach of privilege or confidence.
   (j)   Whoever violates division (a), (b), or (f)(1) of this section is
guilty of failure to report a crime. Violation of division (a)(1) or (f)(1) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Violation of division (a)
(2) or (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (k)   Whoever violates division (c) or (d) of this section is guilty of
failure to report knowledge of a death, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (l)   (1)   Whoever negligently violates division (e) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Whoever knowingly violates division (e) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (m)   As used in this section, NURSE includes an advanced practice
registered nurse, registered nurse, and licensed practical nurse.
(R.C. § 2921.22)
§ 654.05 FAILURE TO AID A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   (a)   No person shall negligently fail or refuse to aid a law enforcement
officer, when called upon for assistance in preventing or halting the
commission of an offense, or in apprehending or detaining an offender, when the
aid can be given without a substantial risk of physical harm to the person
giving it.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to aid a law
enforcement officer, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2921.23)
§ 654.06 OBSTRUCTING OFFICIAL BUSINESS.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so and with purpose to prevent,
obstruct or delay the performance by a public official of any authorized act
within the public official’s official capacity, shall do any act that hampers
or impedes a public official in the performance of the public official’s lawful
duties.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing official
business. Except as otherwise provided in this division, obstructing official
business is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If a violation of this section
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, obstructing official business is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.31)
§ 654.07 OBSTRUCTING JUSTICE.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to hinder the discovery, apprehension,
prosecution, conviction or punishment of another for crime, or to assist
another to benefit from the commission of a crime, and no person, with purpose
to hinder the discovery, apprehension, prosecution, adjudication as a
delinquent child, or disposition of a child for an act that if committed by an
adult would be a crime or to assist a child to benefit from the commission of
an act that if committed by an adult would be a crime, shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Harbor or conceal the other person or child.
      (2)   Provide the other person or child with money, transportation, a
weapon, a disguise or other means of avoiding discovery or apprehension.
      (3)   Warn the other person or child of impending discovery or
apprehension.
      (4)   Destroy or conceal physical evidence of the crime or act, or induce
any person to withhold testimony or information or to elude legal process
summoning him or her to testify or supply evidence.
      (5)   Communicate false information to any person.
      (6)   Prevent or obstruct any person, by means of force, intimidation or
deception, from performing any act to aid in the discovery, apprehension or
prosecution of the other person or child.
   (b)   A person may be prosecuted for, and may be convicted of or adjudicated
a delinquent child for committing, a violation of division (a) of this section
regardless of whether the person or child aided ultimately is apprehended for,
is charged with, is convicted of, pleads guilty to or is adjudicated a
delinquent child for committing the crime or act the person or child aided
committed. The crime or act the person or child aided committed shall be used
under division (c) of this section in determining the penalty for violation of
division (a) of this section, regardless of whether the person or child aided
ultimately is apprehended for, is charged with, is convicted of, pleads guilty
to or is adjudicated a delinquent child for committing the crime or act the
person or child aided committed.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing justice.
      (1)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a misdemeanor or if
the act committed by the child aided would be a misdemeanor if committed by an
adult, obstructing justice is a misdemeanor of the same degree as the crime
committed by the person aided or a misdemeanor of the same degree that the act
committed by the child aided would be if committed by an adult.
      (2)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a felony or if the
act committed by the child aided would be a felony if committed by an adult, or
if the crime or act committed by the person or child aided is an act of
terrorism, obstructing justice is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (d)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   ACT OF TERRORISM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.21.
      (2)   ADULT AND CHILD. Have the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.011.
      (3)   DELINQUENT CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2152.02.
(R.C. § 2921.32)
§ 654.08 RESISTING ARREST.
   (a)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of himself, herself or another.
   (b)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of the person or another person and, during the course of or as a
result of the resistance or interference, cause physical harm to a law
enforcement officer.
   (c)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of the person or another person if either of the following
applies:
      (1)   The offender, during the course of or as a result of the resistance
or interference, recklessly causes physical harm to a law enforcement officer
by means of a deadly weapon; or
      (2)   The offender, during the course of the resistance or interference,
brandishes a deadly weapon.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of resisting arrest. A
violation of division (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. A violation of division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. A violation of division (c) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (e)   As used in this section, DEADLY WEAPON has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2923.11.
(R.C. § 2921.33)
Statutory reference:
   Unlawful taking of deadly weapon from law enforcement officer, felony, see
R.C. § 2911.01
§ 654.09 COMPLIANCE WITH LAWFUL ORDER OF POLICE OFFICER; FLEEING.
   (a)   No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of
any police officer invested with authority to direct, control or regulate
traffic.
   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle so as willfully to elude or
flee a police officer after receiving a visible or audible signal from a police
officer to bring the person’s motor vehicle to a stop.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to comply
with an order or signal of a police officer.
      (2)   A violation of division (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (c)(4) and (c)(5) of this section,
a violation of division (b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   A violation of division (b) of this section is a felony and shall
be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier of fact
finds by proof beyond a reasonable doubt that in committing the offense, the
offender was fleeing immediately after the commission of a felony.
      (5)   A.   A violation of division (b) of this section is a felony and
shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier
of fact finds any of the following by proof beyond a reasonable doubt:
            1.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender was a
proximate cause of serious physical harm to persons or property.
            2.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender caused a
substantial risk of serious physical harm to persons or property.
         B.   If a police officer pursues an offender who is violating division
(b) of this section and division (c)(5)A. of this section applies, the
sentencing court, in determining the seriousness of an offender’s conduct for
purposes of sentencing the offender for a violation of division (b) of this
section, shall consider, along with the factors set forth in R.C. §§ 2929.12
and 2929.13 that are required to be considered, all of the following:
            1.   The duration of the pursuit;
            2.   The distance of the pursuit;
            3.   The rate of speed at which the offender operated the motor
vehicle during the pursuit;
            4.   Whether the offender failed to stop for traffic lights or stop
signs during the pursuit;
            5.   The number of traffic lights or stop signs for which the
offender failed to stop during the pursuit;
            6.   Whether the offender operated the motor vehicle during the
pursuit without lighted lights during a time when lighted lights are required;
            7.   Whether the offender committed a moving violation during the
pursuit;
            8.   The number of moving violations the offender committed during
the pursuit;
            9.   Any other relevant factors indicating that the offender’s
conduct is more serious than conduct normally constituting the offense.
   (d)   In addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of division
(a) of this section, the court shall impose a class five suspension from the
range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). If the offender previously has been
found guilty of an offense under this section or under R.C. § 2921.331 or any
other substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, in addition to any other
sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class one suspension
as described in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(1). The court may grant limited driving
privileges to the offender on a suspension imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of this section as set forth in R.C. § 4510.021. No judge shall suspend any
portion of the suspension under a class one suspension of an offender's
license, permit, or privilege required by this division.
   (e)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   MOVING VIOLATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2743.70.
      (2)   POLICE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(R.C. § 2921.331(A) - (C), (E), (F))
§ 654.10 HAVING AN UNLAWFUL INTEREST IN A PUBLIC CONTRACT.
   (a)   No public official shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Authorize or employ the authority of the public official’s office
to secure authorization of any public contract in which the public official, a
member of the public official’s family, or any of the public official’s
business associates has an interest.
      (2)   Authorize or employ the authority or influence of the public
official’s office to secure the investment of public funds in any share, bond,
mortgage or other security with respect to which the public official, a member
of the public official’s family or any of the public official’s business
associates either has an interest, is an underwriter or receives any brokerage,
origination or servicing fees.
      (3)   During the public official’s term of office or within one year
thereafter, occupy any position of profit in the prosecution of a public
contract authorized by the public official or by a legislative body, commission
or board of which the public official was a member at the time of
authorization, unless the contract was let by competitive bidding to the lowest
and best bidder.
      (4)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract
entered into by or for the use of the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality with which the public official is connected.
      (5)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract
that is not let by competitive bidding when required by law, and that involves
more than $150.
   (b)   In the absence of bribery or a purpose to defraud, a public official,
member of a public official’s family or any of a public official’s business
associates shall not be considered as having an interest in a public contract
or the investment of public funds, if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The interest of that person is limited to owning or controlling
shares of the corporation, or being a creditor of the corporation or other
organization, that is the contractor on the public contract involved, or that
is the issuer of the security in which public funds are invested.
      (2)   The shares owned or controlled by that person do not exceed 5% of
the outstanding shares of the corporation, and the amount due that person as
creditor does not exceed 5% of the total indebtedness of the corporation or
other organization.
      (3)   That person, prior to the time the public contract is entered into,
files with the political subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality
involved, an affidavit giving that person’s exact status in connection with the
corporation or other organization.
   (c)   This section does not apply to a public contract in which a public
official, member of a public official’s family, or one of a public official’s
business associates has an interest, when all of the following apply:
      (1)   The subject of the public contract is necessary supplies or
services for the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved.
      (2)   The supplies or services are unobtainable elsewhere for the same or
lower cost, or are being furnished to the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality as part of a continuing course of dealing established
prior to the public official’s becoming associated with the political
subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality involved.
      (3)   The treatment accorded the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality is either preferential to or the same as that
accorded other customers or clients in similar transactions.
      (4)   The entire transaction is conducted at arm’s length, with full
knowledge by the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved, of the interest of the public official, member of the
public official’s family, or business associate, and the public official takes
no part in the deliberations or decision of the political subdivision or
governmental agency or instrumentality with respect to the public contract.
   (d)   Division (a)(4) of this section does not prohibit participation by a
public employee in any housing program funded by public moneys if the public
employee otherwise qualifies for the program and does not use the authority or
influence of the public employee’s office or employment to secure benefits from
the program and if the moneys are to be used on the primary residence of the
public employee. This participation does not constitute an unlawful interest in
a public contract in violation of this section.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of having an unlawful interest
in a public contract. Violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. Violation of division
(a)(3), (a)(4) or (a)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (f)   It is not a violation of this section for a prosecuting attorney to
appoint assistants and employees in accordance with R.C. §§ 309.06 and
2921.421, or for a chief legal officer of a municipality or an official
designated as prosecutor in a municipality to appoint assistants and employees
in accordance with R.C. §§ 733.621 and 2921.421, or for a township law director
appointed under R.C. § 504.15 to appoint assistants and employees in accordance
with R.C. §§ 504.151 and 2921.421.
   (g)   Any public contract in which a public official, a member of the public
official’s family or any of the public official’s business associates has an
interest in violation of this section is void and unenforceable. Any contract
securing the investment of public funds in which a public official, a member of
the public official’s family or any of the public official’s business
associates has an interest, is an underwriter or receives any brokerage,
origination or servicing fees and that was entered into in violation of this
section is void and unenforceable.
   (h)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CHIEF LEGAL OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 733.621.
      (2)   PUBLIC CONTRACT. Any of the following:
         A.   The purchase or acquisition, or a contract for the purchase or
acquisition, of property or services by or for the use of the state or any of
its political subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either,
including the employment of an individual by the state, any of its political
subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either.
         B.   A contract for the design, construction, alteration, repair or
maintenance of any public property.
(R.C. § 2921.42)
§ 654.11 SOLICITING OR RECEIVING IMPROPER COMPENSATION.
   (a)   No public servant shall knowingly solicit or accept and no person
shall knowingly promise or give to a public servant either of the following:
      (1)   Any compensation, other than as allowed by R.C. § 102.03(G), (H),
(I) or other provisions of law, to perform the public servant’s official
duties, to perform any other act or service in the public servant’s public
capacity, for the general performance of the duties of the public servant’s
public office or public employment, or as a supplement to the public servant’s
public compensation.
      (2)   Additional or greater fees or costs than are allowed by law to
perform the public servant’s official duties.
   (b)   No public servant for the public servant’s own personal or business
use and no person for the person’s own personal or business use or for the
personal or business use of a public servant or party official, shall solicit
or accept anything of value in consideration of either of the following:
      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining or renewing the appointment of
any person to any public office, employment or agency.
      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with
respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion or other
material aspects of employment.
   (c)   No person for the benefit of a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing
entity shall coerce any contribution in consideration of either of the
following:
      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining or renewing the appointment of
any person to any public office, employment or agency.
      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with
respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion or other
material aspects of employment.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of soliciting improper
compensation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (e)   A public servant who is convicted of a violation of this section is
disqualified from holding any public office, employment or position of trust in
this state for a period of seven years from the date of conviction.
   (f)   Divisions (a), (b) and (c) of this section do not prohibit any person
from making voluntary contributions to a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing
entity or prohibit a political party, campaign committee, legislative campaign
fund, political action committee or political contributing entity from
accepting voluntary contributions.
(R.C. § 2921.43)
§ 654.12 DERELICTION OF DUTY.
   (a)   No law enforcement officer shall negligently do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to serve a lawful warrant without delay.
      (2)   Fail to prevent or halt the commission of an offense or to
apprehend an offender, when it is in the law enforcement officer’s power to do
so alone or with available assistance.
   (b)   No law enforcement, ministerial or judicial officer shall negligently
fail to perform a lawful duty in a criminal case or proceeding.
   (c)   No officer, having charge of a detention facility, shall negligently
do any of the following:
      (1)   Allow the detention facility to become littered or unsanitary.
      (2)   Fail to provide persons confined in the detention facility with
adequate food, clothing, bedding, shelter and medical attention.
      (3)   Fail to control an unruly prisoner, or to prevent intimidation of
or physical harm to a prisoner by another.
      (4)   Allow a prisoner to escape.
      (5)   Fail to observe any lawful and reasonable regulation for the
management of the detention facility.
   (d)   No public official shall recklessly create a deficiency, incur a
liability or expend a greater sum than is appropriated by the Council for the
use in any one year of the department, agency, or institution with which the
public official is connected.
   (e)   No public servant shall recklessly fail to perform a duty expressly
imposed by law with respect to the public servant’s office, or recklessly do
any act expressly forbidden by law with respect to the public servant’s office.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of dereliction of duty, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (g)   Except as otherwise provided by law, a public servant who is a county
treasurer; county auditor; township fiscal officer; city auditor; city
treasurer; village fiscal officer; village clerk-treasurer; village clerk; in
the case of a municipal corporation having a charter that designates an officer
who, by virtue of the charter, has duties and functions similar to those of the
city or village officers referred to in this section, the officer so designated
by the charter; school district treasurer; fiscal officer of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314; treasurer of a science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics school established under R.C. Chapter 3326; or
fiscal officer of a college-preparatory boarding school established under R.C.
Chapter 3328 and is convicted of or pleads guilty to dereliction of duty is
disqualified from holding any public office, employment, or position of trust
in this state for four years following the date of conviction or of entry of
the plea, and is not entitled to hold any public office until any repayment or
restitution required by the court is satisfied.
   (h)   As used in this section, PUBLIC SERVANT includes the following:
      (1)   An officer or employee of a contractor as defined in R.C. § 9.08;
      (2)   A fiscal officer employed by the operator of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314 or by the operator of a college-preparatory
boarding school established under R.C. Chapter 3328.
(R.C. § 2921.44)
§ 654.13 INTERFERING WITH CIVIL RIGHTS.
   (a)   No public servant, under color of the public servant’s office,
employment, or authority, shall knowingly deprive, or conspire or attempt to
deprive any person of a constitutional or statutory right.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interfering with civil
rights, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2921.45)
Statutory reference:
   Restraining or confining pregnant children or pregnant women, see R.C. §
2152.75(B) and R.C. § 2901.10
§ 654.14 IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. An employee of the United States
who serves in a position the duties of which are primarily the investigation,
apprehension or detention of individuals suspected or convicted of offenses
under the criminal laws of the United States.
      (2)   IMPERSONATE. To act the part of, assume the identity of, wear the
uniform or any part of the uniform of, or display the identification of a
particular person or of a member of a class of persons with purpose to make
another person believe that the actor is that particular person or is a member
of that class of persons.
      (3)   INVESTIGATOR OF THE BUREAU OF CRIMINAL IDENTIFICATION AND
INVESTIGATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.11.
      (4)   PEACE OFFICER. A Sheriff, Deputy Sheriff, Marshal, Deputy Marshal,
member of the organized police department of a municipal corporation or
township constable, who is employed by a political subdivision of this state; a
member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under
R.C. § 3735.31(D); a member of a police force employed by a regional transit
authority under R.C. § 306.35(Y); a state university law enforcement officer
appointed under R.C. § 3345.04; a veterans’ home police officer appointed under
R.C. § 5907.02; a special police officer employed by a port authority under
R.C. § 4582.04 or 4582.28; an officer, agent or employee of the state or any of
its agencies, instrumentalities or political subdivisions, upon whom, by
statute, a duty to conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is
imposed and the authority to arrest violators is conferred, within limits of
that statutory duty and authority; or a State Highway Patrol trooper whose
primary duties are to preserve the peace, to protect life and property and to
enforce the laws, ordinances or rules of the state or any of its political
subdivisions.
      (5)   PRIVATE POLICE OFFICER. Any security guard, special police officer,
private detective or other person who is privately employed in a police
capacity.
   (b)   No person shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation or
federal law enforcement officer.
   (c)   No person, by impersonating a peace officer, private police officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation or
federal law enforcement officer, shall arrest or detain any person, search any
person or search the property of any person.
   (d)   No person, with purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of an
offense, shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer, federal law
enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the municipality or the
state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation.
   (e)   No person shall commit a felony while impersonating a peace officer,
private police officer, federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or
employee of the municipality or of the state or investigator of the Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation.
   (f)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (b) of this
section that the impersonation of the peace officer, private police officer,
federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the
municipality or of the state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal
Identification and Investigation was for a lawful purpose.
   (g)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Whoever violates division (c) or (d) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the purpose of a
violation of division (d) of this section is to commit or facilitate the
commission of a felony, a violation of division (d) is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. Whoever violates division (e) of this
section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.51)
§ 654.15 DISPLAY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY EMBLEM.
   (a)   No person who is not entitled to do so shall knowingly display on a
motor vehicle the emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law
enforcement officers.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of the unlawful display of the
emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law enforcement
officers, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2913.441)
§ 654.16 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED OR FORFEITED PROPERTY HELD BY POLICE
DEPARTMENT.
   (a)   Safekeeping of property in custody.
      (1)   A.   Any property that has been lost, abandoned, stolen, seized
pursuant to a search warrant, or otherwise lawfully seized or forfeited and
that is in the custody of the Police Department shall be kept safely by the
Police Department, pending the time it no longer is needed as evidence or for
another lawful purpose, and shall be disposed of pursuant to this section or
R.C. §§ 2981.12 and 2981.13.
         B.   This section does not apply to the custody and disposal of any of
the following:
            1.   Vehicles subject to forfeiture under R.C. Title 45, except as
provided in division (b)(1)F. of this section;
            2.   Abandoned junk motor vehicles or other property of negligible
value;
            3.   Property held by a department of rehabilitation and correction
institution that is unclaimed, that does not have an identified owner, that the
owner agrees to dispose of or that is identified by the Department as having
little value;
            4.   Animals taken, and devices used in unlawfully taking animals,
under R.C. § 1531.20;
            5.   Controlled substances sold by a peace officer in the
performance of the officer’s official duties under R.C. § 3719.141;
            6.   Property recovered by a township law enforcement agency under
R.C. §§ 505.105 to 505.109;
            7.   Property held and disposed of under an ordinance of the
municipality or under R.C. §§ 737.29 to 737.33, except that if the municipality
has received notice of a citizens’ reward program as provided in division (b)
(5) of this section and disposes of property under an ordinance shall pay 25%
of any moneys acquired from any sale or auction to the citizens’ reward
program.
      (2)   A.   The Police Department shall adopt and comply with a written
internal control policy that does all of the following:
            1.   Provides for keeping detailed records as to the amount of
property acquired by the Police Department and the date property was acquired;
            2.   Provides for keeping detailed records of the disposition of
the property, which shall include but not be limited to both of the following:
               a.   The manner in which it was disposed, the date of
disposition, detailed financial records concerning any property sold and the
name of any person who received the property. The record shall not identify or
enable identification of the individual officer who seized any item of
property.
               b.   An itemized list of the specific expenditures made with
amounts that are gained from the sale of the property and that are retained by
the agency, including the specific amount expended on each expenditure, except
that the policy shall not provide for or permit the identification of any
specific expenditure that is made in an ongoing investigation.
            3.   Complies with R.C. § 2981.13 if the Police Department has a
law enforcement trust fund or similar fund created under that section.
         B.   The records kept under the internal control policy shall be open
to public inspection during the Police Department’s regular business hours. The
policy adopted under this section is a public record open for inspection under
R.C. § 149.43.
      (3)   A.   The Police Department, with custody of property to be disposed
of under this section or R.C. § 2981.12 or 2981.13, shall make a reasonable
effort to locate persons entitled to possession of the property, to notify them
of when and where it may be claimed, and to return the property to them at the
earliest possible time. In the absence of evidence identifying persons entitled
to possession, it is sufficient notice to advertise using at least one of the
following methods:
            1.   In the print or digital edition of a newspaper of general
circulation in the county;
            2.   On the official public notice web site established under R.C.
§ 125.182;
            3.   On the web site and social media account of the county.
         B.   The notices shall briefly describe the nature of the property in
custody and inviting persons to view and establish their right to it.
      (4)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   CITIZENS’ REWARD PROGRAM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 9.92.
         B.   LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Includes correctional institutions.
         C.   TOWNSHIP LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. An organized police department
of a township, a township police district, a joint police district, or the
office of a township constable.
(R.C. § 2981.11)
   (b)   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property.
      (1)   Unclaimed or forfeited property in the custody of the Police
Department, other than property described in division (a)(1)B. of this section,
shall be disposed of by order of any court of record that has territorial
jurisdiction over the municipality, as follows:
         A.   Drugs shall be disposed of pursuant to R.C. § 3719.11 or placed
in the custody of the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States for
disposal or use for medical or scientific purposes under applicable federal
law.
         B.   Firearms and dangerous ordnance suitable for police work may be
given to a law enforcement agency for that purpose. Firearms suitable for
sporting use or as museum pieces or collectors’ items may be sold at public
auction pursuant to division (b)(2) of this section. The Police Department may
sell other firearms and dangerous ordnance to a federally licensed firearms
dealer in a manner that the court considers proper. The Police Department shall
destroy any firearms or dangerous ordnance not given to a law enforcement
agency or sold or shall send them to the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation for destruction by the Bureau.
         C.   Obscene materials shall be destroyed.
         D.   Beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol seized from a person who
does not hold a permit issued under R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303 or otherwise
forfeited to the state for an offense under R.C. § 4301.45 or 4301.53 shall be
sold by the Division of Liquor Control if the Division determines that it is
fit for sale or shall be placed in the custody of the Investigations Unit in
the Ohio Department of Public Safety and be used for training relating to law
enforcement activities. The Ohio Department of Public Safety, with the
assistance of the Division of Liquor Control, shall adopt rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 to provide for the distribution to state or local law
enforcement agencies upon their request. If any tax imposed under R.C. Title 43
has not been paid in relation to the beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol, any
moneys acquired from the sale shall first be used to pay the tax. All other
money collected under this division (b)(1)D. shall be paid into the State
Treasury. Any beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol that the Division
determines to be unfit for sale shall be destroyed.
         E.   Money received by an inmate of a correctional institution from an
unauthorized source or in an unauthorized manner shall be returned to the
sender, if known, or deposited in the inmates’ industrial and entertainment
fund of the institution if the sender is not known.
         F.   1.   Any mobile instrumentality forfeited under R.C. Chapter 2981
may be given to the law enforcement agency that initially seized the mobile
instrumentality for use in performing its duties, if the agency wants the
mobile instrumentality. The agency shall take the mobile instrumentality
subject to any security interest or lien on the mobile instrumentality.
            2.   Vehicles and vehicle parts forfeited under R.C. §§ 4549.61 to
4549.63 may be given to a law enforcement agency for use in performing its
duties. Those parts may be incorporated into any other official vehicle. Parts
that do not bear vehicle identification numbers or derivatives of them may be
sold or disposed of as provided by rules of the Director of Public Safety.
Parts from which a vehicle identification number or derivative of it has been
removed, defaced, covered, altered or destroyed and that are not suitable for
police work or incorporation into an official vehicle shall be destroyed and
sold as junk or scrap.
         G.   Computers, computer networks, computer systems and computer
software suitable for police work may be given to a law enforcement agency for
that purpose or disposed of under division (b)(2) of this section.
         H.   Money seized in connection with a violation of R.C. § 2905.32,
2907.21, or 2907.22 shall be deposited in the Victims of Human Trafficking Fund
created by R.C. § 5101.87.
      (2)   Unclaimed or forfeited property that is not described in division
(b)(1) of this section or division (a)(1)B. of this section, with court
approval, may be used by the law enforcement agency in possession of it. If it
is not used by the agency, it may be sold without appraisal at a public auction
to the highest bidder for cash or disposed of in another manner that the court
considers proper.
      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (b)(1) and (b)(5) of this section
and after compliance with division (b)(4) of this section when applicable, any
moneys acquired from the sale of property disposed of pursuant to this section
shall be placed in the General Revenue Fund of the state, or the General Fund
of the municipality.
      (4)   If the property was in the possession of the Police Department in
relation to a delinquent child proceeding in a juvenile court, 10% of any
moneys acquired from the sale of property disposed of under this section shall
be applied to one or more community addiction services providers, as defined in
R.C. § 5119.01. A juvenile court shall not specify a services provider, except
as provided in this division, unless the services provider is in the same
county as the court or in a contiguous county. If no services provider is
located in any of those counties, the juvenile court may specify a services
provider anywhere in Ohio. The remaining 90% of the proceeds or cash shall be
applied as provided in division (b)(3) of this section.
      (5)   A.   If the Board of County Commissioners recognizes a citizens’
reward program under R.C. § 9.92, the Board shall notify the Police Department
of the recognition by filing a copy of its resolution conferring that
recognition with the Police Department. When the Board recognizes a citizens’
reward program and the county includes a part, but not all, of the territory of
the municipality, the Board shall so notify the Police Department of the
recognition of the citizens’ reward program only if the county contains the
highest percentage of the municipality’s population.
         B.   Upon being so notified, the Police Department shall pay 25% of
any forfeited proceeds or cash derived from each sale of property disposed of
pursuant to this section to the citizens’ reward program for use exclusively to
pay rewards. No part of the funds may be used to pay expenses associated with
the program. If a citizens’ reward program that operates in more than one
county or in another state in addition to this state receives funds under this
section, the funds shall be used to pay rewards only for tips and information
to law enforcement agencies concerning offenses committed in the county from
which the funds were received.
      (6)   Any property forfeited under R.C. Chapter 2981 not be used to pay
any fine imposed upon a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to an
underlying criminal offense or a different offense arising out of the same
facts and circumstances.
      (7)   Any moneys acquired from the sale of personal effects, tools, or
other property seized because the personal effects, tools, or other property
were used in the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2905.32, 2907.21, or
2907.22 or derived from the proceeds of the commission of a violation of R.C. §
2905.32, 2907.21, or 2907.22 and disposed of pursuant to this division (b)
shall be placed in the Victims of Human Trafficking Fund created by R.C. §
5101.87.
(R.C. § 2981.12)
   (c)   Disposition of contraband, proceeds, or instrumentalities. Except as
otherwise provided in R.C. § 2981.13, property ordered forfeited as contraband,
proceeds, or an instrumentality pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2981 shall be disposed
of, used or sold pursuant to division (b) of this section or R.C. § 2981.12. If
the property is to be sold under division (b) of this section or R.C. §
2981.12, the prosecutor shall cause notice of the proposed sale to be given in
accordance with law.
(R.C. § 2981.13(A))
Statutory reference:
   Forfeiture of property generally, see R.C. Chapter 2981
§ 654.17 DETENTION OF SHOPLIFTERS AND THOSE COMMITTING MOTION PICTURE PIRACY;
PROTECTION OF INSTITUTIONAL PROPERTY.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   ARCHIVAL INSTITUTION. Any public or private building, structure, or
shelter in which are stored historical documents, devices, records, manuscripts
or items of public interest, which historical materials are stored to preserve
the materials or the information in the materials, to disseminate the
information contained in the materials, or to make the materials available for
public inspection or for inspection by certain persons who have a particular
interest in, use for, or knowledge concerning the materials.
      (2)   AUDIOVISUAL RECORDING FUNCTION and FACILITY. Have the same meaning
as in R.C. § 2913.07.
      (3)   MUSEUM. Any public or private nonprofit institution that is
permanently organized for primarily educational or aesthetic purposes, owns or
borrows objects or items of public interest, and cares for and exhibits to the
public the objects or items.
      (4)   PRETRIAL DIVERSION PROGRAM. A rehabilitative, educational program
designed to reduce recidivism and promote personal responsibility that is at
least four hours in length and that has been approved by any court in this
state.
   (b)   A merchant, or an employee or agent of a merchant, who has probable
cause to believe that things offered for sale by a mercantile establishment
have been unlawfully taken by a person, may, for the purposes set forth in
division (d) below, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable
length of time within the mercantile establishment or its immediate vicinity.
   (c)   Any officer, employee or agent of a library, museum or archival
institution may, for the purposes set forth in division (d) below or for the
purpose of conducting a reasonable investigation of a belief that the person
has acted in a manner described in divisions (c)(1) and (c)(2) below, detain a
person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time within, or in the
immediate vicinity of, the library, museum or archival institution, if the
officer, employee or agent has probable cause to believe that the person has:
      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly moved, defaced, damaged,
destroyed or otherwise improperly tampered with property owned by or in the
custody of the library, museum or archival institution; or
      (2)   With purpose to deprive the library, museum or archival institution
of property owned by it or in its custody, knowingly obtained or exerted
control over the property without the consent of the owner or person authorized
to give consent, beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of the
owner or person authorized to give consent, by deception, or by threat.
   (d)   An officer, agent or employee of a library, museum or archival
institution pursuant to division (c) above or a merchant or an employee or
agent of a merchant pursuant to division (b) above may detain another person
for any of the following purposes:
      (1)   To recover the property that is the subject of the unlawful taking,
criminal mischief or theft;
      (2)   To cause an arrest to be made by a peace officer;
      (3)   To obtain a warrant of arrest;
      (4)   To offer the person, if the person is suspected of the unlawful
taking, criminal mischief, or theft and notwithstanding any other provision of
this Code or the Ohio Revised Code, an opportunity to complete a pretrial
diversion program and to inform the person of the other legal remedies
available to the library, museum, archival institution, or merchant.
   (e)   The owner or lessee of a facility in which a motion picture is being
shown, or the owner’s or lessee’s employee or agent, who has probable cause to
believe that a person is or has been operating an audiovisual recording
function of a device in violation of R.C. § 2917.07 may, for the purpose of
causing an arrest to be made by a peace officer or of obtaining an arrest
warrant, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of
time within the facility or its immediate vicinity.
   (f)   The officer, agent or employee of the library, museum or archival
institution, the merchant or an employee or agent of a merchant, or the owner,
lessee, employee or agent of the facility acting under divisions (b), (c) or
(e) above shall not search the person detained, search or seize any property
belonging to the person detained without the person’s consent, or use undue
restraint upon the person detained.
   (g)   Any peace officer may arrest without a warrant any person that the
officer has probable cause to believe has committed any act described in
division (c)(1) or (c)(2) above, that the officer has probable cause to believe
has committed an unlawful taking in a mercantile establishment, or that the
officer has reasonable cause to believe has committed an act prohibited by R.C.
§ 2913.07. An arrest under this division shall be made within a reasonable time
after the commission of the act or unlawful taking.
(R.C. § 2935.041)
§ 654.18 FAILURE TO DISCLOSE PERSONAL INFORMATION.
   (a)   No person who is in a public place shall refuse to disclose the
person’s name, address or date of birth, when requested by a law enforcement
officer who reasonably suspects either of the following:
      (1)   The person is committing, has committed or is about to commit a
criminal offense.
      (2)   The person witnessed any of the following:
         A.   An offense of violence that would constitute a felony under the
laws of this state;
         B.   A felony offense that causes or results in, or creates a
substantial risk of, serious physical harm to another person or property;
         C.   Any attempt or conspiracy to commit, or complicity in committing,
any offenses identified in division (a)(2)A. or (a)(2)B. of this section;
         D.   Any conduct reasonably indicating that any offense identified in
division (a)(2)A. or (a)(2)B. of this section or any attempt, conspiracy or
complicity described in division (a)(2)C. of this section has been, is being or
is about to be committed.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of failure to
disclose one’s personal information, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (c)   Nothing in division (a) of this section requires a person to answer
any questions beyond that person’s name, address or date of birth. Nothing in
division (a) of this section authorizes a law enforcement officer to arrest a
person for not providing any information beyond the person’s name, address or
date of birth or for refusing to describe the offense observed.
   (d)   It is not a violation of division (a) of this section to refuse to
answer a question that would reveal a person’s age or date of birth if age is
an element of the crime that the person is suspected of committing.
(R.C. § 2921.29)
   (e)   No person entering an airport, train station, port or other similar
critical transportation infrastructure site shall refuse to show identification
when requested by a law enforcement officer when there is a threat to security
and the law enforcement officer is requiring identification of all persons
entering the site.
   (f)   A law enforcement officer may prevent any person who refuses to show
identification when asked under the circumstances described in division (e) of
this section from entering the critical transportation infrastructure site.
(R.C. § 2909.31)
§ 654.19 MISUSE OF 9-1-1 SYSTEM.
   (a)   As used in this section, “9-1-1 system” means a system through which
individuals can request emergency service using the access number 9-1-1.
(R.C. § 128.01(A))
   (b)   No person shall knowingly use the telephone number of a 9-1-1 system
established under R.C. Chapter 128 to report an emergency if the person knows
that no emergency exists.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly use a 9-1-1 system for a purpose other than
obtaining emergency service.
   (d)   No person shall disclose or use any information concerning telephone
numbers, addresses, or names obtained from the database that serves the public
safety answering point of a 9-1-1 system established under R.C. Chapter 128,
except for any of the following purposes or under any of the following
circumstances:
      (1)   For the purpose of the 9-1-1 system;
      (2)   For the purpose of responding to an emergency call to an emergency
service provider;
      (3)   In the circumstance of the inadvertent disclosure of such
information due solely to technology of the wireless telephone network portion
of the 9-1-1 system not allowing access to the database to be restricted to 9-
1-1 specific answering lines at a public safety answering point;
      (4)   In the circumstance of access to a database being given by a
telephone company that is a wireless service provider to a public utility or
municipal utility in handling customer calls in times of public emergency or
service outages. The charge, terms and conditions for the disclosure or use of
the information for the purpose of such access to a database shall be subject
to the jurisdiction of the Steering Committee;
      (5)   In the circumstance of access to a database given by a telephone
company that is a wireline service provider to a state and local government in
warning of a public emergency, as determined by the Steering Committee. The
charge, terms and conditions for the disclosure or use of that information for
the purpose of access to a database is subject to the jurisdiction of the
Steering Committee.
(R.C. § 128.96(F) - (H))
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (c) or (d) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 128.99(A), (B))
§ 654.20 USING SHAM LEGAL PROCESS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   LAWFULLY ISSUED. Adopted, issued or rendered in accordance with the
United States Constitution, the constitution of a state, and the applicable
statutes, rules, regulations and ordinances of the United States, a state and
the political subdivisions of a state.
      (2)   POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS. Municipal corporations, townships,
counties, school districts and all other bodies corporate and politic that are
organized under state law and are responsible for governmental activities only
in geographical areas smaller than that of a state.
      (3)   SHAM LEGAL PROCESS. An instrument that meets all of the following
conditions:
         A.   It is not lawfully issued.
         B.   It purports to do any of the following:
            1.   To be a summons, subpoena, judgment or order of a court, a law
enforcement officer, or a legislative, executive or administrative body.
            2.   To assert jurisdiction over or determine the legal or
equitable status, rights, duties, powers or privileges of any person or
property.
            3.   To require or authorize the search, seizure, indictment,
arrest, trial or sentencing of any person or property.
         C.   It is designed to make another person believe that it is lawfully
issued.
      (4)   STATE. A state of the United States, including without limitation
the state legislature, the highest court of the state that has statewide
jurisdiction, the offices of all elected state officers, and all departments,
boards, offices, commissions, agencies, institutions and other
instrumentalities of the state. STATE does not include the political
subdivisions of the state.
   (b)   No person shall, knowing the sham legal process to be a sham legal
process, do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly issue, display, deliver, distribute or otherwise use sham
legal process.
      (2)   Knowingly use sham legal process to arrest, detain, search or seize
any person or the property of another person.
      (3)   Knowingly commit or facilitate the commission of an offense using
sham legal process.
      (4)   Knowingly commit a felony by using sham legal process.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (b)(1) or (b)
(2) of this section that the use of sham legal process was for a lawful
purpose.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using sham legal process. A
violation of division (b)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. A violation of division (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree, except that if the purpose of a violation of
division (b)(3) of this section is to commit or facilitate the commission of a
felony, a violation of division (b)(3) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division (b)(4) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.52(A) - (D))
CHAPTER 660: SAFETY, SANITATION AND HEALTH
Section
   
660.01   Venting of heaters and burners
   
660.02   Spreading contagion
   
660.03   Littering
   
660.04   Noxious odors; filthy accumulations; polluting and diverting
watercourses
   
660.05   Duty to keep sidewalks in repair and clean
   
660.06   Abandoned refrigerators and airtight containers
   
660.07   Storage of junk vehicles
   
660.08   Open burning
   
660.09   Barricades and warning lights
   
660.10   Sidewalk obstructions; damage or injury
   
660.11   Notice to fill lots, remove putrid substances
   
660.12   Fences
   
660.13   Smoking in places of public assembly
   
660.14   Litter on private property
   
660.15   Accumulation of garbage or refuse
   
660.16   Depositing of offensive garbage or refuse
   
660.17   Exterior property areas
   
660.18   Noxious weeds
   
660.19   Notice of violation; cleanup
   
660.20   Village Administrator or Village Zoning Inspector to cause the
abatement of certain nuisances
   
660.21   Disposition of remains
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Animal nuisances, see §
618.14
   Excavation liability, see R.C. §§ 723.49 et seq.
   Inducing panic, see §
648.07
   Littering from motor vehicles, see §
432.43
   Loads dropping or leaking; tracking mud; removal required, see §
440.06
   Nuisances, see R.C. Ch. 3767
   Placing harmful substance or objects in food or confection, see §
636.16
   Placing injurious material or obstruction in street, see §
412.01
   Rabies quarantine, see §
618.12
   Riot, see §§
648.01 et seq.
   Safety and equipment for motor vehicles, see
Ch. 438
   Weapons and explosives, see
Ch. 678
   Willfully leaving vehicles on private or public property, see §
452.05
§ 660.01 VENTING OF HEATERS AND BURNERS.
   (a)   The use of a brazier, salamander, space heater, room heater, furnace,
water heater, or other burner or heater, using wood, coal, coke, fuel oil,
kerosene, gasoline, natural gas, liquid petroleum gas or similar fuel, and
tending to give off carbon monoxide or other harmful gases, must comply with
the following provisions;
      (1)   When used in living quarters, or in any enclosed building or space
in which persons are usually present, shall be used with a flue or vent so
designed, installed and maintained as to vent the products of combustion
outdoors; except in storage, factory or industrial buildings which are provided
with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide poisoning.
      (2)   When used as a portable or temporary burner or heater at a
construction site, or in a warehouse, shed or structure in which persons are
temporarily present, shall be vented as provided in division (a)(1) or used
with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide poisoning.
   (b)   This section does not apply to domestic ranges, laundry stoves, gas
logs installed in a fireplace with an adequate flue, or hot plates, unless the
same are used as space or room heaters.
   (c)   No person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in charge
or occupant of premises, negligently permit the use of a burner or heater in
violation of the standards for venting and ventilation provided in this
section.
   (d)   Division (a) above does not apply to any kerosene-fired space or room
heater that is equipped with an automatic extinguishing tip-over device, or to
any natural gas-fired or liquid petroleum gas-fired space or room heater that
is equipped with an oxygen depletion safety shut-off system, and that has its
fuel piped from a source outside the building in which it is located, that are
approved by an authoritative source recognized by the State Fire Marshal in the
State Fire Code adopted by him or her under R.C. § 3737.82.
   (e)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules to ensure the safe use of
unvented kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum gas heaters exempted from
division (a) above when used in assembly buildings, business buildings, high
hazard buildings, institutional buildings, mercantile buildings and type R-
1 and R-2 residential buildings, as these groups of buildings are defined in
rules adopted by the Board of Building Standards under R.C. § 3781.10. No
person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in charge or occupant
of premises, negligently permit the use of a heater in violation of any rules
adopted under this division.
   (f)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules prescribing standards for
written instructions containing ventilation requirements and warning of any
potential fire hazards that may occur in using a kerosene, natural gas or
liquid petroleum gas heater. No person shall sell or offer for sale any
kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum gas heater unless the manufacturer
provides with the heater written instructions that comply with any rules
adopted under this division.
   (g)   No product labeled as a fuel additive for kerosene heaters and having
a flash point below 100°F or 37.8°C shall be sold, offered for sale or used in
any kerosene space heater.
   (h)   No device that prohibits any safety feature on a kerosene, natural gas
or liquid petroleum gas space heater from operating shall be sold, offered for
sale or used in connection with any kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum
gas space heater.
   (i)   No person shall sell or offer for sale any kerosene-fired, natural gas
or liquid petroleum gas- fired heater that is not exempt from division (a)
above, unless it is marked conspicuously by the manufacturer on the container
with the phrase “Not Approved For Home Use.”
   (j)   No person shall use a cabinet-type, liquid petroleum gas-fired heater
having a fuel source within the heater, inside any building, except as
permitted by the State Fire Marshal in the State Fire Code adopted by him or
her under R.C. § 3737.82.
(R.C. § 3701.82)
   (k)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 3701.99(B))
§ 660.02 SPREADING CONTAGION.
   (a)   No person, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the
person has a dangerous, contagious disease, shall knowingly fail to take
reasonable measures to prevent exposing self to other persons, except when
seeking medical aid.
   (b)   No person, having charge or care of a person whom the person having
charge or care knows or has reasonable cause to believe has a dangerous,
contagious disease, shall recklessly fail to take reasonable measures to
protect others from exposure to the contagion, and to inform health authorities
of the existence of the contagion.
   (c)   No person, having charge of a public conveyance or place of public
accommodation, amusement, resort or trade, and knowing or having reasonable
cause to believe that persons using the conveyance or place have been or are
being exposed to a dangerous, contagious disease, shall negligently fail to
take reasonable measures to protect the public from exposure to the contagion,
and to inform health authorities of the existence of the contagion.
(R.C. § 3701.81)
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
(R.C. § 3701.99(C))
§ 660.03 LITTERING.
   (a)   No person, regardless of intent, shall deposit litter or cause litter
to be deposited on any public property, on private property not owned by him or
her, or in or on waters of the state, unless one of the following applies:
      (1)   The person is directed to do so by a public official as part of a
litter collection drive.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, the person
deposits the litter in a litter receptacle in a manner that prevents its being
carried away by the elements.
      (3)   The person is issued a permit or license covering the litter
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3734 or 6111.
   (b)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly deposit litter,
or cause it to be deposited, in a litter receptacle located on any public
property or on any private property not owned by him or her, unless one of the
following applies:
      (1)   The litter was generated or located on the property on which the
litter receptacle is located.
      (2)   The person is directed to do so by a public official as part of a
litter collection drive.
      (3)   The person is directed to do so by a person whom he or she
reasonably believes to have the privilege to use the litter receptacle.
      (4)   The litter consists of any of the following:
         A.   The contents of a litter bag or container of a type and size
customarily carried and used in a motor vehicle.
         B.   The contents of an ash tray of a type customarily installed or
carried and used in a motor vehicle.
         C.   Beverage containers and food sacks, wrappings and containers of a
type and in an amount that reasonably may be expected to be generated during
routine commuting or business or recreational travel by a motor vehicle.
         D.   Beverage containers, food sacks, wrappings, containers and other
materials of a type and in an amount that reasonably may be expected to be
generated during a routine day by a person and deposited in a litter receptacle
by a casual passerby.
   (c)   (1)   As used in division (b)(1) of this section, “public property”
includes any private property open to the public for the conduct of business,
the provision of a service, or upon the payment of a fee, but does not include
any private property to which the public otherwise does not have a right of
access.
      (2)   As used in division (b)(4) of this section, “casual passerby” means
a person who does not have depositing litter in a litter receptacle as his or
her primary reason for traveling to or by the property on which the litter
receptacle is located.
   (d)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   AUXILIARY CONTAINER. A bag, can, cup, food or beverage service
item, container, keg, bottle, or other packaging to which all of the following
apply:
         A.   It is designed to be either single use or reusable.
         B.   It is made of cloth, paper, plastic, foamed or expanded plastic,
cardboard, corrugated material, aluminum, metal, glass, postconsumer recycled
material, or similar materials or substances, including coated, laminated, or
multilayered substrates.
         C.   It is designed for consuming, transporting, or protecting
merchandise, food, or beverages from or at a food service operation, retail
food establishment, grocery, or any other type of retail, manufacturing, or
distribution establishment.
      (2)   DEPOSIT. To throw, drop, discard or place.
      (3)   LITTER. Garbage, trash, waste, rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles, wire,
paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts, furniture, glass, auxiliary
containers, or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.
      (4)   LITTER RECEPTACLE. A dumpster, trash can, trash bin, garbage can or
similar container in which litter is deposited for removal.
   (e)   This section may be enforced by any sheriff, deputy sheriff, police
officer of a municipal corporation, police constable or officer of a township,
or township or joint police district, wildlife officer designated under R.C. §
1531.13, natural resources officer appointed under R.C. § 1501.24, forest-fire
investigator appointed under R.C. § 1503.09, conservancy district police
officer, inspector of nuisances of a county, or any other law enforcement
officer within the law enforcement officer’s jurisdiction.
(R.C. § 3767.32)
   (f)   Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. The sentencing court may, in addition to or in
lieu of the penalty provided in this division, require a person who violates
this section to remove litter from any public or private property or in or on
waters of the state.
(R.C. § 3767.99(C))
§ 660.04 NOXIOUS ODORS; FILTHY ACCUMULATIONS; POLLUTING AND DIVERTING
WATERCOURSES.
   (a)   No person shall erect, continue to use or maintain a building,
structure or place for the exercise of a trade, employment or business or for
keeping or feeding an animal which, by occasioning noxious exhalations or
noisome or offensive smells, becomes injurious to the health, comfort or
property of individuals or of the public.
   (b)   No person shall cause or allow offal, filth or noisome substances to
be collected or remain in any place to the damage or prejudice of others or of
the public.
   (c)   No person shall unlawfully obstruct or impede the passage of a
navigable river, harbor or collection of water, or corrupt or render
unwholesome or impure a watercourse, stream of water or unlawfully divert the
watercourse from its natural course or state to the injury or prejudice of
others.
   (d)   Persons who are engaged in agriculture-related activities, as
AGRICULTURE is defined in R.C. § 519.01, and who are conducting those
activities outside the municipality, in accordance with generally accepted
agricultural practices, and in such a manner so as not to have a substantial,
adverse effect on the public health, safety or welfare, are exempt from
divisions (a) and (b) above and from any ordinances, resolutions, rules, or
other enactments of the municipality that prohibit excessive noise.
(R.C. § 3767.13)
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 3767.99(C))
§ 660.05 DUTY TO KEEP SIDEWALKS IN REPAIR AND CLEAN.
   (a)   No owner or occupant of lots or lands abutting any sidewalk, curb or
gutter shall fail to keep the sidewalks, curbs and gutters in repair and free
from snow, ice or any nuisance, and to remove from the sidewalks, curbs or
gutters all snow and ice accumulated thereon within a reasonable time, which
will ordinarily not exceed 12 hours after any storm during which the snow and
ice has accumulated.
(R.C. § 723.011)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 660.06 ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS AND AIRTIGHT CONTAINERS.
   (a)   No person shall abandon, discard or knowingly permit to remain on
premises under the person’s control, in a place accessible to children, any
abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semi-airtight
container which has a capacity of one and one-half cubic feet or more and an
opening of 50 square inches or more and which has a door or lid equipped with a
hinge, latch or other fastening device capable of securing the door or lid,
without rendering the equipment harmless to human life by removing the hinges,
latches or other hardware which may cause a person to be confined therein. This
section shall not apply to an icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semi-
airtight container located in that part of a building occupied by a dealer,
warehouse or repairer.
(R.C. § 3767.29)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 3767.99(B))
§ 660.07 STORAGE OF JUNK VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   For purposes of this section, JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE means any motor
vehicle which is three years old or older; extensively damaged, the damage
including but not limited to any of the following: missing wheels, tires, motor
or transmission; apparently inoperable; and having a fair market value of
$1,500 or less, that is left uncovered in the open on private property for more
than 72 hours with the permission of the person having the right to possession
of the property, except if the person is operating a junk yard or scrap metal
processing facility licensed under the authority of R.C. §§ 4737.05 through
4737.12, or otherwise regulated under authority of a political subdivision; or
if the property on which the motor vehicle is left is not subject to licensure
or regulation by any governmental authority, unless the person having the right
to the possession of the property can establish that the motor vehicle is part
of a bona fide commercial operation; or if the motor vehicle is a collector’s
vehicle.
      (2)   The municipality shall not prevent a person from storing or
keeping, or restrict him or her in the method of storing or keeping, any
collector’s vehicle on private property with the permission of the person
having the right to the possession of the property, except that the
municipality may require a person having such permission to conceal, by means
of buildings, fences, vegetation, terrain or other suitable obstruction, any
unlicensed collector’s vehicle stored in the open.
      (3)   The Police Chief, the Legislative Authority, or the zoning
authority may send notice, by certified mail with return receipt requested, to
the person having the right to the possession of the property on which a junk
motor vehicle is left, that within ten days of receipt of the notice, the junk
motor vehicle either shall be covered by being housed in a garage or other
suitable structure, or shall be removed from the property.
      (4)   No person shall willfully leave a junk motor vehicle uncovered in
the open for more than ten days after receipt of a notice as provided in this
section. The fact that a junk motor vehicle is so left is prima facie evidence
of willful failure to comply with the notice, and each subsequent period of 30
days that a junk motor vehicle continues to be so left constitutes a separate
offense.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.65)
§ 660.08 OPEN BURNING.
   (a)   (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         A.   AGRICULTURAL WASTE. Any waste material generated by crop,
horticultural, or livestock production practices, and includes such items as
woody debris and plant matter from stream flooding, bags, cartons, structural
materials, and landscape wastes that are generated in agricultural activities,
but does not include land clearing waste; buildings (including dismantled/
fallen barns); garbage; dead animals; animal waste; motor vehicles and parts
thereof; nor economic poisons and containers thereof, unless the manufacturer
has identified open burning as a safe disposal procedure.
         B.   AIR CURTAIN BURNER. An engineered apparatus consisting of a
motorized high-velocity fan and an air distribution system designed to aid in
the efficient combustion of materials placed in a manufactured steel structure
and for which a permit-to-install has been obtained as required in O.A.C.
Chapter 3745-31 and a permit-to-operate has been obtained as required in O.A.C.
Chapter 3745-77.
         C.   AIR CURTAIN DESTRUCTOR. An engineered apparatus consisting of a
motorized high-velocity fan and an air distribution system designed to aid in
the efficient combustion of materials placed in an adjacent pit. An air curtain
burner may be used in place of an air curtain destructor, but an air curtain
destructor may not be used in place of an air curtain burner.
         D.   BUILDING MATERIALS. Those materials resulting from the
alteration, construction, destruction, rehabilitation, or repair of any human-
made physical structure, including, without limitation, houses, buildings,
industrial or commercial facilities, or roadways.
         E.   ECONOMIC POISONS. Include but are not restricted to pesticides
such as insecticides, fungicides, rodenticides, miticides, nematocides and
fumigants; herbicides; seed disinfectants; and defoliants.
         F.   EMERGENCY BURNING. The burning of clean wood waste or deceased
animals caused by a natural disaster or an uncontrolled event such as the
following:
            1.   A tornado.
            2.   High winds.
            3.   An earthquake.
            4.   An explosion.
            5.   A flood.
            6.   A hail storm, a rain storm or an ice storm.
         G.   GARBAGE. Any waste material resulting from the handling,
processing, preparation, cooking and consumption of food or food products.
         H.   INHABITED BUILDING. Any inhabited private dwelling house and any
public structure which may be used as a place of resort, assembly, education,
entertainment, lodging, trade, manufacture, repair, storage, traffic, or
occupancy by the public. Examples would include, but are not limited to,
highway rest stops, restaurants, motels, hotels and gas stations.
         I.   LAND CLEARING WASTE. Plant waste material which is removed from
land, including plant waste material removed from stream banks during projects
involving more than one property owner, for the purpose of rendering the land
useful for residential, commercial, or industrial development. Land clearing
waste also includes the plant waste material generated during the clearing of
land for new agricultural development.
         J.   LANDSCAPE WASTE. Any plant waste material, except garbage,
including trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves, grass,
shrubbery, yard trimmings, and crop residues.
         K.   OHIO EPA. The Ohio Environmental Protection Agency Director or
agencies delegated authority by the Director of the Ohio Environmental
Protection Agency pursuant to R.C. § 3704.03 or the Chief of any Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency District Office.
         L.   OPEN BURNING. The burning of any materials wherein air
contaminants resulting from combustion are emitted directly into the ambient
air without passing through a stack or chimney. Open burning includes the
burning of any refuse or salvageable material in any device not subject to or
designed specifically to comply with the requirements of O.A.C. 3745-17-09 or
O.A.C. 3745-17-10.
         M.   RESIDENTIAL WASTE. Any waste material, including landscape waste,
generated on the property of a one-, two- or three-family residence as a result
of residential activities, but not including garbage, rubber, grease, asphalt,
liquid petroleum products, or plastics.
         N.   RESTRICTED AREA. The area within the boundary of the
municipality, plus a zone extending 1,000 feet beyond the boundaries of a
municipality having a population of 1,000 to 10,000 persons and a zone
extending one mile beyond any municipality having a population of 10,000
persons or more according to the latest federal census.
         O.   UNRESTRICTED AREA. All areas outside the boundaries of a
restricted area as defined in this section.
      (2)   Referenced materials. This section includes references to certain
matter or materials. The text of the referenced materials is not included in
the legislation contained in this section. Information on the availability of
the referenced materials as well as the date of, and/or the particular edition
or version of the material is included in this section. For materials subject
to change, only the specific versions specified in this section are referenced.
Material is referenced as it exists on the effective date of this section.
Except for subsequent annual publication of existing (unmodified) Code of
Federal Regulation compilations, any amendment or revision to a referenced
document is not applicable unless and until this section has been amended to
specify the new dates.
         A.   Availability. The referenced materials are available as follows:
            1.   Clean Air Act. Information and copies may be obtained by
writing to: Superintendent of Documents, Attn: New Orders, PO Box 371954,
Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954. The full text of the act as amended in 1990 is also
available in electronic format at www.epa.gov/oar/caa/. A copy of the act is
also available for inspection and use at most public libraries and the State
Library of Ohio.
            2.   Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.). Information and copies
may be obtained by writing to: Superintendent of Documents, Attn: New Orders,
PO Box 371954, Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954. The full text of the C.F.R. is also
available in electronic format at http://www.ecfr.gov. The C.F.R. compilations
are also available for inspection and use at most public libraries and the
State Library of Ohio.
            3.   National Fire Protection Association. Information on the
National Fire Protection Association codes may be obtained by contacting the
Association at 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts 02169-7471, 617-770-
3000. Codes may be ordered at www.nfpa.org/catalog/home/index.asp. Copies of
the code exist or are available at most public libraries and the State Library
of Ohio.
         B.   Referenced materials.
            1.   40 C.F.R. § 60.2974: “Am I required to apply for and obtain a
title V operating permit for my air curtain incinerator that burns only wood
waste, clean lumber, and yard waste?” as published in the July 1, 2017 Code of
Federal Regulations.
            2.   40 C.F.R. § 60.3069: “Am I required to apply for and obtain a
title V operating permit for my air curtain incinerator that burns only wood
waste, clean lumber, and yard waste?” as published in the July 1, 2017 Code of
Federal Regulations.
            3.   NFPA publication 1403: “Standard on Live Fire Training
Evolutions, Chapter 4, Acquired Structures” published April 30, 2007.
            4.   Section 129 of the Clean Air Act, contained in 42 U.S.C. §
7429: “Solid waste combustion” published January 6, 2017 in Supplement IV of
the 2012 Edition of the United States Code.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-01)
   (b)   Relation to other laws.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any provision in O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19, no open
burning shall be conducted in an area where an air alert, warning or emergency
under O.A.C. Chapter 3745-25 is in effect.
      (2)   No provisions of O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19 permitting open burning,
and no permission to open burn granted by the Ohio EPA, shall exempt any person
from compliance with any section of the Ohio Revised Code, or any regulation of
any state department, or any local ordinance or regulation dealing with open
burning.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-02)
   (c)   Open burning in restricted areas.
      (1)   No person or property owner shall cause or allow open burning in a
restricted area except as provided in divisions (c)(2) to (c)(4) of this
section or in R.C. § 3704.11.
      (2)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes without
notification to or permission from the Ohio EPA:
         A.   Heating tar, welding, acetylene torches, highway safety flares,
heating for warmth of outdoor workers and strikers, smudge pots and similar
occupational needs.
         B.   Bonfires, campfires and outdoor fireplace equipment, whether for
cooking food for human consumption, pleasure, religious, ceremonial, warmth,
recreational or similar purposes, if the following conditions are met:
            1.   They are fueled with clean seasoned firewood, natural gas or
equivalent, or any clean burning fuel with emissions that are equivalent to or
lower than those created from the burning of seasoned firewood;
         2.   They are not used for waste disposal purposes; and
            3.   They shall have a total fuel area of three feet or less in
diameter and two feet or less in height.
         C.   Disposal of hazardous explosive materials, military munitions or
explosive devices that require immediate action to prevent endangerment of
human health, public safety, property or the environment and that are excluded
from the requirement to obtain a hazardous waste permit pursuant to O.A.C.
3745-50-45(D)(1)(d).
         D.   Recognized training in the use of fire extinguishers for
commercial or industrial fire prevention.
         E.   Fires set at the direction of federal, state, and local law
enforcement officials for the purpose of destruction of cannabis sativa
(marijuana) plant vegetation, processed marijuana material and/or other drugs
seized by federal, state or local law enforcement officials.
         F.   Fires allowed by divisions (c)(2)A., (c)(2)B. and (c)(2)D. of
this section shall not be used for waste disposal purposes and shall be of
minimum size sufficient for their intended purpose; the fuel shall be chosen to
minimize the generation and emission of air contaminants.
      (3)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes with prior
notification to the Ohio EPA in accordance with division (d)(2) of this
section:
         A.   Prevention or control of disease or pests, with written or oral
verification to the Ohio EPA from the Ohio Department of Health or local health
department, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, cooperative
extension service, Ohio Department of Agriculture or U.S. Department of
Agriculture, that open burning is the only appropriate disposal method.
         B.   Bonfires or campfires used for ceremonial purposes that do not
meet the requirements of division (c)(2)B. of this section, provided the
following conditions are met:
            1.   They have a total fuel area no greater than five feet in
diameter by five feet in height and burn no longer than three hours;
            2.   They are not used for waste disposal purposes; and
            3.   They are fueled with clean seasoned firewood, natural gas or
equivalent, or any clean burning fuel with emissions that are equivalent to or
lower than those created from the burning of seasoned firewood.
         C.   Disposal of agricultural waste generated on the premises if the
following conditions are observed:
            1.   The fire is set only when atmospheric conditions will readily
dissipate contaminants;
            2.   The fire does not create a visibility hazard on the roadways,
railroad tracks or air fields;
            3.   The fire is located at a point on the premises no less than
1,000 feet from any inhabited building not located on the premises;
            4.   The wastes are stacked and dried to provide the best
practicable condition for efficient burning; and
            5.   No materials are burned which contain rubber, grease, asphalt,
liquid petroleum products, plastics or building materials.
         D.   Recognized horticultural, silvicultural (forestry), range
management, prairie and grassland management, invasive species management, or
wildlife management practices, if all of the following conditions are met:
            1.   The fire shall be performed within 180 days of submitting the
notification.
            2.   The fire shall be performed when it is anticipated weather
conditions will minimize the dispersion of smoke near populated areas and the
smoke does not create a visibility hazard on roadways, railroad tracks, or air
fields. Smoke dispersion conditions shall be evaluated before, during, and
after the fire and actions taken to minimize smoke impacts.
            3.   The person making the notification shall notify the local fire
department having jurisdiction over the burn area at least 24 hours before the
fire is anticipated to occur.
            4.   The person making the notification shall provide reasonable
notification to populations potentially impacted by the smoke before the fire
occurs. Populations potentially impacted shall include, at a minimum, those
within one-quarter mile of the burn site. Reasonable notification shall include
one of the following:
               a.   Posting notice of intent to burn, including contact
information for the person making the notification and the anticipated date
that the fire will occur, within open view from a public roadway adjacent to
and outside of the property on which the fire will occur.
               b.   Posting a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in
the local community in which the fire will occur. The notice shall include, at
a minimum, the address of the property at which the fire will occur, contact
information for the person making the notification and the anticipated date
that the fire will occur.
               c.   Delivering written notice directly to residences and
businesses within a minimum of one-quarter mile of the burn site. Notices shall
include, at a minimum, the address of the property at which the fire will
occur, contact information for the person making the notification and the
anticipated date that the fire will occur.
            5.   The person making the notification shall document information
on the weather, smoke conditions, any air quality concerns before, during, and
after the fire, the actual number of acres burned, the time the fire was
initially kindled, the time when active kindling ceased and the time at which
mop up activities ceased. The person making the notification shall maintain
this information for a minimum of one year from the date of the fire and shall
provide this information to the appropriate Ohio EPA district office or local
air agency within ten days upon request.
            6.   Reasonable access to the burn site shall be provided to Ohio
EPA representatives at any time during the fire.
      (4)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes upon
receipt of written permission from the Ohio EPA, in accordance with division
(d)(1) of this section, provided that any conditions specified in the
permission are followed:
         A.   Disposal of ignitable or explosive materials where the Ohio EPA
determines that there is no practical alternate method of disposal, excluding
those materials identified in division (c)(2)C. of this section;
         B.   Instruction in methods of fire fighting or for research in the
control of fires as recognized by the State Fire Marshal Division of the Ohio
Department of Commerce and the guidelines set forth in the National Fire
Protection Association’s (NFPA) publication 1403, Standard on Live Fire
Training Evolutions, Chapter 4, Acquired Structures, provided that the
application required in division (d)(1)A. of this section is submitted by the
commercial or public entity responsible for the instruction;
         C.   In emergency or other extraordinary circumstances for any purpose
determined to be necessary by the Director and performed as identified in the
appendix to O.A.C. § 3745-19-03. If deemed necessary, the open burning may be
authorized with prior oral approval by the Director followed by the issuance of
a written permission to open burn within seven working days of the oral
approval;
         D.   Fires or pyrotechnic effects, for purposes other than waste
disposal, set as part of commercial film-making or video production activities
for motion pictures and television.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-03)
   (d)   Permission to individuals and notification to the Ohio EPA.
      (1)   Permission.
         A.   An application for permission to open burn shall be submitted in
writing to Ohio EPA. The applicant shall allow Ohio EPA at least ten working
days to review the permit. Applicant may proceed with burn upon receipt of
written permission from Ohio EPA. Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays shall
not be considered working days. The application shall be in such form and
contain such information as required by the Ohio EPA.
         B.   Except as provided in divisions (d)(1)F. and (d)(1)G. of this
section, the applications shall contain, as a minimum, the following
information:
            1.   The purpose of the proposed burning;
            2.   The quantity or acreage and the nature of the materials to be
burned;
            3.   The date or dates when the burning will take place;
            4.   The location of the burning site, including a map showing
distances to residences, populated areas, roadways, air fields and other
pertinent landmarks; and
            5.   The methods or actions which will be taken to reduce the
emissions of air contaminants.
         C.   Permission to open burn shall not be granted unless the applicant
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Ohio EPA that open burning is necessary
to the public interest; will be conducted in a time, place and manner as to
minimize the emission of air contaminants, when atmospheric conditions are
appropriate; and will have no serious detrimental effect upon adjacent
properties or the occupants thereof. The Ohio EPA may impose such conditions as
may be necessary to accomplish the purpose of O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19.
         D.   Except as provided in division (d)(1)F. of this section,
permission to open burn must be obtained for each specific project. In
emergencies where public health or environmental quality will be seriously
threatened by delay while written permission is sought, the fire may be set
with oral permission of the Ohio EPA.
         E.   Violations of any of the conditions set forth by the Ohio EPA in
granting permission to open burn shall be grounds for revocation of that
permission and refusal to grant future permission, as well as for the
imposition of other sanctions provided by law.
         F.   The Ohio Department of Commerce, Division of State Fire Marshal,
may request permission to open burn on an annual basis for the purpose of
training firefighters on pre-flashover conditions using the Ohio Fire Academy’s
mobile training laboratory at either the academy or at other training sites in
Ohio. The annual application required pursuant to division (d)(1)A. of this
section shall contain information as required in division (d)(1)B. of this
section, except the information required in divisions (d)(1)B.3. and (d)(1)B.4.
of this section need not be provided unless it is available at the time of
submittal of the application. The Academy shall contact the appropriate Ohio
EPA District Office or local air agency at least five working days before each
training session of the date or dates when the training session will take place
and its location. Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays shall not be considered a
working day.
         G.   For open burning defined under division (c)(4)B. of this section
and O.A.C. 3745-19-04(C)(2), permission to open burn shall not be granted
unless the applicant provides proof of written notice of intent to demolish
received by the appropriate Ohio EPA field office in accordance with O.A.C.
3745-20-03.
      (2)   Notification.
         A.   Notification shall be submitted in writing at least ten working
days before the fire is to be set. Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays shall
not be considered a working day. It shall be in such form and contain such
information as shall be required by the Ohio EPA.
         B.   Such notification shall inform the Ohio EPA regarding the
following:
            1.   The purpose of the proposed burning;
            2.   The nature and quantities of materials to be burned;
            3.   The date or dates when the burning will take place; and
            4.   The location of the burning site.
         C.   The Ohio EPA, after receiving notification, may determine that
the open burning is not allowed under O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19 and the Ohio EPA
shall notify the applicant to this effect.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-05)
   (e)   Penalty. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. In addition, the
offender shall be required to pay the cost of proper disposal of the materials
burned. The cost of proper disposal of the materials burned shall be the amount
it would have cost to dispose of the materials in a manner that is consistent
with the air, water and solid waste laws, ordinances and regulations of the
municipality and the state.
§ 660.09 BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.
   (a)   No person shall abandon or knowingly permit to remain on public or
private property, any excavation, well, cesspool or structure which is in the
process of construction, reconstruction, repair or alteration unless the same
is adequately protected by suitable barricades and guarded by warning devices
or lights at night so that the condition will not reasonably prove dangerous to
life or limb.
   (b)   No person shall destroy, remove, damage or extinguish any barricade or
warning light that is placed for the protection of the public so as to prevent
injury to life or limb.
   (c)   Any owner or agent in control of a premises upon which a basement,
cellar, well or cistern has been abandoned due to demolition, failure to build
or any other reason shall cause the same to be filled to the ground surface
with rock, gravel, earth or other suitable material.
   (d)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 660.10 SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTIONS; DAMAGE OR INJURY.
   (a)   No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a sidewalk or
playground any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails or other articles which may
damage property of another or injure any person or animal traveling along or
upon the sidewalk or playground.
   (b)   No person shall walk on, or allow any animal upon, or injure or deface
in any way, any soft or newly laid sidewalk pavement.
   (c)   No person shall place, deposit or maintain any merchandise, goods,
material or equipment upon any sidewalk so as to obstruct pedestrian traffic
thereon except for such reasonable time as may be actually necessary for the
delivery or pickup of the articles. In no case shall the obstruction remain on
the sidewalk for more than one hour.
   (d)   No person shall unload upon, or transport any heavy merchandise,
goods, material or equipment over or across any sidewalk or curb without first
placing some sufficient protection over the pavement to protect against damage
or injury.
   (e)   No person shall allow any cellar or trap door, coal chute or elevator
or lift opening in any sidewalk to remain open without providing suitable
safeguards to protect and warn pedestrian traffic of the dangerous conditions.
   (f)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 660.11 NOTICE TO FILL LOTS, REMOVE PUTRID SUBSTANCES.
   (a)   No person shall fail to comply with the following requirements within
the lawful time after service or publication of the notice or resolution is
made as required by law: to fill or drain any lot or land or remove all putrid
substances therefrom, or remove all obstructions from culverts, covered drains
or natural watercourses as provided in R.C. § 715.47.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
§ 660.12 FENCES.
   (a)   No person shall erect or maintain any fence charged with electrical
current.
   (b)   No person shall erect or maintain a barbed wire fence which abuts or
is adjacent to any public street or sidewalk. This division (b) does not
prevent the placement and use of not more than two strands of barbed wire on
top of a fence other than a barbed wire fence, provided the strands are not
less than 48 inches from the ground.
   (c)   Barbed wire partition fences may be erected and maintained as provided
in R.C. § 971.03.
   (d)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 660.13 SMOKING IN PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY.
   (a)   As used in this section, PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY means:
      (1)   Enclosed theaters, except the lobby; opera houses; auditoriums;
classrooms; elevators; rooms in which persons are confined as a matter of
health care, including but not limited to a hospital room and a room in a
residential care facility serving as the residence of a person living in the
residential care facility.
      (2)   All buildings and other enclosed structures owned by the state, its
agencies, or political subdivisions, including but not limited to hospitals and
state institutions for persons with mental illnesses and persons with
intellectual disabilities; university and college buildings, except rooms
within those buildings used primarily as the residences of students or other
persons affiliated with the university or college; office buildings; libraries;
museums; and vehicles used in public transportation. That portion of a building
or other enclosed structure that is owned by the state, a state agency or a
political subdivision, and that is used primarily as a food service
establishment, is not a place of public assembly.
      (3)   Each portion of a building or enclosed structure that is not
included in division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is a place of public
assembly if it has a seating capacity of 50 or more persons and is available to
the public. Restaurants, food service establishments, dining rooms, cafes,
cafeterias or other rooms used primarily for the service of food, as well as
bowling alleys and places licensed by the Ohio Division of Liquor Control to
sell intoxicating beverages for consumption on the premises, are not places of
public assembly.
   (b)   For the purpose of separating persons who smoke from persons who do
not smoke for the comfort and health of persons not smoking, in every place of
public assembly there shall be an area where smoking is not permitted, which
shall be designated a no smoking area, provided that not more than one-half of
the rooms in any health care facility in which persons are confined as a matter
of health care may be designated as smoking areas in their entirety. The
designation shall be made before the place of public assembly is made available
to the public. In places included in division (a)(1) of this section, the local
fire authority having jurisdiction shall designate the no smoking area. In
places included in division (a)(2) of this section that are owned by the state
or its agencies, the Ohio Director of Administrative Services shall designate
the area, and if the place is owned by a political subdivision, its legislative
authority shall designate an officer who shall designate the area. In places
included in division (a)(3) of this section, the person having control of the
operations of the place of public assembly shall designate the no smoking area.
In places included in division (a)(2) of this section which are also included
in division (a)(1) of this section, the officer who has authority to designate
the area in places in division (a)(2) of this section shall designate the no
smoking area. A no smoking area may include the entire place of public
assembly. Designations shall be made by the placement of signs that are clearly
visible and that state “no smoking.” No person shall remove signs from areas
designated as no smoking areas.
   (c)   This section does not affect or modify the prohibition contained in
R.C. § 3313.751(B).
   (d)   No person shall smoke in any area designated as a no smoking area in
accordance with division (b) of this section.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3791.031)
§ 660.14 LITTER ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any private property,
including any vacant lot within the village, whether owned by such person or
not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may
maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such manner that
litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon
any street, sidewalk or other public place, or upon any private property.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (a) is guilty of a minor misdemeanor
of a first offense; on each subsequent offense, such person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth offense; each day the violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
   (b)   (1)   Note: The notice required in R.C. § 731.51 requires a written
notice to be served on the owner, lessee, agent or tenant having charge of the
land notifying him or her of the litter and giving the prescribed five days to
correct the problem. The notice may be hand delivered, by U.S. mail or served
by a Zoning Inspector or police officer.
      (2)   If the owner or other person in charge of the land is not a
resident of the municipality, certified mail notice is required to his or her
known address. If his or her address is unknown, notice published once in a
newspaper of general circulation complies with the Revised Code.
(Ord. 716, passed 5-28-2002)
§ 660.15 ACCUMULATION OF GARBAGE OR REFUSE.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   BUILDING MATERIALS. Any material including wood, stone, brick,
steel beam, roofing, pipes, cement block or any composition thereof, used for
erection of any building or structure.
      (2)   GARBAGE. All putrescrible wastes, except wastes of the human body
and other water-carried wastes and shall include all vegetable and animal
wastes resulting from handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of foods.
Any containers that have contained food or liquids for consumption shall also
be classified as GARBAGE.
      (3)   INOPERATIVE MOTOR VEHICLE. Any type of motor vehicle unable to move
under its own power due to defective or missing parts, dismantled, partly
dismantled, wrecked vehicle or parts thereof. A motor vehicle is also presumed
to be in an inoperable condition if it has not been duly registered and
licensed under the laws of the state for a period of 30 days or more.
      (4)   JUNK. Any one item or combination of any of the following:
batteries, paper, rubber, more than four bikes or parts thereof, lumber pallets
in a residential area without permit or building materials that are stored for
more than three months in an outside area where active building has not
occurred.
      (5)   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every device in, on or by which any person or
property may be transported or drawn by power other than human muscular power.
      (6)   RAGS. Clothing or cloth which is unfit for further use for its
originally intended purposes, in its present condition.
      (7)   REFUSE. Ashes, crockery, bottles, cans, paper and other wood pulp
products, boxes, grass clippings and other cut vegetation, old or discarded
clothing, bedding, mattresses, furniture, appliances (or any parts thereof),
rubbish, dirt, nails, pieces of glass and all other similar nonputrescrible
wastes other than those included in the definition of garbage.
      (8)   ROPE. Hemp, cotton, nylon, rayon or any similar composition,
whether in a single piece or various parts, which is no longer safe to use or
which can no longer be used for its intended purpose.
      (9)   SCRAP METAL. Pieces or parts of steel, iron, tin, zinc, copper or
any alloy thereof, whether covered with porcelain or any other material,
whether intact or in parts, which have served their usefulness in their
original form or can no longer be used for their originally intended purpose.
      (10)   USED BUILDING MATERIALS. Any material including wood, stone,
brick, cement block or any composition thereof, used or useful in the erection
of any building or structure which have been previously used for such
construction by the same persons or by any other person.
   (b)   Public nuisance defined; prohibited.
      (1)   The accumulation, storage or disposition of garbage or refuse in
any manner other than as provided by the ordinances or health regulations of
the village.
      (2)   The accumulation or storage of junk, rope, rags, used building
materials, scrap metal, inoperable motor vehicles or building materials for
more than 30 days where active building has not occurred, except in a wholly
enclosed building or structure.
         A.   No storage container or dumpster may be stored or stationed on
the boulevard, front yard or driveway for more than 24 hours unless it is
specifically being used for construction or fire debris. If used for
construction or fire debris, the dumpster may not remain stationed for more
than two weeks unless granted permission by the Zoning Officer.
         B.   No person shall suffer, permit or maintain a public nuisance as
defined above upon any property which they own, occupy or over which they have
legal or constructive charge.
      (3)   Covering the offensive items indicated herein is not permitted;
these items must be removed and/or discarded.
(Ord. 763, passed 12-18-2007)
   
§ 660.16 DEPOSITING OF OFFENSIVE GARBAGE OR REFUSE.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, or permit to be
deposited, any garbage, junk, trash, refuse matter, offal or animal carcass
which is unsightly or which may become offensive, noxious or dangerous to the
public welfare or the public health, on his or her own premises, or any
premises under his or her control, or deposit such garbage, junk, trash or
refuse matter in any vacant lot, public ground, park, alley, street or area
way, or in any other place within the village, except as may be otherwise
provided by law.
   (b)   Any person who violates division (a) above shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $50. Each day’s violation of said
section shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 443, passed 7-15-1963)
§ 660.17 EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS.
   (a)   Regulation. All exterior property areas and premises shall be
maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition free of rubbish, garbage or
junk. Furniture or appliances manufactured only for indoor use, such as, but
not limited to, upholstered furniture, refrigerators, freezers and TV sets
shall not be left outside unless at curbside for disposal within 12 hours. The
above prohibition extends to any owner, operator or occupant of any premises
regardless of intent and items included in said prohibition include any major
home appliance or fixture, including, but not limited to, any stove,
refrigerator, washer, dryer, water heater, furnace or any part of such
appliance or fixture or any furniture which has been manufactured and intended
for interior use which is placed upon, within or about any open, unenclosed
structure located on such premises, including any porch, gazebo, deck, patio,
veranda or upon any lawn or other open exterior area of such premises.
   (b)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates any provision of this section for which no other
penalty is provided is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Each day of noncompliance with the notices and orders of the Zoning
Inspector shall constitute a separate offense.
      (3)   Violators shall also be fined the costs incurred for proper
disposal of the material collected from littering and any other public
nuisance.
(Ord. 759, passed 9-25-2007)
§ 660.18 NOXIOUS WEEDS.
   (a)   Keeping down weeds. Any person owning or having charge of land within
the municipality shall keep said property free and clear from all noxious weeds
and rank vegetation and shall be required to cut all such weeds and vegetation
on the lots owned or controlled by him or her at least twice in every year,
once between June 1 and July 1 and once between August 1 and September 1.
   (b)   Notice to owner to cut noxious weeds; service. Upon information that
noxious weeds are growing on lands in the municipality and are about to spread
or mature seeds, the Council shall cause written notice to be served on the
owner or person having charge of such land that such weeds must be cut and
destroyed within five days after service of such notice. If such owner or
person having charge of such land is a nonresident whose address is known, such
notice shall be sent to his or her address by registered mail; if unknown, it
shall be sufficient to publish such notice once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county.
   (c)   Fees for service and return. The Police Chief, any police officer or
Clerk of Council may make service and return of the notice provided for in
division (b) above and shall be allowed the same fee as that provided for
service and return of summons in civil cases before a magistrate.
   (d)   Procedure when owner fails to comply with notice. If the owner or
person having charge of such land fails to comply with such notice, Council
shall cause the noxious weeds to be cut and destroyed. All expenses and labor
costs incurred shall, when approved by Council, be paid out of municipal funds
not otherwise appropriated.
   (e)   Written return to County Auditor; amount a lien upon property. The
Council shall make a written return to the County Auditor of its action under
divisions (b) and (c) above with a statement of the charges for their services,
the amount paid for labor, the fees of the officers serving said notices and a
proper description of the premises. Such amounts, when allowed, shall be
entered upon the tax duplicate and be a lien upon such lands from and after the
date of entry and will be collected as other taxes and returned to the
municipality with the General Fund.
   (f)   Penalty. Whoever shall violate or fail to comply with any of the
provisions of this section for which another penalty is not provided shall be
fined not less than $10 and not more than $100.
(Ord. 515, passed 9-8-1975)
§ 660.19 NOTICE OF VIOLATION; CLEANUP.
   (a)   The Village Zoning Inspector shall notify the property owner of the
above violation in writing, evidenced by a certified mailing of the above
violation, and the property owner shall have five days to correct the
situation.
   (b)   After the five-day notice has expired, a village employee may clean up
the property and the costs of labor, disposal and/or any other costs incurred
may be assessed on the property owner’s real estate taxes.
(Ord. 730, passed 5-25-2004)
§ 660.20 VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR OR VILLAGE ZONING INSPECTOR TO CAUSE THE
ABATEMENT OF CERTAIN NUISANCES.
   (a)   This Council finds that the Village Administrator or Village Zoning
Inspector may cause the abatement of certain nuisances after notifying the
owners of the property on which each of said nuisances originated and shall
report the cost of such abatement, all as provided by law.
   (b)   The amounts reported therefor shall be assessed upon said properties,
and such assessments shall be certified by the Village Fiscal Officer to the
County Auditor for collection as soon as possible on the next duplicate in the
same manner as general taxes.
(Ord. 868, passed 8-28-2018)
§ 660.21 DISPOSITION OF REMAINS.
   (a)   Whenever a body is required to be disposed of at the village's expense
pursuant to R.C. § 9.15, the village shall only be obligated for the following:
      (1)   The village shall cause the body to be cremated at the expense of
the village, with such total expense not to exceed $750.
      (2)   Upon receipt of the cremains, the village shall give notice by
regular U.S. mail to the decedent's next of kin, if known, to retrieve the
cremains. The cremains shall be made available for retrieval by the decedent's
next of kin, provided he or she reimburse the village fully for the monies
expended by the village for such cremation. If such cremains are not retrieved
within 30 days of the delivery of the notice required herein, the village may
dispose of said cremains in any manner permitted by law.
   (b)   In the event that the village is required to dispose of any body under
R.C. § 9.15 and it is later determined that the estate of the decedent has
value sufficient to reimburse the village for any amounts expended for disposal
of the decedent's body, the Village Solicitor is hereby authorized to submit a
claim against the decedent's estate for the amount of expense the village has
incurred in the disposition of the decedent's body and/or cremains. For
purposes of this section, the term EXPENSE shall include, but not be limited
to, cremation expenses, transportation expenses, costs of postage or shipping,
wages, filing fees, and attorney fees.
(Res. 2025-004, passed 4-22-2025)
CHAPTER 666: SEX RELATED OFFENSES
Section
   
666.01   Definitions
   
666.02   Unlawful sexual conduct with a minor
   
666.03   Sexual imposition
   
666.04   Public indecency
   
666.05   Voyeurism
   
666.06   Polygraph examinations for victims; restrictions on use
   
666.07   Procuring; engagement in sexual activity for hire
   
666.08   Soliciting
   
666.09   Loitering to engage in solicitation
   
666.10   Prostitution
   
666.11   Rules of evidence
   
666.12   Disseminating matter harmful to juveniles
   
666.13   Displaying matter harmful to juveniles
   
666.14   Deception to obtain matter harmful to juveniles
   
666.15   Presumptions; notice
   
666.16   Declaratory judgment
   
666.17   Injunction; abatement of nuisance
   
666.18   Unlawful operation of viewing booths depicting sexual conduct
   
666.19   Juveniles on the premises of adult entertainment establishments
prohibited
   
666.20   Sexually oriented businesses; illegal operation and activity
   
666.21   Unlawful advertising of massage
   
666.22   Nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images
   
666.23   Grooming
   
666.99   Sentencing for sexually oriented offenses; sexual predators;
registration
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Assistance to victims of sexual assault, see R.C. §§ 2907.28 through 2907.30
   Child victim, disposition of, see R.C. § 2945.481
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Examination and treatment for venereal disease; HIV tests, see R.C. §
2907.27
   Sentencing generally, see
Ch. 698
   Sexual conduct with an animal, see §
618.17
   Spreading contagion, see §
660.02
   Registration of sex offenders in cities and counties, see R.C. §§ 2950.01 et
seq.
§ 666.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   HARMFUL TO JUVENILES. That quality of any material or performance
describing or representing nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sado-
masochistic abuse in any form to which all of the following apply:
      (1)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole, appeals to
the prurient interest of juveniles in sex.
      (2)   The material or performance is patently offensive to prevailing
standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable
for juveniles.
      (3)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole, lacks
serious literary, artistic, political and scientific value for juveniles.
   (b)   JUVENILE. Any unmarried person under 18 years of age.
   (c)   LICENSED MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL. Any of the following medical
professionals:
      (1)   A physician assistant licensed under R.C. Chapter 4730;
      (2)   A physician authorized under R.C. Chapter 4731 to practice medicine
and surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery, or podiatric medicine and
surgery;
      (3)   A massage therapist licensed under R.C. Chapter 4731.
   (d)   MATERIAL. Any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print,
picture, figure, image, description, motion picture film, video cassette, laser
disc, phonograph record, cassette tape, compact disc or other tangible thing
capable of arousing interest through sight, sound or touch and includes an
image or text appearing on a computer monitor, television screen, liquid
crystal display or similar display device or an image or text recorded on a
computer hard disk, computer floppy disk, compact disk, magnetic tape or
similar data storage device.
   (e)   MENTAL HEALTH CLIENT OR PATIENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2305.51.
   (f)   MENTAL HEALTH PROFESSIONAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2305.115.
   (g)   MINOR. A person under the age of 18.
   (h)   NUDITY. The showing, representation or depiction of human male or
female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a full, opaque covering,
or of a female breast with less than a full, opaque covering of any portion
thereof below the top of the nipple, or of covered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.
   (i)   OBSCENE. When considered as a whole, and judged with reference to
ordinary adults or, if it is designed for sexual deviates or other specially
susceptible group, judged with reference to that group, any material or
performance is OBSCENE if any of the following apply:
      (1)   Its dominant appeal is to prurient interest.
      (2)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting
sexual activity, masturbation, sexual excitement or nudity in a way that tends
to represent human beings as mere objects of sexual appetite.
      (3)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting
bestiality or extreme or bizarre violence, cruelty or brutality.
      (4)   Its dominant tendency is to appeal to scatological interest by
displaying or depicting human bodily functions of elimination in a way that
inspires disgust or revulsion in persons with ordinary sensibilities, without
serving any genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral or artistic
purpose.
      (5)   It contains a series of displays or descriptions of sexual
activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, nudity, bestiality, extreme or
bizarre violence, cruelty or brutality, or human bodily functions of
elimination, the cumulative effect of which is a dominant tendency to appeal to
prurient or scatological interest, when the appeal to such an interest is
primarily for its own sake or for commercial exploitation, rather than
primarily for a genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral or
artistic purpose.
   (j)   PERFORMANCE. Any motion picture, preview, trailer, play, show, skit,
dance or other exhibition performed before an audience.
   (k)   PLACE WHERE A PERSON HAS A REASONABLE EXPECTATION OF PRIVACY. A place
where a reasonable person would believe that the person could fully disrobe in
private.
   (l)   PRIVATE AREA. The genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or female breast
below the top of the areola, where nude or covered by an undergarment.
   (m)   PROSTITUTE. A male or female who promiscuously engages in sexual
activity for hire, regardless of whether the hire is paid to the prostitute or
to another.
   (n)   SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person or
the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained.
   (o)   SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Sexual conduct or sexual contact, or both.
   (p)   SEXUAL CONDUCT. Vaginal intercourse between a male and female; anal
intercourse, fellatio and cunnilingus between persons regardless of sex; and,
without privilege to do so, the insertion, however slight, of any part of the
body or any instrument, apparatus or other object into the vaginal or anal
opening of another. Penetration, however slight, is sufficient to complete
vaginal or anal intercourse.
   (q)   SEXUAL CONTACT. Any touching of an erogenous zone of another,
including without limitation the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region, or, if
the person is a female, a breast, for the purpose of sexually arousing or
gratifying either person.
   (r)   SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals when
in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   (s)   SPOUSE. A person married to an offender at the time of an alleged
offense, except that the person shall not be considered the spouse when any of
the following apply:
      (1)   When the parties have entered into a written separation agreement
pursuant to R.C. § 3103.06.
      (2)   When an action is pending between the parties for annulment,
divorce, dissolution of marriage or legal separation.
      (3)   In the case of an action for legal separation, after the effective
date of the judgment for legal separation.
(R.C. § 2907.01)
§ 666.02 UNLAWFUL SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH A MINOR.
   (a)   No person who is 18 years of age or older shall engage in sexual
conduct with another when the offender knows the other person is 13 years of
age or older but less than 16 years of age, or the offender is reckless in that
regard.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful sexual conduct
with a minor.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(2), unlawful sexual
conduct with a minor is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(3) of this section, if
the offender is less than four years older than the other person, unlawful
sexual conduct with a minor is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03 or 2907.04, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of former R.C. § 2907.12, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, unlawful sexual conduct with a
minor is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.04)
§ 666.03 SEXUAL IMPOSITION.
   (a)   No person shall have sexual contact with another; cause another to
have sexual contact with the offender; or cause two or more other persons to
have sexual contact when the offender knows that the sexual contact is
offensive to the other person, or one of the other persons, or is reckless in
that regard.
   (b)   No person shall be convicted of a violation of this section solely
upon the victim’s testimony unsupported by other evidence.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of sexual imposition, a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section, R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03,
2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, former R.C. § 2907.12, or a substantially equivalent
state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this section, R.C. § 2907.02,
2907.03, 2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, former R.C. § 2907.12, or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any combination of those
sections, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree and,
notwithstanding the range of jail terms prescribed in R.C. § 2929.24, the court
may impose on the offender a definite jail term of not more than one year.
(R.C. § 2907.06)
Statutory reference:
   Gross sexual imposition, felony, see R.C. § 2907.05
   Notice to licensing board or agency upon indictment, conviction or guilty
plea of mental health professional, see R.C. §§ 2907.17 and 2907.18
§ 666.04 PUBLIC INDECENCY.
   (a)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following, under
circumstances in which the person’s conduct is likely to be viewed by and
affront others who are in the person’s physical proximity and who are not
members of the person’s household:
      (1)   Expose the person’s private parts.
      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct or masturbation.
      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be
sexual conduct or masturbation.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following, under circumstances
in which the person’s conduct is likely to be viewed by and affront another
person who is in the person’s physical proximity, who is a minor, and who is
not the spouse of the offender:
      (1)   Engage in masturbation.
      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct.
      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be
sexual conduct or masturbation.
      (4)   Expose the person’s private parts with the purpose of personal
sexual arousal or gratification or to lure the minor into sexual activity.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public indecency and
shall be punished as provided in divisions (c)(2), (c)(3), (c)(4) and (c)(5) of
this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(2), a violation
of division (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, a violation of division (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the third degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by
the offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations
of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
a violation of division (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by the
offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more
violations of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, a violation of division (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by
the offender’s conduct was a minor, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(3), a violation
of division (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a violation of division (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section
is a misdemeanor of the second degree or, if any person who was likely to view
and be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section or a substantially equivalent
state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (a)(2) or (a)(3) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if any person who was
likely to view and be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor, a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(4), a violation
of division (b)(1), (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
second degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law
or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (b)(1), (b)(2) or (b)(3) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (b)(1), (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(5), a violation
of division (b)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation of
this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (b)(4) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (d)   (1)   If either of the following applies, the court may determine at
the time of sentencing whether to classify the offender as a tier I sex
offender/child-victim offender for a violation of division (b)(4) of this
section:
         A.   The offender is less than ten years older than the other person.
         B.   The offender is ten or more years older than the other person and
the offender has not previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any
violation of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance.
      (2)   If the offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (b)(4) of this section, is ten or more years older than the other
person, and previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation
of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the court shall issue an order at the time of sentencing that
classifies the offender as a tier I sex offender/child-victim offender subject
to registration under R.C. §§ 2950.04, 2950.041, 2950.05, and 2950.06.
(R.C. § 2907.09)
   (e)   A mother is entitled to breast-feed her baby in any location of a
place of public accommodation, as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, wherein the mother
otherwise is permitted.
(R.C. § 3781.55)
Statutory reference:
   Bail considerations for persons charged, see R.C. § 2907.41
§ 666.05 VOYEURISM.
   (a)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying himself
or herself, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade the
privacy of another, to spy or eavesdrop upon another.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly commit trespass or otherwise secretly or
surreptitiously videotape, film, photograph, broadcast, stream, or otherwise
record another person, in a place where a person has a reasonable expectation
of privacy, for the purpose of viewing the private areas of that person.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly commit trespass or otherwise secretly or
surreptitiously videotape, film, photograph, broadcast, stream, or otherwise
record a minor, in a place where a person has a reasonable expectation of
privacy, for the purpose of viewing the private areas of the minor.
   (d)   No person shall secretly or surreptitiously videotape, film,
photograph, or otherwise record another person above, under, or through the
clothing being worn by that other person for the purpose of viewing the body
of, or the undergarments worn by, that other person.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of voyeurism.
      (1)   A violation of division (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
      (2)   A violation of division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
second degree.
      (3)   A violation of division (d) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (4)   A violation of division (c) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.08)
§ 666.06 POLYGRAPH EXAMINATIONS FOR VICTIMS; RESTRICTIONS ON USE.
   (a)   (1)   A peace officer, prosecutor, other public official, defendant,
defendant's attorney, alleged juvenile offender, or alleged juvenile offender’s
attorney shall not ask or require a victim of an alleged sex offense to submit
to a polygraph examination as a condition for proceeding with the investigation
or prosecution of the alleged sex offense.
      (2)   The refusal of the victim of an alleged sex offense to submit to a
polygraph examination shall not prevent the investigation of the alleged sex
offense, the filing of criminal charges with respect to the alleged sex
offense, or the prosecution of the alleged perpetrator of the alleged sex
offense.
   (b)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   ALLEGED JUVENILE OFFENDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2930.01.
      (2)   PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.51.
      (3)   POLYGRAPH EXAMINATION. Any mechanical or electrical instrument or
device of any type used or allegedly used to examine, test or question an
individual for the purpose of determining the individual’s truthfulness.
      (4)   PROSECUTION. The prosecution of criminal charges in a criminal
prosecution or the prosecution of a delinquent child complaint in a delinquency
proceeding.
      (5)   PROSECUTOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
      (6)   PUBLIC OFFICIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 117.01.
      (7)   SEX OFFENSE. A violation of any provision of §§
666.02 to
666.05 or R.C. §§ 2907.02 to 2907.09.
(R.C. § 2907.10)
§ 666.07 PROCURING; ENGAGEMENT IN SEXUAL ACTIVITY FOR HIRE.
   (a)   Procuring.
      (1)   No person, knowingly and for gain, shall do either of the
following:
         A.   Entice or solicit another to patronize a prostitute or brothel;
         B.   Procure a prostitute for another to patronize, or take or direct
another at the other's request to any place for the purpose of patronizing a
prostitute.
      (2)   No person, having authority or responsibility over the use of
premises, shall knowingly permit the premises to be used for the purpose of
engaging in sexual activity for hire.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (a)(1)A. or (a)(1)B. of this section is
guilty of procuring. Except as otherwise provided in this division, procuring
is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the prostitute who is procured,
patronized, or otherwise involved in a violation of division (a)(1)B. of this
section is under 18 years of age at the time of the violation, regardless of
whether the offender who violates division (a)(1)B. of this section knows the
prostitute’s age, or if a prostitute who engages in sexual activity for hire in
premises used in violation of division (a)(2) of this section is under 18 years
of age at the time of the violation, regardless of whether the offender who
violates division (a)(2) of this section knows the prostitute’s age, procuring
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.23)
   (b)   Engagement in sexual activity for hire.
      (1)   As used in this division (b):
         A.   PERSON WITH A DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY. Has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 2905.32.
         B.   SEXUAL ACTIVITY FOR HIRE. An implicit or explicit agreement to
provide sexual activity in exchange for anything of value paid to the person
engaging in such sexual activity, to any person trafficking that person, or to
any person associated with either such person.
      (2)   No person shall recklessly induce, entice, or procure another to
engage in sexual activity for hire in exchange for the person giving anything
of value to the other person.
      (3)   No person shall recklessly induce, entice, or procure another to
engage in sexual activity for hire in exchange for the person giving anything
of value to the other person if the other person is a person with a
developmental disability and the offender knows or has reasonable cause to
believe that the other person is a person with a developmental disability.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (b)(2) of this section is guilty of
engaging in prostitution, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever violates
division (b)(3) of this section is guilty of engaging in prostitution with a
person with a developmental disability, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. In sentencing an offender under this division for a
violation of division (b)(2) of this section, the court shall require the
offender to attend an education or treatment program aimed at preventing
persons from inducing, enticing, or procuring another to engage in sexual
activity for hire in exchange for the person giving anything of value to the
other person. Notwithstanding the fine specified in R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a) for
a misdemeanor of the first degree, in sentencing an offender under this
division for a violation of division (b)(2) of this section, the court may
impose upon the offender a fine of not more than $1,500.
(R.C. § 2907.231)
§ 666.08 SOLICITING.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly solicit another to engage in sexual activity
for hire in exchange for the person receiving anything of value from the other
person.
   (b)   No person, with knowledge that the person has tested positive as a
carrier of a virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, shall engage
in conduct in violation of division (a) of this section.
   (c)   As used in division (a) of this section, SEXUAL ACTIVITY FOR HIRE
means an implicit or explicit agreement to provide sexual activity in exchange
for anything of value paid to the person engaging in such sexual activity, to
any person trafficking that person, or to any person associated with either
such person.
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
soliciting. Soliciting is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of engaging
in solicitation after a positive HIV test, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.24)
Statutory reference:
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27
§ 666.09 LOITERING TO ENGAGE IN SOLICITATION.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to solicit another to engage in sexual
activity for hire and while in or near a public place, shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Beckon to, stop or attempt to stop another;
      (2)   Engage or attempt to engage another in conversation;
      (3)   Stop or attempt to stop the operator of a vehicle or approach a
stationary vehicle;
      (4)   If the offender is the operator of or a passenger in a vehicle,
stop, attempt to stop, beckon to, attempt to beckon to, or entice another to
approach or enter the vehicle of which the offender is the operator or in which
the offender is the passenger;
      (5)   Interfere with the free passage of another.
   (b)   No person, with knowledge that the person has tested positive as a
carrier of a virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, shall engage
in conduct in violation of division (a) of this section.
   (c)   As used in division (a) of this section:
      (1)   PUBLIC PLACE. Any of the following:
         A.   A street, road, highway, thoroughfare, bikeway, walkway,
sidewalk, bridge, alley, alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking lot or
transportation facility.
         B.   A doorway or entrance way to a building that fronts on a place
described in division (1)A. of this definition.
         C.   A place not described in division (1)A. or (1)B. of this
definition that is open to the public.
      (2)   VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
loitering to engage in solicitation, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
loitering to engage in solicitation after a positive HIV test, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.241)
Statutory reference:
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27
§ 666.10 PROSTITUTION.
   (a)   No person shall engage in sexual activity for hire.
   (b)   No person, with knowledge that the person has tested positive as a
carrier of a virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, shall engage
in sexual activity for hire.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
prostitution, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of engaging
in prostitution after a positive HIV test, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.25)
Statutory reference:
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27
§ 666.11 RULES OF EVIDENCE.
   (a)   In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a place is a
brothel, evidence as to the reputation of the place and as to the reputation of
the persons who inhabit or frequent it is admissible on the question of whether
the place is or is not a brothel.
   (b)   In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a person is a
prostitute, evidence as to the reputation of the person is admissible on the
question of whether the person is or is not a prostitute.
   (c)   In any prosecution for a violation of §§
666.07 to
666.10, proof of a prior conviction of the accused of any such offense or
substantially equivalent offense is admissible in support of the charge.
   (d)   The prohibition contained in R.C. § 2317.02(D) against testimony by a
husband or wife concerning communications between them does not apply, and the
accused’s spouse may testify concerning any such communication in any of the
following cases:
      (1)   When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of §
666.07 and the spouse testifying was the prostitute involved in the offense or
the person who used the offender’s premises to engage in sexual activity for
hire;
      (2)   When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of §
666.08 or
666.10.
(R.C. § 2907.26)
§ 666.12 DISSEMINATING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (a)   No person, with knowledge of its character or content, shall
recklessly do any of following:
      (1)   Directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit,
rent or present to a juvenile any material or performance that is obscene or
harmful to juveniles;
      (2)   Offer or agree to sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide,
exhibit, rent or present to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles;
      (3)   While in the physical proximity of the juvenile or law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, allow any juvenile or law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile to review or peruse any material or view any live
performance that is harmful to juveniles.
   (b)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section
that involves material or a performance that is harmful to juveniles but not
obscene:
      (1)   The defendant is the parent, guardian or spouse of the juvenile
involved.
      (2)   The juvenile involved, at the time of the conduct in question, was
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian who, with knowledge of its
character, consented to the material or performance being furnished or
presented to the juvenile.
      (3)   The juvenile exhibited to the defendant or his or her agent or
employee a draft card, driver’s license, birth record, marriage license or
other official or apparently official document purporting to show that the
juvenile was 18 years of age or over or married, and the person to whom the
document was exhibited did not otherwise have reasonable cause to believe that
the juvenile was under the age of 18 and unmarried.
   (c)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section,
involving material or a performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles,
that the material or performance was furnished or presented for a bona fide
medical, scientific, educational, governmental, judicial or other proper
purpose, by a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher,
librarian, clergy, prosecutor, judge or other proper person.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (b)(3) of this section, mistake of
age is not a defense to a charge under this section.
   (d)   (1)   A person directly sells, delivers, furnishes, disseminates,
provides, exhibits, rents or presents or directly offers or agrees to sell,
deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent or present material or a
performance to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles in violation of this section by means of an electronic method of
remotely transmitting information if the person knows or has reason to believe
that the person receiving the information is a juvenile or the group of persons
receiving the information are juveniles.
      (2)   A person remotely transmitting information by means of a method of
mass distribution does not directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate,
provide, exhibit, rent or present or directly offer or agree to sell, deliver,
furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent or present the material or
performance in question to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles in violation of this section if either of the following applies:
         A.   The person has inadequate information to know or have reason to
believe that a particular recipient of the information or offer is a juvenile.
         B.   The method of mass distribution does not provide the person the
ability to prevent a particular recipient from receiving the information.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disseminating matter
harmful to juveniles. If the material or performance involved is harmful to
juveniles except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the material or performance
involved is obscene, violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.31)
§ 666.13 DISPLAYING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (a)   No person who has custody, control or supervision of a commercial
establishment, with knowledge of the character or content of the material
involved, shall display at the establishment any material that is harmful to
juveniles and that is open to view by juveniles as part of the invited general
public.
   (b)   It is not a violation of division (a) of this section if the material
in question is displayed by placing it behind “blinder racks” or similar
devices that cover at least the lower two-thirds of the material, if the
material in question is wrapped or placed behind the counter, or if the
material in question otherwise is covered or located so that the portion that
is harmful to juveniles is not open to the view of juveniles.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of displaying matter harmful
to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day during which the
offender is in violation of this section constitutes a separate offense.
(R.C. § 2907.311)
§ 666.14 DECEPTION TO OBTAIN MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (a)   No person, for the purpose of enabling a juvenile to obtain any
material or gain admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles,
shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is the parent, guardian or spouse
of the juvenile.
      (2)   Furnish the juvenile with any identification or document purporting
to show that the juvenile is 18 years of age or over or married.
   (b)   No juvenile, for the purpose of obtaining any material or gaining
admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles, shall do either of
the following:
      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is 18 years of age or over or
married.
      (2)   Exhibit any identification or document purporting to show that he
or she is 18 years of age or over or married.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of deception to obtain matter
harmful to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the second degree. A juvenile who
violates division (b) of this section shall be adjudged an unruly child, with
the disposition of the case as may be appropriate under R.C. Chapter 2151.
(R.C. § 2907.33)
§ 666.15 PRESUMPTIONS; NOTICE.
   (a)   An owner or manager, or agent or employee of an owner or manager, of a
bookstore, newsstand, theater or other commercial establishment engaged in
selling material or exhibiting performances, who, in the course of business
does any of the acts prohibited by §
666.12 is presumed to have knowledge of the character of the material or
performance involved if the owner, manager, or agent or employee of the owner
or manager has actual notice of the nature of the material or performance,
whether or not the owner, manager, or agent or employee of the owner or manager
has precise knowledge of its contents.
   (b)   Without limitation on the manner in which the notice may be given,
actual notice of the character of material or a performance may be given in
writing by the chief legal officer of the municipality. This notice, regardless
of the manner in which it is given, shall identify the sender, identify the
material or performance involved, state whether it is obscene or harmful to
juveniles, and bear the date of the notice.
   (c)   Section
666.12 does not apply to a motion picture operator or projectionist acting
within the scope of employment as an employee of the owner or manager of the
theater or other place for the showing of motion pictures to the general
public, and having no managerial responsibility or financial interest in the
operator’s or projectionist’s place of employment, other than wages.
   (d)   (1)   The provisions of §§
666.12,
666.13 and
666.14(a) do not apply to a person solely because the person provided access or
connection to or from an electronic method of remotely transferring information
not under that person’s control, including having provided capabilities that
are incidental to providing access or connection to or from the electronic
method of remotely transferring the information, and that do not include the
creation of the content of the material that is the subject of the access or
connection.
      (2)   Division (d)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
conspires with an entity actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of §
666.12,
666.13 or
666.14 or who knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.
      (3)   Division (d)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
provides access or connection to an electronic method of remotely transferring
information that is engaged in the violation of §
666.12,
666.13 or
666.14 and that contain content that person has selected and introduced into
the electronic method of remotely transferring information or content over
which that person exercises editorial control.
   (e)   An employer is not guilty of a violation of §
666.12,
666.13 or
666.14 based on the actions of an employee or agent of the employer unless the
employee’s or agent’s conduct is within the scope of the employee’s or agent’s
employment or agency, and the employer does either of the following:
      (1)   With knowledge of the employee’s or agent’s conduct, the employer
authorizes or ratifies the conduct.
      (2)   The employer recklessly disregards the employee’s or agent’s
conduct.
   (f)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under §
666.12 or
666.13 as the section applies to an image transmitted through the internet or
other electronic method of remotely transmitting information that the person
charged with violating the section has taken, in good faith, reasonable,
effective and appropriate actions under the circumstances to restrict or
prevent access by juveniles to material that is harmful to juveniles, including
any method that is feasible under available technology.
(R.C. § 2907.35)
§ 666.16 DECLARATORY JUDGMENT.
   (a)   Without limitation on the persons otherwise entitled to bring an
action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2721, involving the
same issue, the following persons have standing to bring a declaratory judgment
action to determine whether particular materials or performances are obscene or
harmful to juveniles:
      (1)   The chief legal officer of the municipality if and when there is
reasonable cause to believe that R.C. § 2907.31 or 2907.32, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, is being or is about to be violated;
      (2)   Any person who, pursuant to R.C. § 2907.35(B) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, has received notice in writing from the chief
legal officer stating that particular materials or performances are obscene or
harmful to juveniles.
   (b)   Any party to an action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to division
(a) of this section is entitled, upon the party’s request, to trial on the
merits within five days after joinder of the issues, and the court shall render
judgment within five days after trial is concluded.
   (c)   An action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to division (a) of this
section shall not be brought during the pendency of any civil action or
criminal prosecution when the character of the particular materials or
performances involved is at issue in the pending case, and either of the
following applies:
      (1)   Either of the parties to the action for a declaratory judgment is a
party to the pending case;
      (2)   A judgment in the pending case will necessarily constitute res
judicata as to the character of the materials or performances involved.
   (d)   A civil action or criminal prosecution in which the character of
particular materials or performances is at issue, brought during the pendency
of an action for a declaratory judgment involving the same issue, shall be
stayed during the pendency of the action for a declaratory judgment.
   (e)   The fact that a violation of R.C. § 2907.31 or 2907.32, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, occurs prior to a judicial
determination of the character of the material or performance involved in the
violation does not relieve the offender of criminal liability for the
violation, even though prosecution may be stayed pending the judicial
determination.
(R.C. § 2907.36)
§ 666.17 INJUNCTION; ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   (a)   Where it appears that R.C. § 2907.31 or 2907.32, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, is being or is about to be violated, the chief
legal officer of the municipality may bring an action to enjoin the violation.
The defendant, upon his or her request, is entitled to trial on the merits
within five days after the joinder of the issues, and the court shall render
judgment within five days after the trial is concluded.
   (b)   Premises used or occupied for repeated violations of R.C. § 2907.31 or
2907.32, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, constitute a
nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2907.37)
§ 666.18 UNLAWFUL OPERATION OF VIEWING BOOTHS DEPICTING SEXUAL CONDUCT.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. An entity that is open to the public and
to which either of the following applies:
         A.   It has a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade
of the sale, rental or viewing of visual materials or performances depicting
sexual conduct.
         B.   It has as a principal business purpose the sale, rental or
viewing of visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct.
      (2)   VISUAL MATERIALS OR PERFORMANCES. Films, videos, CD-ROM discs,
streaming video or other motion pictures.
   (b)   No person who has custody, control or supervision of a commercial
establishment, with knowledge of the character of the visual material or
performance involved, shall knowingly permit the use of, or offer the use of,
viewing booths, stalls or partitioned portions of a room located in the
commercial establishment for the purpose of viewing visual materials or
performances depicting sexual conduct unless both of the following apply:
      (1)   The inside of each booth, stall or partitioned room is visible
from, and at least one side of each booth, stall or partitioned room is open
to, a continuous and contiguous main aisle or hallway that is open to the
public areas of the commercial establishment and is not obscured by any
curtain, door or other covering or enclosure.
      (2)   No booth, stall or partitioned room is designed, constructed,
pandered or allowed to be used for the purpose of encouraging or facilitating
nudity or sexual activity on the part of or between patrons or members of the
public, and no booth, stall or partitioned room has any aperture, hole or
opening for the purpose of encouraging or facilitating nudity or sexual
activity.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that
either of the following applies to the involved visual materials or
performances:
      (1)   The visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct are
disseminated or presented for a bona fide medical, scientific, educational,
religious, governmental, judicial or other proper purpose and by or to a
physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher, person pursuing bona
fide studies or research, librarian, member of the clergy, prosecutor, judge or
other person having a proper interest in the visual materials or performances.
      (2)   The visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct,
taken as a whole, would be found by a reasonable person to have serious
literary, artistic, political or scientific value or are presented or
disseminated in good faith for a serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific purpose and are not pandered for their prurient appeal.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting unlawful
operation of viewing booths depicting sexual conduct, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(R.C. § 2907.38)
§ 666.19 JUVENILES ON THE PREMISES OF ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
PROHIBITED.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   ADULT ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
in which coin- operated, slug-operated or electronically, electrically or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other
image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five or
fewer persons per machine at any one time, and in which the images so displayed
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting or
describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (2)   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE.
         A.   A commercial establishment that, for any form of consideration,
has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-trade in, derives a
significant or substantial portion of its revenues from, devotes a significant
or substantial portion of its interior business or advertising to, or maintains
a substantial section of its sales or display space for the sale or rental of
any of the following:
            1.   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides or
other visual representations, that are characterized by their emphasis upon the
exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas;
            2.   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are designed for
use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of self or others.
         B.   Includes a commercial establishment as defined in R.C. § 2907.38.
An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve
the offering for sale, rental or viewing of materials exhibiting or describing
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and still be
categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store.
The existence of other principal business purposes does not exempt an
establishment from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store
or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes is
offering for sale or rental, for some form of consideration, such materials
that exhibit or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
      (3)   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle club
or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are
served, that regularly features any of the following:
         A.   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity;
         B.   Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities;
         C.   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
      (4)   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT. The sale, rental or exhibition, for any form
of consideration, of books, films, video cassettes, magazines, periodicals or
live performances that are characterized by an emphasis on the exposure or
display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activity.
      (5)   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT. An adult arcade, adult
bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, nude or seminude model studio or sexual
encounter establishment. An establishment in which a medical practitioner,
psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the state
engages in medically approved and recognized therapy, including but not limited
to massage therapy, as regulated pursuant to R.C. § 4731.15, is not an ADULT
ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT.
      (6)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic
reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon
the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas are regularly shown for any form of consideration.
      (7)   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment that, for any form of consideration, regularly
features persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity or live
performances that are characterized by their emphasis upon the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
      (8)   DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY THEIR EMPHASIS UPON. The dominant
or principal character and theme of the object described by this phrase. For
instance, when the phrase refers to films “that are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas”, the films so described are
those whose dominant or principal character and theme are the exhibition or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (9)   NUDE OR SEMINUDE MODEL STUDIO. Any place where a person, who
regularly appears in a state of nudity or seminudity, is provided for money or
any other form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons. A modeling
class or studio is not a NUDE OR SEMINUDE MODEL STUDIO and is not subject to
this chapter if it is operated in any of the following ways:
         A.   By a college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation;
         B.   By a private college or university that maintains and operates
educational programs, the credits for which are transferable to a college or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
         C.   In a structure that has no sign visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising indicating that a person appearing in a
state of nudity or seminudity is available for viewing, if in order to
participate in a class in the structure, a student must enroll at least three
days in advance of the class and if not more than one nude or seminude model is
on the premises at any one time.
      (10)   NUDITY, NUDE or STATE OF NUDITY. The showing of the human male or
female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than
a fully opaque covering; or the showing of the female breasts with less than a
fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple.
      (11)   REGULARLY FEATURES or REGULARLY SHOWN. A consistent or substantial
course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a
substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a part of the
ongoing business of the adult entertainment establishment.
      (12)   SEMINUDE or STATE OF SEMINUDITY. A state of dress in which opaque
clothing covers not more than the genitals, pubic region and nipple of the
female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or
devices.
      (13)   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT.
         A.   A business or commercial establishment that, as one of its
principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration a place where
either of the following occur:
            1.   Two or more persons may congregate, associate or consort for
the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities.
            2.   Two or more persons appear nude or seminude for the purpose of
displaying their nude or seminude bodies for their receipt of consideration or
compensation in any type or form.
         B.   An establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist,
psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in
medically approved and recognized therapy, including but not limited to massage
therapy, as regulated pursuant to R.C. § 4731.15, is not a SEXUAL ENCOUNTER
ESTABLISHMENT.
      (14)   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. The cleft of the buttocks, anus, male
or female genitals, or the female breast.
      (15)   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Any of the following:
         A.   Sex acts, normal or perverted, or actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy;
         B.   Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the
activities described in division A. of this definition.
   (b)   No person knowingly shall allow an individual, including but not
limited to a patron, customer, or employee, who is under 18 years of age on the
premises of an adult entertainment establishment.
   (c)   No individual who is under 18 years of age knowingly shall show or
give false information concerning the individual’s name or age, or other false
identification, for the purpose of gaining entrance to an adult entertainment
establishment.
   (d)   A person shall not be found guilty of a violation of division (b) of
this section if the person raises as an affirmative defense and if the jury or,
in a nonjury trial, the court finds the person has established by a
preponderance of the evidence, all of the following:
      (1)   The individual gaining entrance to the adult entertainment
establishment exhibited to an operator, employee, agent or independent
contractor of the adult entertainment establishment a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 and
4507.52 showing that the individual was then at least 18 years of age.
      (2)   The operator, employee, agent or independent contractor made a bona
fide effort to ascertain the true age of the individual gaining entrance to the
adult entertainment establishment by checking the identification presented, at
the time of entrance, to ascertain that the description on the identification
compared with the appearance of the individual and that the identification had
not been altered in any way.
      (3)   The operator, employee, agent or independent contractor had reason
to believe that the individual gaining entrance to the adult entertainment
establishment was at least 18 years of age.
   (e)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense described in
division (d) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or the
Deputy Registrar who issued a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50 and 4507.52 shall be permitted to
submit certified copies of the records, in the Registrar’s or Deputy
Registrar’s possession, of the issuance of the license or identification card
in question, in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of the Bureau of Motor
Vehicles in the action.
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
permitting a juvenile on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment,
a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day a person violates this division
constitutes a separate offense.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of use by a
juvenile of false information to enter an adult entertainment establishment, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if committed by
an adult.
(R.C. § 2907.39)
§ 666.20 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES; ILLEGAL OPERATION AND ACTIVITY.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE. A commercial establishment
that has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-trade or
inventory in, derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues
from, devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or
advertising to, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display
space for the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of books,
magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides or other visual
representations, that are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (2)   ADULT CABARET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
      (3)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic
reproductions that are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown
to more than five individuals for any form of consideration.
      (4)   CHARACTERIZED BY. Describing the essential character or quality of
an item.
      (5)   EMPLOYEE. Any individual who performs any service on the premises
of a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis,
regardless of whether the individual is denominated an employee, independent
contractor, agent or otherwise, but does not include an individual exclusively
on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery
of goods to the premises.
      (6)   NUDITY, NUDE or STATE OF NUDITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2907.39.
      (7)   OPERATOR. Any individual on the premises of a sexually oriented
business who causes the business to function or who puts or keeps in operation
the business or who is authorized to manage the business or exercise overall
operational control of the business premises.
      (8)   PATRON. Any individual on the premises of a sexually oriented
business except for any of the following:
         A.   An operator or an employee of the sexually oriented business;
         B.   An individual who is on the premises exclusively for repair or
maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises;
         C.   A public employee or a volunteer firefighter emergency medical
services worker acting within the scope of the public employee’s or volunteer’s
duties as a public employee or volunteer.
      (9)   PREMISES. The real property on which the sexually oriented business
is located and all appurtenances to the real property, including but not
limited to the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways and
parking lots or parking garages adjacent to the real property under the
ownership, control or supervision of the owner or operator of the sexually
oriented business.
      (10)   REGULARLY. Consistently or repeatedly.
      (11)   SEMINUDE or STATE OF SEMINUDITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2907.39.
      (12)   SEXUAL DEVICE. Any three-dimensional object designed and marketed
for stimulation of the male or female human genitals or anus or female breasts
or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others, including but not
limited to dildos, vibrators, penis pumps and physical representations of the
human genital organs, but not including devices primarily intended for
protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy.
      (13)   SEXUAL DEVICE SHOP. A commercial establishment that regularly
features sexual devices, but not including any pharmacy, drug store, medical
clinic or establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or healthcare
products or services, and not including any commercial establishment that does
not restrict access to its premises by reason of age.
      (14)   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. A business or commercial enterprise that,
as one of its principal business purposes, purports to offer for any form of
consideration physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
individuals of the opposite sex when one or more of the individuals is nude or
seminude.
      (15)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult bookstore, adult video store,
adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, sexual device shop or sexual
encounter center, but does not include a business solely by reason of its
showing, selling or renting materials that may depict sex.
      (16)   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Includes human genitals, pubic region
and buttocks and the human female breast below a point immediately above the
top of the areola.
      (17)   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Sexual intercourse, oral copulation,
masturbation or sodomy, or excretory functions as a part of or in connection
with any of these activities.
   (b)   No sexually oriented business shall be or remain open for business
between midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day, except that a sexually oriented
business that holds a liquor permit pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4303 may remain
open until the hour specified in that permit if it does not conduct, offer or
allow sexually oriented entertainment activity in which the performers appear
nude.
   (c)   (1)   No patron who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family
shall knowingly touch any employee while that employee is nude or seminude or
touch the clothing of any employee while that employee is nude or seminude.
      (2)   No employee who regularly appears nude or seminude on the premises
of a sexually oriented business, while on the premises of that sexually
oriented business and while nude or seminude, shall knowingly touch a patron
who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who
is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or the clothing of a patron
who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who
is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or allow a patron who is not
a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who is not a
member of the employee’s immediate family to touch the employee or the clothing
of the employee.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of illegally
operating a sexually oriented business, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of illegal
sexually oriented activity in a sexually oriented business. If the offender
touches a specified anatomical area of the patron or employee, or the clothing
covering a specified anatomical area, a violation of division (c) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender does not touch a
specified anatomical area of the patron or employee, or the clothing covering a
specified anatomical area, a violation of division (c) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2907.40)
Statutory reference:
   State indemnification for certain municipal liability stemming from local
adult business regulations, see R.C. § 715.55
§ 666.21 UNLAWFUL ADVERTISING OF MASSAGE.
   (a)   No person, by means of a statement, solicitation, or offer in a print
or electronic publication, sign, placard, storefront display, or other medium,
shall advertise massage, relaxation massage, any other massage technique or
method, or any related service, with the suggestion or promise of sexual
activity.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful advertising of
massage, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (c)   Nothing in this section prevents the municipality from enacting any
regulation of the advertising of massage further than and in addition to the
provisions of divisions (a) and (b) of this section.
   (d)   As used in this section, SEXUAL ACTIVITY has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2907.01.
(R.C. § 2927.17)
§ 666.22 NONCONSENSUAL DISSEMINATION OF PRIVATE SEXUAL IMAGES.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   CABLE SERVICE PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.01.
      (2)   DIRECT-TO-HOME SATELLITE SERVICE. Has the meaning defined in 47
U.S.C. § 303, as amended.
      (3)   DISSEMINATE. Means to post, distribute, or publish on a computer
device, computer network, web site, or other electronic device or medium of
communication.
      (4)   IMAGE. Means a photograph, film, videotape, digital recording, or
other depiction or portrayal of a person.
      (5)   INTERACTIVE COMPUTER SERVICE. Has the meaning defined in the
“Telecommunications Act of 1996”, 47 U.S.C. § 230, as amended.
      (6)   INTERNET PROVIDER. A provider of internet service, including all of
the following:
         A.   Broadband service, however defined or classified by the Federal
Communications Commission;
         B.   Information service or telecommunications service, both as
defined in the “Telecommunications Act of 1996”, 47 U.S.C. § 153, as amended;
         C.   Internet protocol-enabled services, as defined in R.C. § 4927.01.
      (7)   MOBILE SERVICE. Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153, as
amended.
      (8)   SEXUAL ACT. Any of the following:
         A.   Sexual activity;
         B.   Masturbation;
         C.   An act involving a bodily substance that is performed for the
purpose of sexual arousal or gratification;
         D.   Sado-masochistic abuse.
      (9)   TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER. Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C. §
153, as amended.
      (10)   VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly disseminate an image of another person if
all of the following apply:
      (1)   The person in the image is 18 years of age or older.
      (2)   The person in the image can be identified from the image itself or
from information displayed in connection with the image and the offender
supplied the identifying information.
      (3)   The person in the image is in a state of nudity or is engaged in a
sexual act.
      (4)   The image is disseminated without consent from the person in the
image.
      (5)   The image is disseminated with intent to harm the person in the
image.
   (c)   This section does not prohibit the dissemination of an image if any of
the following apply:
      (1)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of a criminal
investigation that is otherwise lawful.
      (2)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of, or in connection
with, the reporting of unlawful conduct.
      (3)   The image is part of a news report or commentary or an artistic or
expressive work, such as a performance, work of art, literary work, theatrical
work, musical work, motion picture, film, or audiovisual work.
      (4)   The image is disseminated by a law enforcement officer, or a
corrections officer or guard in a detention facility, acting within the scope
of the person’s official duties.
      (5)   The image is disseminated for another lawful public purpose.
      (6)   The person in the image is knowingly and willingly in a state of
nudity or engaged in a sexual act and is knowingly and willingly in a location
in which the person does not have a reasonable expectation of privacy.
      (7)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of medical treatment or
examination.
   (d)   The following entities are not liable for a violation of this section
solely as a result of an image or other information provided by another person:
      (1)   A provider of interactive computer service;
      (2)   A mobile service;
      (3)   A telecommunications carrier;
      (4)   An internet provider;
      (5)   A cable service provider;
      (6)   A direct-to-home satellite service;
      (7)   A video service provider.
   (e)   Any conduct that is a violation of this section and any other section
of this Code or the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, the
other section, or both sections.
   (f)   (1)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (f)(1)B., (f)
(1)C., or (f)(1)D. of this section, whoever violates this section is guilty of
nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images, a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of this section or any substantially equivalent state or
local law, nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images is a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
         C.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section or any substantially
equivalent state or local law, nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual
images is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         D.   If the offender is under 18 years of age and the person in the
image is not more than five years older than the offender, the offender shall
not be prosecuted under this section.
      (2)   In addition to any other penalty or disposition authorized or
required by law, the court may order any person who is convicted of a violation
of this section or who is adjudicated delinquent by reason of a violation of
this section to criminally forfeit all of the following property to the state
under R.C. Chapter 2981:
         A.   Any profits or proceeds and any property the person has acquired
or maintained in violation of this section that the sentencing court determines
to have been acquired or maintained as a result of the violation;
         B.   Any interest in, securities of, claim against, or property or
contractual right of any kind affording a source of influence over any
enterprise that the person has established, operated, controlled, or conducted
in violation of this section that the sentencing court determines to have been
acquired or maintained as a result of the violation.
   (g)   A victim of a violation of this section may commence a civil cause of
action against the offender, as described in R.C. § 2307.66.
(R.C. § 2917.211)
§ 666.23 GROOMING.
   (a)   As used in this section, PATTERN OF CONDUCT has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2903.211.
   (b)   No person who is 18 years of age or older shall engage in a pattern of
conduct with a minor who is less than 16 years of age and who is four or more
years younger than the person, when the pattern of conduct would cause a
reasonable adult person to believe that the person is communicating with the
minor with purpose to do either of the following:
      (1)   Entice, coerce, or solicit the minor to engage in sexual activity,
and when the person's purpose in engaging in the pattern of conduct is to
entice, coerce, or solicit the minor to engage in sexual activity with the
person or a third person;
      (2)   Prepare the minor to engage in sexual activity, and when the
person's purpose in engaging in the pattern of conduct is to prepare the minor
to engage in sexual activity with the person or a third person that would be a
violation of R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, or 2907.07.
   (c)   No person who is 18 years of age or older shall engage in a pattern of
conduct with a minor if the person and the minor are in any of the
relationships described in R.C. § 2907.03(A)(5) to (A)(13), when the pattern of
conduct would cause a reasonable adult person to believe that the person is
communicating with the minor with purpose to do either of the following:
      (1)   Entice, coerce, or solicit the minor to engage in sexual activity,
and when the person's purpose in engaging in the pattern of conduct is to
entice, coerce, or solicit the minor to engage in sexual activity with the
person or a third person;
      (2)   Prepare the minor to engage in sexual activity, and when the
person's purpose in engaging in the pattern of conduct is to prepare the minor
to engage in sexual activity with the person or a third person that would be a
violation of R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, or 2907.07.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of grooming.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of
division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
victim of the offense is less than 13 years of age or if the offender supplied
alcohol or a drug of abuse to the victim of the offense, a violation of
division (b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. If the victim of the offense is less than 13 years of age and if the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
this section or a sexually oriented offense or a child-victim oriented offense
or the offender supplied alcohol or a drug of abuse to the victim of the
offense, a violation of division (b) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or a sexually
oriented offense or a child-victim oriented offense and the offender supplied
alcohol or a drug of abuse to the victim of the offense, a violation of
division (b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of
division (c) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender supplied alcohol or a drug of abuse to the victim of the offense, a
violation of division (c) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If the victim of the offense is less than 13 years of
age or if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of this section or a sexually oriented offense or a child-victim
oriented offense, a violation of division (c) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the victim of the offense is less
than 13 years of age and if the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or a sexually oriented offense or
a child-victim oriented offense or the offender supplied alcohol or a drug of
abuse to the victim of the offense, a violation of division (c) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (e)   A prosecution for a violation of this section does not preclude a
prosecution of a violation of any other section of this code or the Ohio
Revised Code. One or more acts, a series of acts, or a course of behavior that
can be prosecuted under this section or any other section of this code or the
Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, the other sections of
this code or the Revised Code, or both sections.
(R.C. § 2907.071)
§ 666.99 SENTENCING FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED OFFENSES; SEXUAL PREDATORS;
REGISTRATION.
   (a)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented offense or
child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on or after
January 1, 1997, and the offender is a tier III sex offender/child-victim
offender relative to the offense or the offense is any offense listed in R.C. §
2901.07(D)(1) to (D)(3), the judge shall include in the offender’s sentence a
statement that the offender is a tier III sex offender/child-victim offender,
shall comply with the requirements of R.C. § 2950.03, and shall require the
offender to submit to a DNA specimen collection procedure pursuant to R.C. §
2901.07.
   (b)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented offense or a
child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on or after
January 1, 1997, the judge shall include in the sentence a summary of the
offender’s duties imposed under R.C. §§ 2950.04, 2950.041, 2950.05 and 2950.06,
and the duration of the duties. The judge shall inform the offender, at the
time of sentencing, of those duties and of their duration. If required under
R.C. § 2950.03(A)(2), the judge shall perform the duties specified in that
section or, if required under R.C. § 2950.03(A)(6), the judge shall perform the
duties specified in that division.
(R.C. § 2929.23)
CHAPTER 672: THEFT AND FRAUD
Section
   
672.01   Theft
   
672.02   Receiving stolen property
   
672.03   Determining property value in theft offense
   
672.04   Degree of offense when certain property involved
   
672.05   Evidence of theft of rented property
   
672.06   Tampering with coin machines
   
672.07   Prosecutions for theft of utilities
   
672.08   Misconduct involving a public transportation system
   
672.09   Unauthorized use of a vehicle; vehicle trespass
   
672.10   Passing bad checks
   
672.11   Misuse of credit cards
   
672.12   Recording credit card, telephone or Social Security numbers
   
672.13   Forging or selling forged identification cards
   
672.14   Criminal simulation
   
672.15   Making or using slugs
   
672.16   Prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud
   
672.17   Tampering with records
   
672.18   Securing writings by deception
   
672.19   Personating an officer
   
672.20   Defrauding creditors
   
672.21   Insurance fraud
   
672.22   Workers’ compensation fraud
   
672.23   Medicaid fraud
   
672.24   Diminishing or interfering with forfeitable property
   
672.25   Motion picture piracy
CROSS REFERENCES
   Definitions relating to theft and fraud, see §
642.01
   Detention of shoplifters and those committing motion picture piracy;
protection of institutional property, see §
654.17
   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police Department,
see §
654.16
   Possessing criminal tools, see §
678.14
   Possession of municipal property, see §
642.02
   Unauthorized use of property, see §
642.03
§ 672.01 THEFT.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to deprive the owner of property or services,
shall knowingly obtain or exert control over either the property or services in
any of the following ways:
      (1)   Without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give
consent;
      (2)   Beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of the owner or
person authorized to give consent;
      (3)   By deception;
      (4)   By threat;
      (5)   By intimidation.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of theft. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, a violation of this section is misdemeanor
theft, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the elements set forth in R.C. §
2913.02(B) for felony theft, grand theft, or aggravated theft are met, then a
violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (2)   In addition to the penalties described in division (b)(1) of this
section, if the offender committed the violation by causing a motor vehicle to
leave the premises of an establishment at which gasoline is offered for retail
sale without the offender making full payment for gasoline that was dispensed
into the fuel tank of the motor vehicle or into another container, the court
may do one of the following:
         A.   Unless division (b)(2)B. of this section applies, suspend for not
more than six months the offenders driver's license, probationary driver's
license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, or
nonresident operating privilege;
         B.   If the offender's driver's license, probationary driver's
license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, or
nonresident operating privilege has previously been suspended pursuant to
division (b)(2)A. of this section, or any other substantially equivalent state
or local law, impose a class seven suspension of the offender's license,
permit, or privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7), provided
that the suspension shall be at least six months;
         C.   The court, in lieu of suspending the offender's driver's or
commercial driver's license, probationary driver's license, temporary
instruction permit, or nonresident operating privilege pursuant to division (b)
(2)A. or (b)(2)B of this section, instead may require the offender to perform
community service for a number of hours determined by the court.
      (3)   In addition to the penalties described in division (b)(1) of this
section, if the offender committed the violation by stealing rented property or
rental services, the court may order that the offender make restitution
pursuant to R.C. § 2929.18 or R.C. § 2929.28. Restitution may include, but is
not limited to, the cost of repairing or replacing the stolen property, or the
cost of repairing the stolen property and any loss of revenue resulting from
deprivation of the property due to theft of rental services that is less than
or equal to the actual value of the property at the time it was rented.
Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property or rental services shall
be determined pursuant to the provisions of R.C. § 2913.72.
   (c)   The sentencing court that suspends an offender's license, permit, or
nonresident operating privilege under division (b)(2) of this section may grant
the offender limited driving privileges during the period of the suspension in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 4510.
(R.C. § 2913.02)
Statutory reference:
   Felony theft provisions, see R.C. § 2913.02(B)
§ 672.02 RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall receive, retain or dispose of property of another
knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the property has been
obtained through commission of a theft offense.
   (b)   It is not a defense to a charge of receiving stolen property in
violation of this section that the property was obtained by means other than
through the commission of a theft offense if the property was explicitly
represented to the accused person as being obtained through the commission of a
theft offense.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of receiving stolen property.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, receiving stolen property is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If any of the following criteria are met, then
a violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law:
      (1)   The value of the property involved is $1,000 or more;
      (2)   The property involved is any of the property listed in R.C. §
2913.71;
      (3)   The property involved is a firearm or dangerous ordnance, as
defined in R.C. § 2923.11;
      (4)   The property involved is a motor vehicle as defined in R.C. §
4501.01;
      (5)   The property involved is any dangerous drug, as defined in R.C. §
4729.01; or
      (6)   The property involved in violation of this section is a special
purchase article as defined in R.C. § 4737.04 or a bulk merchandise container
as defined in R.C. § 4737.012.
(R.C. § 2913.51)
§ 672.03 DETERMINING PROPERTY VALUE IN THEFT OFFENSE.
   (a)   If more than one item of property or services is involved in a theft
offense or in a violation of R.C. § 1716.14(A) involving a victim who is an
elderly person or disabled adult, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the value of the property or services involved for the purpose of
determining the value as required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value
of all property or services involved in the offense.
   (b)   (1)   When a series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02, or a series of
violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or
complicity in violations of R.C. § 1716.14(A), 2913.02, 2913.03 or 2913.04,
2913.21(B)(1) or (B)(2), or 2913.31 or 2913.43 involving a victim who is an
elderly person or disabled adult, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance to any of these offenses, is committed by the offender in the
offender’s same employment, capacity or relationship to another, all of those
offenses shall be tried as a single offense. When a series of offenses under
R.C. § 2913.02, or a series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation
of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in violations of R.C. § 2913.02 or
2913.43 involving a victim who is an active duty service member or spouse of an
active duty service member, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance
to any of these offenses, is committed by the offender in the offender’s same
employment, capacity, or relationship to another, all of those offenses shall
be tried as a single offense. The value of the property or services involved in
the series of offenses for the purpose of determining the value as required by
R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property and services involved
in all offenses in the series.
      (2)   If an offender commits a series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02
that involves a common course of conduct to defraud multiple victims, all of
the offenses may be tried as a single offense. If an offender is being tried
for the commission of a series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation
of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in violations of R.C. § 1716.14(A),
2913.02, 2913.03 or 2913.04, 2913.21(B)(1) or (B)(2), or 2913.31 or 2913.43,
whether committed against one victim or more than one victim, involving a
victim who is an elderly person or disabled adult, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, pursuant to a scheme
or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried as a single offense.
If an offender is being tried for the commission of a series of violations of,
attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in
violations of R.C. § 2913.02 or 2913.43, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, whether committed against one
victim or more than one victim, involving a victim who is an active duty
service member or spouse of an active duty service member pursuant to a scheme
or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried as a single offense.
If the offenses are tried as a single offense, the value of the property or
services involved for the purpose of determining the value as required by R.C.
§ 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property and services involved in
all of the offenses in the course of conduct.
      (3)   When a series of two or more offenses under R.C. § 2913.40,
2913.48, or 2921.41 is committed by the offender in the offender’s same
employment, capacity or relationship to another, all of those offenses may be
tried as a single offense. If the offenses are tried as a single offense, the
value of the property or services involved for the purpose of determining the
value as required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property
and services involved in all of the offenses in the series of two or more
offenses.
      (4)   In prosecuting a single offense under division (b)(1), (b)(2) or
(b)(3) of this section, it is not necessary to separately allege and prove each
offense in the series. Rather, it is sufficient to allege and prove that the
offender, within a given span of time, committed one or more theft offenses or
violations of R.C. § 2913.40, 2913.48, or 2921.41 in the offender’s same
employment, capacity, or relationship to another as described in division (b)
(1) or (b)(3) of this section, or committed one or more theft offenses that
involve a common course of conduct to defraud multiple victims or a scheme or
course of conduct as described in division (b)(2) of this section. While it is
not necessary to separately allege and prove each offense in the series in
order to prosecute a single offense under division (b)(1), (b)(2), or (b)(3) of
this section, it remains necessary in prosecuting them as a single offense to
prove the aggregate value of the property or services in order to meet the
requisite statutory offense level sought by the prosecution.
   (c)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of
property or services involved in a theft offense:
      (1)   The value of an heirloom, memento, collector’s item, antique,
museum piece, manuscript, document, record or other thing that has intrinsic
worth to its owner and that either is irreplaceable or is replaceable only on
the expenditure of substantial time, effort or money, is the amount which would
compensate the owner for its loss.
      (2)   The value of personal effects and household goods, and of
materials, supplies, equipment and fixtures used in the profession, business,
trade, occupation, or avocation of its owner, which property is not covered
under division (c)(1) of this section, and which retains substantial utility
for its purpose regardless of its age or condition, is the cost of replacing
the property with new property of like kind and quality.
      (3)   The value of any real or personal property that is not covered
under division (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section, and the value of services, is
the fair market value of the property or services. As used in this section,
FAIR MARKET VALUE is the money consideration which a buyer would give and a
seller would accept for property or services, assuming that the buyer is
willing to buy and the seller is willing to sell, that both are fully informed
as to all facts material to the transaction, and that neither is under any
compulsion to act.
   (d)   Without limitation on the evidence which may be used to establish the
value of property or services involved in a theft offense:
      (1)   When the property involved is personal property held for sale at
wholesale or retail, the price at which the property was held for sale is prima
facie evidence of its value.
      (2)   When the property involved is a security or commodity traded on an
exchange, the closing price or, if there is no closing price, the asked price,
given in the latest marked quotation prior to the offense, is prima facie
evidence of the value of the security or commodity.
      (3)   When the property involved is livestock, poultry or raw
agricultural products for which a local market price is available, the latest
local market price prior to the offense is prima facie evidence of the value of
the livestock, poultry or products.
      (4)   When the property involved is a negotiable instrument, the face
value is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (5)   When the property involved is a warehouse receipt, bill of lading,
pawn ticket, claim check or other instrument entitling the holder or bearer to
receive property, the face value or, if there is no face value, the value of
the property covered by the instrument less any payment necessary to receive
the property, is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (6)   When the property involved is a ticket of admission, ticket for
transportation, coupon, token or other instrument entitling the holder or
bearer to receive property or services, the face value or, if there is no face
value, the value of the property or services which may be received by the
instrument is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (7)   When the services involved are gas, electricity, water, telephone,
transportation, shipping or other services for which the rate is established by
law, the duly established rate is prima facie evidence of the value of the
services.
      (8)   When the services involved are services for which the rate is not
established by law, and the offender has been notified prior to the offense of
the rate for the services, either in writing or orally, or by posting in a
manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential offenders,
the rate contained in the notice is prima facie evidence of the value of the
services.
(R.C. § 2913.61(B) - (E))
§ 672.04 DEGREE OF OFFENSE WHEN CERTAIN PROPERTY INVOLVED.
   Regardless of the value of the property involved, and regardless of whether
the offender previously has been convicted of a theft offense, a violation of §
672.01 or
672.02 is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the property
involved is any of the following:
   (a)   A credit card;
   (b)   A printed form for a check or other negotiable instrument, that on its
face identifies the drawer or maker for whose use it is designed or identifies
the account on which it is to be drawn, and that has not been executed by the
drawer or maker or on which the amount is blank;
   (c)   A motor vehicle identification license plate as prescribed by R.C. §
4503.22, a temporary motor vehicle license registration as prescribed by R.C. §
4503.182, or any comparable temporary motor vehicle license registration as
prescribed by the applicable law of another state or the United States;
   (d)   A blank form for a certificate of title or a manufacturer’s or
importer’s certificate to a motor vehicle, as prescribed by R.C. § 4505.07;
   (e)   A blank form for any license listed in R.C. § 4507.01.
(R.C. § 2913.71)
§ 672.05 EVIDENCE OF THEFT OF RENTED PROPERTY.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   RENTEE. A person who pays consideration to a renter for the use of
rented property.
      (2)   RENTER. A person who owns rented property.
   (b)   Each of the following shall be considered evidence of intent to commit
theft of rented property or rental services:
      (1)   At the time of entering into the rental contract, the rentee
presented the renter with identification that was materially false, fictitious
or not current with respect to name, address, place of employment or other
relevant information.
      (2)   After receiving a notice demanding the return of the rented
property as provided in division (c) of this section, the rentee neither
returned the rented property nor made arrangements acceptable with the renter
to return the rented property.
   (c)   To establish that a rentee has an intent to commit theft of rented
property or rental services under division (b)(2) above, a renter may issue a
notice to a rentee demanding the return of the rented property. The renter
shall mail the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
rentee at the address the rentee gave when the rental contract was executed, or
to the rentee at the last address the rentee or the rentee’s agent furnished in
writing to the renter.
   (d)   A demand for the return of the rented property is not a prerequisite
for the prosecution of a rentee for theft of rented property or rental
services. The evidence specified in division (b) above does not constitute the
only evidence that may be considered as evidence of intent to commit theft of
rented property or rental services.
(R.C. § 2913.72)
§ 672.06 TAMPERING WITH COIN MACHINES.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to commit theft or to defraud, shall knowingly
enter, force an entrance into, tamper with or insert any part of an instrument
into any coin machine.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with coin
machines, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of this section or of any theft offense as
defined in R.C. § 2913.01, tampering with coin machines is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2911.32)
§ 672.07 PROSECUTIONS FOR THEFT OF UTILITIES.
   (a)   In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in R.C. § 2913.01,
that involves alleged tampering with a gas, electric, steam or water meter,
conduit or attachment of a utility that has been disconnected by the utility,
proof that a meter, conduit or attachment of a utility has been tampered with
is prima facie evidence that the person who is obligated to pay for the service
rendered through the meter, conduit or attachment, and who is in possession or
control of the meter, conduit or attachment at the time the tampering occurred
has caused the tampering with intent to commit a theft offense.
   (b)   In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in R.C. § 2913.01,
that involves the alleged reconnection of a gas, electric, steam or water
meter, conduit or attachment of a utility that has been disconnected by the
utility, proof that a meter, conduit or attachment disconnected by a utility
has been reconnected without the consent of the utility is prima facie evidence
that the person in possession or control of the meter, conduit or attachment at
the time of the reconnection has reconnected the meter, conduit or attachment
with intent to commit a theft offense.
   (c)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   TAMPER. To interfere with, damage or bypass a utility meter,
conduit or attachment with the intent to impede the correct registration of a
meter or the proper functions of a conduit or attachment so as to reduce the
amount of utility service that is registered on the meter.
      (2)   UTILITY. Any electric light company, gas company, natural gas
company, pipe-line company, water-works company or heating or cooling company,
as defined in R.C. § 4905.03(C), (D), (E), (F), (G), or (H), its lessees,
trustees or receivers, or any similar utility owned or operated by a political
subdivision.
(R.C. § 4933.18)
   (d)   Each electric light company, gas company, natural gas company,
pipeline company, waterworks company or heating or cooling company, as defined
by R.C. § 4905.03(C), (D), (E), (F), (G), or (H), or its lessees, trustees or
receivers, and each similar utility owned or operated by a political
subdivision, shall notify its customers, on an annual basis, that tampering
with or bypassing a meter constitutes a theft offense that could result in the
imposition of criminal sanctions.
(R.C. § 4933.19)
§ 672.08 MISCONDUCT INVOLVING A PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM.
   (a)   As used in this section, PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM means a county
transit system operated in accordance with R.C. §§ 306.01 to 306.13, a regional
transit authority operated in accordance with R.C. §§ 306.30 to 306.71, or a
regional transit commission operated in accordance with R.C. §§ 306.80 to
306.90.
   (b)   No person shall evade the payment of the known fares of a public
transportation system.
   (c)   No person shall alter any transfer, pass, ticket or token of a public
transportation system with the purpose of evading the payment of fares or of
defrauding the system.
   (d)   No person shall do any of the following while in any facility or on
any vehicle of a public transportation system:
      (1)   Play sound equipment without the proper use of a private earphone;
      (2)   Smoke, eat or drink in any area where the activity is clearly
marked as being prohibited; or
      (3)   Expectorate upon a person, facility or vehicle.
   (e)   No person shall write, deface, draw or otherwise mark on any facility
or vehicle of a public transportation system.
   (f)   No person shall fail to comply with a lawful order of a public
transportation system police officer, and no person shall resist, obstruct or
abuse a public transportation police officer in the performance of the
officer’s duties.
   (g)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of
misconduct involving a public transportation system.
      (1)   A violation of division (b), (c) or (f) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   A violation of division (d) of this section is a minor misdemeanor
on a first offense. If a person previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of any division of this section or of a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any division of this section, a
violation of division (d) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (3)   A violation of division (e) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
   (h)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, 75% of each fine paid to
satisfy a sentence imposed for a violation of any of the provisions of this
section shall be deposited into the Treasury of the county and 25% shall be
deposited with the county transit board, regional transit authority or regional
transit commission that operates the public transportation system involved in
the violation, unless the Board of County Commissioners operates the public
transportation system, in which case 100% of each fine shall be deposited into
the Treasury of the county.
(R.C. § 2917.41)
§ 672.09 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF A VEHICLE; VEHICLE TRESPASS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle,
motorcycle, motorboat or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of
the owner or person authorized to give consent.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle,
motorboat or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of the owner or
person authorized to give consent, and either remove it from this state or keep
possession of it for more than 48 hours.
   (c)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section:
      (1)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor, though mistaken,
reasonably believed that he or she was authorized to use or operate the
property.
      (2)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor reasonably believed
that the owner or person empowered to give consent would authorize the actor to
use or operate the property.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unauthorized use of a
vehicle.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (d)(1), a violation
of division (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled adult and if the victim
incurs a loss as a result of the violation, a violation of division (a) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (b) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.03)
Statutory reference:
   Theft offense involving motor vehicle, offender to pay towing and storage
fees, see R.C. § 2913.82
§ 672.10 PASSING BAD CHECKS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CHECK. Includes any form of debit from a demand deposit account,
including but not limited to any of the following:
         A.   A check, bill of exchange, draft, order of withdrawal, or similar
negotiable or non-negotiable instrument;
         B.   An electronic check, electronic transaction, debit card
transaction, check card transaction, substitute check, web check or any form of
automated clearing house transaction.
      (2)   ISSUE A CHECK. Causing any form of debit from a demand deposit
account.
   (b)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall issue or transfer or cause
to be issued or transferred a check or other negotiable instrument, knowing
that it will be dishonored or knowing that a person has ordered or will order
stop payment on the check or other negotiable instrument.
   (c)   For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers a check
or other negotiable instrument is presumed to know that it will be dishonored
if either of the following occurs:
      (1)   The drawer has no account with the drawee at the time of issue or
the stated date, whichever is later.
      (2)   The check or other negotiable instrument was properly refused
payment for insufficient funds upon presentment within 30 days after issue or
the stated date, whichever is later, and the liability of the drawer, indorser,
or any party who may be liable thereon is not discharged by payment or
satisfaction within ten days after receiving notice of dishonor.
   (d)   In determining the value of the payment for purposes of division (e)
of this section, the court may aggregate all checks and other negotiable
instruments that the offender issued or transferred or caused to be issued or
transferred in violation of division (b) of this section within a period of 180
consecutive days.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of passing bad checks. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, passing bad checks is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the check or checks or other negotiable instrument or
instruments are issued or transferred to a single vendor or single other person
for the payment of $1,000 or more, or if the check or checks or other
negotiable instrument or instruments are issued or transferred to multiple
vendors or persons for the payment of $1,500 or more, passing bad checks is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.11)
§ 672.11 MISUSE OF CREDIT CARDS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Practice deception for the purpose of procuring the issuance of a
credit card, when a credit card is issued in actual reliance thereon;
      (2)   Knowingly buy or sell a credit card from or to a person other than
the issuer;
      (3)   As an officer, employee, or appointee of a political subdivision or
as a public servant as defined under R.C. § 2921.01, knowingly misuse a credit
card account held by a political subdivision.
   (b)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Obtain control over a credit card as security for a debt;
      (2)   Obtain property or services by the use of a credit card, in one or
more transactions, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the card
has expired or been revoked, or was obtained, is retained or is being used in
violation of law;
      (3)   Furnish property or services upon presentation of a credit card,
knowing that the card is being used in violation of law;
      (4)   Represent or cause to be represented to the issuer of a credit card
that property or services have been furnished, knowing that the representation
is false.
   (c)   No person, with purpose to violate this section, shall receive,
possess, control or dispose of a credit card.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misuse of credit cards.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (d)(3) of this section, a
violation of division (a), (b)(1) or (c) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division or division (d)(3) of
this section, a violation of division (b)(2), (b)(3) or (b)(4) of this section
is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the cumulative retail value of the
property and services involved in one or more violations of division (b)(2),
(b)(3) or (b)(4) of this section which violations involve one or more credit
card accounts and occur within a period of 90 consecutive days commencing on
the date of the first violation, is $1,000 or more, misuse of credit cards is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled
adult, and if the offense involves a violation of division (b)(1) or (b)(2) of
this section, misuse of credit cards is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.21)
§ 672.12 RECORDING CREDIT CARD, TELEPHONE OR SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBERS.
   (a)   No person shall record or cause to be recorded either of the
following:
      (1)   A credit card account number of the other party to a transaction,
when a check, bill of exchange or other draft is presented for payment; or
      (2)   The telephone number or Social Security account number of the other
party to a transaction, when payment is made by credit card charge agreement,
check, bill of exchange or other draft.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a transaction, if all
of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The credit card account number, Social Security account number or
telephone number is recorded for a legitimate business purpose, including
collection purposes.
      (2)   The other party to the transaction consents to the recording of the
credit card account number, Social Security account number or telephone number.
      (3)   The credit card account number, Social Security account number or
telephone number that is recorded during the course of the transaction is not
disclosed to any third party for any purposes other than collection purposes
and is not used to market goods or services unrelated to the goods or services
purchased in the transaction.
   (c)   Nothing in this section prohibits the recording of the number of a
credit card account when given in lieu of a deposit to secure payment in the
event of default, loss, damage or other occurrence, or requires a person to
accept a check presented for payment, if the other party to the transaction
refuses to consent to the recording of the number of the party’s Social
Security account or license to operate a motor vehicle. (R.C. § 1349.17)
   (d)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1349.99(A))
§ 672.13 FORGING OR SELLING FORGED IDENTIFICATION CARDS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly do either of the following:
      (1)   Forge an identification card.
      (2)   Sell or otherwise distribute a card that purports to be an
identification card, knowing it was forged.
   (b)   As used in this section, IDENTIFICATION CARD means a card that
includes personal information or characteristics of an individual, a purpose of
which is to establish the identity of the bearer described on the card, whether
the words IDENTITY, IDENTIFICATION, IDENTIFICATION CARD or other similar words
appear on the card.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of forging
identification cards or selling or distributing forged identification cards.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, forging identification cards or
selling or distributing forged identification cards is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
division (a) of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, forging identification cards or selling or distributing
forged identification cards is a misdemeanor of the first degree and, in
addition, the court shall impose upon the offender a fine not less than $250.
      (2)   If the victim of a violation of this section is an elderly person,
R.C. § 2913.31(C)(2)(b) applies and the offense shall be prosecuted under R.C.
§ 2913.31.
(R.C. § 2913.31(B), (C)(2))
Statutory reference:
   Forgery, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2913.31(A), (C)(1)
   Forgery of originating address or other routing information in connection
with the transmission of an electronic mail advertisement, felony provisions,
see R.C. § 2307.64
§ 672.14 CRIMINAL SIMULATION.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud, or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Make or alter any object so that it appears to have value because
of antiquity, rarity, curiosity, source or authorship, which it does not in
fact possess.
      (2)   Practice deception in making, retouching, editing or reproducing
any photograph, movie film, video tape, phonograph record or recording tape.
      (3)   Falsely or fraudulently make, simulate, forge, alter or counterfeit
any wrapper, label, stamp, cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control
Commission under R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303, falsely or fraudulently cause to
be made, simulated, forged, altered or counterfeited any wrapper, label, stamp,
cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under R.C. Chapters
4301 and 4303, or use more than once any wrapper, label, stamp, cork or cap
prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303.
      (4)   Offer, or possess with the purpose to offer, any object that the
person knows to have been simulated as provided in divisions (a)(1), (a)(2) or
(a)(3) of this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal simulation. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, criminal simulation is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the loss to the victim is $1,000 or more, criminal
simulation is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.32)
§ 672.15 MAKING OR USING SLUGS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Insert or deposit a slug in a coin machine, with purpose to
defraud;
      (2)   Make, possess or dispose of a slug, with purpose of enabling
another to defraud by inserting or depositing it in a coin machine.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or using slugs, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 2913.33)
§ 672.16 PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF PURPOSE TO DEFRAUD.
   In a prosecution of a person for a theft offense that alleges that the
person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she was facilitating a
fraud, hired or rented an aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy or other property or equipment, kept or
operated any of the same that has been hired or rented, or engaged
accommodations at a hotel, motel, inn, campground or other hostelry, it is
prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud if the person did any of the
following:
   (a)   Used deception to induce the rental agency to furnish the person with
the aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat, sailboat, camper, trailer,
horse, buggy or other property or equipment, or used deception to induce the
hostelry to furnish the person with accommodations;
   (b)   Hired or rented any aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy or other property or equipment, or
engaged accommodations, knowing that he or she is without sufficient means to
pay the hire or rental;
   (c)   Absconded without paying the hire or rental;
   (d)   Knowingly failed to pay the hire or rental as required by the contract
of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure;
   (e)   Knowingly failed to return hired or rented property as required by the
contract of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure.
(R.C. § 2913.41)
§ 672.17 TAMPERING WITH RECORDS.
   (a)   No person, knowing that he or she has no privilege to do so, and with
purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is facilitating a fraud, shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Falsify, destroy, remove, conceal, alter, deface or mutilate any
writing, computer software, data or record;
      (2)   Utter any writing or record, knowing it to have been tampered with
as provided in division (a)(1) of this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with records.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(3) of this section, if the
offense does not involve data or computer software, tampering with records is
whichever of the following is applicable:
         A.   If division (b)(1)B. of this section does not apply, it is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   If the writing or record is a will unrevoked at the time of the
offense, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (b)(3) of this section, if the
offense involves a violation of division (a) of this section involving data or
computer software, tampering with records is whichever of the following is
applicable:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(2)B. of this
section, it is a misdemeanor of the first degree;
         B.   If the value of the data or computer software involved in the
offense or the loss to the victim is $1,000 or more or if the offense is
committed for the purpose of devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to
obtain property or services and the value of the property or services or the
loss to the victim is $7,500 or more, it is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the writing, data, computer software or record is kept by or
belongs to a local, state or federal governmental entity, it is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.42)
§ 672.18 SECURING WRITINGS BY DECEPTION.
   (a)   No person, by deception, shall cause another to execute any writing
that disposes of or encumbers property, or by which a pecuniary obligation is
incurred.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of securing writings by
deception. Except as otherwise provided in this division, securing writings by
deception is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property or
the obligation involved is $1,000 or more, securing writings by deception is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate to state law. If the victim of the
offense is an elderly person, disabled adult, active duty service member, or
spouse of an active duty service member, securing writings by deception is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.43)
§ 672.19 PERSONATING AN OFFICER.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is
facilitating a fraud, or with purpose to induce another to purchase property or
services, shall personate a law enforcement officer, or an inspector,
investigator or agent of any governmental agency.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of personating an officer, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2913.44)
§ 672.20 DEFRAUDING CREDITORS.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud one or more of his or her
creditors, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Remove, conceal, destroy, encumber, convey or otherwise deal with
any of his or her property;
      (2)   Misrepresent or refuse to disclose to a fiduciary appointed to
administer or manage his or her affairs or estate, the existence, amount or
location of any of his or her property, or any other information regarding the
property which he or she is legally required to furnish to the fiduciary.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of defrauding creditors.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, defrauding creditors is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property involved is
$1,000 or more, defrauding creditors is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.45)
§ 672.21 INSURANCE FRAUD.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   DATA. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01 and additionally
includes any other representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts or
instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner.
      (2)   DECEPTIVE. A statement, in whole or in part, would cause another to
be deceived because it contains a misleading representation, withholds
information, prevents the acquisition of information, or by any other conduct,
act or omission creates, confirms or perpetuates a false impression, including
but not limited to a false impression as to law, value, state of mind or other
objective or subjective fact.
      (3)   INSURER. Any person that is authorized to engage in the business of
insurance in this state under R.C. Title 39, the Ohio Fair Plan Underwriting
Association created under R.C. § 3929.43, any health insuring corporation, and
any legal entity that is self-insured and provides benefits to its employees or
members.
      (4)   POLICY. A policy, certificate, contract or plan that is issued by
an insurer.
      (5)   STATEMENT. Includes but is not limited to any notice, letter, or
memorandum; proof of loss; bill of lading; receipt for payment; invoice,
account or other financial statement; estimate of property damage; bill for
services; diagnosis or prognosis; prescription; hospital, medical or dental
chart or other record; x-ray, photograph, videotape or movie film; test result;
other evidence of loss, injury or expense; computer-generated document; and
data in any form.
   (b)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Present to, or cause to be presented to, an insurer any written or
oral statement that is part of, or in support of, an application for insurance,
a claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a claim for any other benefit
pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the statement,
is false or deceptive;
      (2)   Assist, aid, abet, solicit, procure or conspire with another to
prepare or make any written or oral statement that is intended to be presented
to an insurer as part of, or in support of, an application for insurance, a
claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a claim for any other benefit
pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the statement,
is false or deceptive.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of insurance fraud. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, insurance fraud is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the amount of the claim that is false or deceptive is $1,000
or more, insurance fraud is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
   (d)   This section shall not be construed to abrogate, waive or modify R.C.
§ 2317.02(A).
(R.C. § 2913.47)
§ 672.22 WORKERS’ COMPENSATION FRAUD.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Receive workers’ compensation benefits to which the person is not
entitled;
      (2)   Make or present or cause to be made or presented a false or
misleading statement with the purpose to secure payment for goods or services
rendered under R.C. Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127 or 4131 or to secure workers’
compensation benefits;
      (3)   Alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any record or document
that is necessary to fully establish the validity of any claim filed with, or
necessary to establish the nature and validity of all goods and services for
which reimbursement or payment was received or is requested from the Bureau of
Workers’ Compensation, or a self-insuring employer under R.C. Chapter 4121,
4123, 4127 or 4131;
      (4)   Enter into an agreement or conspiracy to defraud the Bureau of
Workers’ Compensation or a self-insuring employer by making or presenting or
causing to be made or presented a false claim for workers’ compensation
benefits;
      (5)   Make or present or cause to be made or presented a false statement
concerning manual codes, classification or employees, payroll, paid
compensation or number of personnel, when information of that nature is
necessary to determine the actual workers’ compensation premium or assessment
owed to the Bureau by an employer;
      (6)   Alter, forge or create a workers’ compensation certificate or
falsely show current or correct workers’ compensation coverage;
      (7)   Fail to secure or maintain workers’ compensation coverage as
required by R.C. Chapter 4123 with the intent to defraud the Bureau of Workers’
Compensation.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of workers’ compensation
fraud. Except as otherwise provided in this division, workers’ compensation
fraud is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of premiums and
assessments unpaid pursuant to actions described in division (a)(5), (a)(6) or
(a)(7) of this section, or goods, services, property or money stolen is $1,000
or more, workers’ compensation fraud is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (c)   Upon application of the governmental body that conducted the
investigation and prosecution of a violation of this section, the court shall
order the person who is convicted of the violation to pay the governmental body
its costs of investigating and prosecuting the case. These costs are in
addition to any other costs or penalty provided under federal, state or local
law.
   (d)   The remedies and penalties provided in this section are not exclusive
remedies and penalties and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or
civil remedy or penalty for any act that is in violation of this section.
   (e)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CLAIM. Any attempt to cause the Bureau of Workers’ Compensation, an
independent third party with whom the administrator or an employer contracts
under R.C. § 4121.44, or a self-insuring employer to make payment or
reimbursement for workers’ compensation benefits.
      (2)   EMPLOYER, EMPLOYEE, and SELF-INSURING EMPLOYER. Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 4123.01.
      (3)   EMPLOYMENT. Participating in any trade, occupation, business,
service or profession for substantial gainful remuneration.
      (4)   FALSE. Wholly or partially untrue or deceptive.
      (5)   GOODS. Includes but is not limited to medical supplies, appliances,
rehabilitative equipment and any other apparatus or furnishing provided or used
in the care, treatment or rehabilitation of a claimant for workers’
compensation benefits.
      (6)   RECORDS. Any medical, professional, financial or business record
relating to the treatment or care of any person, to goods or services provided
to any person, or to rates paid for goods or services provided to any person,
or any record that the administrator of workers’ compensation requires pursuant
to rule.
      (7)   REMUNERATION. Includes but is not limited to wages, commissions,
rebates and any other reward or consideration.
      (8)   SERVICES. Includes but is not limited to any service provided by
any health care provider to a claimant for workers’ compensation benefits and
any and all services provided by the Bureau as part of workers’ compensation
insurance coverage.
      (9)   STATEMENT. Includes but is not limited to any oral, written,
electronic, electronic impulse or magnetic communication notice, letter,
memorandum, receipt for payment, invoice, account, financial statement or bill
for services; a diagnosis, prognosis, prescription, hospital, medical or dental
chart or other record; and a computer generated document.
      (10)   WORKERS’ COMPENSATION BENEFITS. Any compensation or benefits
payable under R.C. Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127 or 4131.
(R.C. § 2913.48)
§ 672.23 MEDICAID FRAUD.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   PROVIDER. Any person who has signed a provider agreement with the
Department of Medicaid to provide goods or services pursuant to the Medicaid
program or any person who has signed an agreement with a party to such a
provider agreement under which the person agrees to provide goods or services
that are reimbursable under the Medicaid program.
      (2)   PROVIDER AGREEMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
      (3)   RECIPIENT. Any individual who receives goods or services from a
provider under the Medicaid program.
      (4)   RECORDS. Any medical, professional, financial or business records
relating to the treatment or care of any recipient, to goods or services
provided to any recipient, or to rates paid for goods or services provided to
any recipient, and any records that are required by the rules of the Medicaid
Director to be kept for the Medicaid program.
      (5)   STATEMENT OR REPRESENTATION. Any oral, written, electronic,
electronic impulse or magnetic communication that is used to identify an item
of goods or a service for which reimbursement may be made under the Medicaid
program or that states income and expense and is or may be used to determine a
rate of reimbursement under the Medicaid program.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a false or
misleading statement or representation for use in obtaining reimbursement from
the Medicaid program.
   (c)   No person, with purpose to commit fraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Contrary to the terms of the person’s provider agreement, charge,
solicit, accept or receive for goods or services that the person provides under
the Medicaid program any property, money or other consideration in addition to
the amount of reimbursement under the Medicaid program and the person’s
provider agreement for the goods or services and any cost-sharing expenses
authorized by R.C. § 5162.20 or rules adopted by the Medicaid Director
regarding the Medicaid program.
      (2)   Solicit, offer or receive any remuneration, other than any cost-
sharing expenses authorized by R.C. § 5162.20 or rules adopted by the Medicaid
Director regarding the Medicaid program, in cash or in kind, including but not
limited to a kickback or rebate, in connection with the furnishing of goods or
services for which whole or partial reimbursement is or may be made under the
Medicaid program.
   (d)   No person, having submitted a claim for or provided goods or services
under the Medicaid program, shall do either of the following for a period of at
least six years after a reimbursement pursuant to that claim, or a
reimbursement for those goods or services, is received under the Medicaid
program:
      (1)   Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any records
that are necessary to fully disclose the nature of all goods or services for
which the claim was submitted, or for which reimbursement was received, by the
person; or
      (2)   Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any records
that are necessary to disclose fully all income and expenditures upon which
rates of reimbursements were based for the person.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of Medicaid fraud. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, Medicaid fraud is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the value of the property, services or funds obtained in
violation of this section is $1,000 or more, Medicaid fraud is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (f)   Upon application of the governmental agency, office or other entity
that conducted the investigation and prosecution in a case under this section,
the court shall order any person who is convicted of a violation of this
section for receiving any reimbursement for furnishing goods or services under
the Medicaid program to which the person is not entitled to pay to the
applicant its cost of investigating and prosecuting the case. The costs of
investigation and prosecution that a defendant is ordered to pay pursuant to
this division shall be in addition to any other penalties for the receipt of
that reimbursement that are provided in this section, R.C. § 2913.40 or
5164.35, or any other provision of law.
   (g)   The provisions of this section are not intended to be exclusive
remedies and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or civil remedy for
any act that is in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 2913.40)
   (h)   Medicaid eligibility fraud.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following in an application
for enrollment in the Medicaid program or in a document that requires a
disclosure of assets for the purpose of determining eligibility for the
Medicaid program:
         A.   Make or cause to be made a false or misleading statement;
         B.   Conceal an interest in property;
         C.   1.   Except as provided in division (h)(1)C.2. of this section,
fail to disclose a transfer of property that occurred during the period
beginning 36 months before submission of the application or document and ending
on the date the application or document was submitted;
            2.   Fail to disclose a transfer of property that occurred during
the period beginning 60 months before submission of the application or document
and ending on the date the application or document was submitted and that was
made to an irrevocable trust a portion of which is not distributable to the
applicant for or recipient of Medicaid or to a revocable trust.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates this division (h) is guilty of Medicaid
eligibility fraud. Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation
of this division (h) is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the
Medicaid services paid as a result of the violation is $1,000 or more, a
violation of this division (h) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
         B.   In addition to imposing a sentence under division (h)(2)A. of
this section, the court shall order that a person who is guilty of Medicaid
eligibility fraud make restitution in the full amount of any Medicaid services
paid on behalf of an applicant for or recipient of Medicaid for which the
applicant or recipient was not eligible, plus interest at the rate applicable
to judgments on unreimbursed amounts from the date on which the Medicaid
services were paid to the date on which restitution is made.
         C.   The remedies and penalties provided in this division (h) are not
exclusive and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or civil remedy for
any act that is in violation of this division (h).
      (3)   This division (h) does not apply to a person who fully disclosed in
an application for Medicaid or in a document that requires a disclosure of
assets for the purpose of determining eligibility for Medicaid all of the
interests in property of the applicant for or recipient of Medicaid, all
transfers of property by the applicant for or recipient of Medicaid, and the
circumstances of all those transfers.
      (4)   Any amounts of Medicaid services recovered as restitution under
this division (h) and any interest on those amounts shall be credited to the
General Revenue Fund, and any applicable federal share shall be returned to the
appropriate agency or department of the United States.
      (5)   For the purpose of this division (h), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         A.   MEDICAID SERVICES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
         B.   PROPERTY. Any real or personal property or other asset in which a
person has any legal title or interest.
(R.C. § 2913.401)
§ 672.24 DIMINISHING OR INTERFERING WITH FORFEITABLE PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall destroy, damage, remove or transfer property that is
subject to forfeiture or otherwise take any action in regard to property that
is subject to forfeiture with purpose to do any of the following:
      (1)   Prevent or impair the state’s or political subdivision’s lawful
authority to take the property into its custody or control under R.C. Chapter
2981 or to continue holding the property under its lawful custody or control;
      (2)   Impair or defeat the court’s continuing jurisdiction over the
person and property;
      (3)   Devalue property that the person knows, or has reasonable cause to
believe, is subject to forfeiture proceedings under R.C. Chapter 2981.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with or
diminishing forfeitable property. Except as otherwise provided in this division
(b), interference with or diminishing forfeitable property is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the value of the property is $1,000 or more, interference
with or diminishing forfeitable property is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2981.07)
§ 672.25 MOTION PICTURE PIRACY.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   AUDIOVISUAL RECORDING FUNCTION means the capability of a device to
record or transmit a motion picture or any part of a motion picture by means of
any technology existing on, or developed after, March 9, 2004.
      (2)   FACILITY means a movie theater.
   (b)   No person, without the written consent of the owner or lessee of the
facility and of the licensor of the motion picture, shall knowingly operate an
audiovisual recording function of a device in a facility in which the motion
picture is being shown.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of motion
picture piracy, a misdemeanor of the first degree on the first offense and a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
   (d)   This section does not prohibit or restrict a lawfully authorized
investigative, law enforcement, protective or intelligence gathering employee
or agent of the government of this state or a political subdivision of this
state, or of the federal government, when acting in an official capacity, from
operating an audiovisual recording function of a device in any facility in
which a motion picture is being shown.
   (e)   Division (b) of this section does not limit or affect the application
of any other prohibition in this code or the Ohio Revised Code. Any act that is
a violation of both division (b) of this section and another provision of this
code or the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, under the
other provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code, or under both this
section and the other provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code.
(R.C. § 2913.07)
CHAPTER 678: WEAPONS AND EXPLOSIVES
Section
   
678.01   Definitions
   
678.02   Carrying concealed weapons
   
678.03   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention
   
678.04   Using weapons while intoxicated
   
678.05   Improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle
   
678.06   License or permit to possess dangerous ordnance
   
678.07   Failure to secure dangerous ordnance
   
678.08   Unlawful transactions in weapons
   
678.09   Underage purchase of a firearm or handgun
   
678.10   Pointing and discharging firearms and other weapons
   
678.11   Discharge of a firearm on or near prohibited premises
   
678.12   Fireworks
   
678.13   Endangering aircraft and airport operations
   
678.14   Possessing criminal tools
   
678.15   Possession of an object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school
safety zone
   
678.16   Concealed handgun licenses: possession of a revoked or suspended
license; additional restrictions; posting of signs prohibiting possession
   
678.17   Defaced firearms
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Arson, see §
642.06
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Hunting prohibited, see §
618.13
   Posting firearm warning signs, see §
612.06
   Prohibiting sales of firearms and explosives in riot areas, see R.C. §
3761.16
   Reporting gunshot wounds, see §
654.04
   Vehicles transporting explosives, see §
440.04
§ 678.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   ACTIVE DUTY. Has the same meaning as defined in 10 U.S.C. § 101.
   (b)   ALIEN REGISTRATION NUMBER. The number issued by the United States
Citizenship and Immigration Services Agency that is located on the alien’s
permanent resident card and may also be commonly referred to as the USCIS
NUMBER or the ALIEN NUMBER.
   (c)   AUTOMATIC FIREARM. Any firearm designed or specially adapted to fire a
succession of cartridges with a single function of the trigger.
   (d)   BALLISTIC KNIFE. A knife with a detachable blade that is propelled by
a spring-operated mechanism.
   (e)   CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE or LICENSE TO CARRY A CONCEALED HANDGUN.
      (1)   Means, subject to division (2) of this definition, a license or
temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun issued under R.C. §
2923.125 or R.C. § 2923.1213 or a license to carry a concealed handgun issued
by another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a reciprocity
agreement under R.C. § 109.69.
      (2)   A reference in any provision of this Code to a concealed handgun
license issued under R.C. § 2923.125 or a license to carry a concealed handgun
issued under R.C. § 2923.125 means only a license of the type that is specified
in that section. A reference in any provision of this Code to a concealed
handgun license issued under R.C. § 2923.1213, a license to carry a concealed
handgun issued under R.C. § 2923.1213, or a license to carry a concealed
handgun on a temporary emergency basis means only a license of the type that is
specified in R.C. § 2923.1213. A reference in any provision of this Code to a
concealed handgun license issued by another state or a license to carry a
concealed handgun issued by another state means only a license issued by
another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a reciprocity
agreement under R.C. § 109.69.
   (f)   DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
      (1)   Any of the following, except as provided in division (2) of this
definition:
         A.   Any automatic or sawed-off firearm, zip-gun or ballistic knife.
         B.   Any explosive device or incendiary device.
         C.   Nitroglycerin, nitrocellulose, nitrostarch, PETN, cyclonite, TNT,
picric acid, and other high explosives; amatol, tritonal, tetrytol, pentolite,
pecretol, cyclotol and other high explosive compositions; plastic explosives;
dynamite, blasting gelatin, gelatin dynamite, sensitized ammonium nitrate,
liquid-oxygen blasting explosives, blasting powder and other blasting agents;
and any other explosive substance having sufficient brisance or power to be
particularly suitable for use as a military explosive, or for use in mining,
quarrying, excavating or demolitions.
         D.   Any firearm, rocket launcher, mortar, artillery piece, grenade,
mine, bomb, torpedo or similar weapon, designed and manufactured for military
purposes, and the ammunition for that weapon.
         E.   Any firearm muffler or suppressor.
         F.   Any combination of parts that is intended by the owner for use in
converting any firearm or other device into a dangerous ordnance.
      (2)   DANGEROUS ORDNANCE does not include any of the following:
         A.   Any firearm, including a military weapon and the ammunition for
that weapon, and regardless of its actual age, that employs a percussion cap or
other obsolete ignition system, or that is designed and safe for use only with
black powder.
         B.   Any pistol, rifle or shotgun, designed or suitable for sporting
purposes, including a military weapon as issued or as modified, and the
ammunition for that weapon, unless the firearm is an automatic or sawed-off
firearm.
         C.   Any cannon or other artillery piece that, regardless of its
actual age, is of a type in accepted use prior to 1887, has no mechanical,
hydraulic, pneumatic or other system for absorbing recoil and returning the
tube into battery without displacing the carriage, and is designed and safe for
use only with black powder.
         D.   Black powder, priming quills and percussion caps possessed and
lawfully used to fire a cannon of a type defined in division (2)C. of this
definition during displays, celebrations, organized matches or shoots, and
target practice, and smokeless and black powder, primers and percussion caps
possessed and lawfully used as a propellant or ignition device in small-arms or
small-arms ammunition.
         E.   Dangerous ordnance that is inoperable or inert and cannot readily
be rendered operable or activated, and that is kept as a trophy, souvenir,
curio or museum piece.
         F.   Any device that is expressly excepted from the definition of a
destructive device pursuant to the “Gun Control Act” of 1968, 18 U.S.C. § 921
(a)(4), as amended, and regulations issued under that Act.
         G.   Any firearm with an overall length of at least 26 inches that is
approved for sale by the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and
Explosives under the “Gun Control Act of 1968”, 82 Stat. 1213, 18 U.S.C. § 921
(a)(3), but that is found by the Bureau not to be regulated under the “National
Firearms Act”, 68A Stat. 725 (1934), 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a).
   (g)   DEADLY WEAPON. Any instrument, device or thing capable of inflicting
death, and designed or specially adapted for use as a weapon, or possessed,
carried or used as a weapon.
   (h)   EXPLOSIVE. Any chemical compound, mixture or device, the primary or
common purpose of which is to function by explosion. EXPLOSIVE includes all
materials that have been classified as division 1.1, division 1.2, division 1.3
or division 1.4 explosives by the United States Department of Transportation in
its regulations and includes but is not limited to dynamite, black powder,
pellet powders, initiating explosives, blasting caps, electric blasting caps,
safety fuses, fuse igniters, squibs, cordeau detonant fuses, instantaneous
fuses, and igniter cords and igniters. EXPLOSIVES does not include FIREWORKS,
as defined in R.C. § 3743.01, or any substance or material otherwise meeting
the definition of EXPLOSIVE set forth in this section that is manufactured,
sold, possessed, transported, stored or used in any activity described in R.C.
§ 3743.80, provided the activity is conducted in accordance with all applicable
laws, rules and regulations, including but not limited to the provisions of
R.C. § 3743.80 and the rules of the Fire Marshal adopted pursuant to R.C. §
3737.82.
   (i)   EXPLOSIVE DEVICE. Any device designed or specially adapted to cause
physical harm to persons or property by means of an explosion, and consisting
of an explosive substance or agency and a means to detonate it. EXPLOSIVE
DEVICE includes without limitation any bomb, any explosive demolition device,
any blasting cap or detonator containing an explosive charge and any pressure
vessel that has been knowingly tampered with or arranged so as to explode.
   (j)   FIREARM.
      (1)   Any deadly weapon capable of expelling or propelling one or more
projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible propellant. FIREARM
includes an unloaded firearm, and any firearm that is inoperable but that can
readily be rendered operable.
      (2)   When determining whether a firearm is capable of expelling or
propelling one or more projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible
propellant, the trier of fact may rely upon circumstantial evidence, including
but not limited to the representations and actions of the individual exercising
control over the firearm.
   (k)   HANDGUN. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm that has a short stock and is designed to be held and
fired by the use of a single hand;
      (2)   Any combination of parts from which a firearm of a type described
in division (1) of this definition can be assembled.
   (l)   INCENDIARY DEVICE. Any firebomb, and any device designed or specially
adapted to cause physical harm to persons or property by means of fire, and
consisting of an incendiary substance or agent and a means to ignite it.
   (m)   MISDEMEANOR PUNISHABLE BY IMPRISONMENT FOR A TERM EXCEEDING ONE YEAR.
The phrase does not include any of the following:
      (1)   Any federal or state offense pertaining to antitrust violations,
unfair trade practices, restraints of trade, or other similar offenses relating
to the regulation of business practices;
      (2)   Any misdemeanor offense punishable by a term of imprisonment of two
years or less.
   (n)   SAWED-OFF FIREARM. A shotgun with a barrel less than 18 inches long,
or a rifle with a barrel less than 16 inches long, or a shotgun or rifle less
than 26 inches long overall. SAWED-OFF FIREARM does not include any firearm
with an overall length of at least 26 inches that is approved for sale by the
Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives under the “Gun
Control Act of 1968”, 82 Stat. 1213, 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(3), but that is found
by the Bureau not to be regulated under the “National Firearms Act”, 68A Stat.
725 (1934), 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a).
   (o)   SEMI-AUTOMATIC FIREARM. Any firearm designed or specially adapted to
fire a single cartridge and automatically chamber a succeeding cartridge ready
to fire, with a single function of the trigger.
   (p)   VALID CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE or VALID LICENSE TO CARRY A CONCEALED
HANDGUN. A concealed handgun license that is currently valid, that is not under
a suspension under R.C. § 2923.128(A)(1), under R.C. § 2923.1213, or under a
suspension provision of the state other than this state in which the license
was issued, and that has not been revoked under R.C. § 2923.128(B)(1), under
R.C. § 2923.1213, or under a revocation provision of the state other than this
state in which the license was issued.
   (q)   ZIP-GUN. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm of crude and extemporized manufacture.
      (2)   Any device, including without limitation a starter’s pistol, not
designed as a firearm, but that is specially adapted for use as a firearm.
      (3)   Any industrial tool, signaling device or safety device, not
designed as a firearm, but that as designed is capable of use as such, when
possessed, carried or used as a firearm.
(R.C. § 2923.11)
§ 678.02 CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly carry or have, concealed on the person’s
person or concealed ready at hand, any of the following:
      (1)   A deadly weapon other than a handgun;
      (2)   A handgun other than a dangerous ordnance;
      (3)   A dangerous ordnance.
   (b)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license shall do any
of the following:
      (1)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, before or at the time a law enforcement officer
asks if the person is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to disclose
that the person then is carrying a concealed handgun, provided that it is not a
violation of this division if the person fails to disclose that fact to an
officer during the stop and the person already has notified another officer of
that fact during the same stop;
      (2)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to keep the person’s hands in
plain sight at any time after any law enforcement officer begins approaching
the person while stopped and before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless
the failure is pursuant to and in accordance with directions given by a law
enforcement officer;
      (3)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose, if the
person is carrying a concealed handgun, and if the person is approached by any
law enforcement officer while stopped, knowingly remove or attempt to remove
the loaded handgun from the holster, pocket or other place in which the person
is carrying it, knowingly grasp or hold the loaded handgun, or knowingly have
contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with the person’s hands or
fingers at any time after the law enforcement officer begins approaching and
before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the person removes, attempts
to remove, grasps, holds or has contact with the loaded handgun pursuant to and
in accordance with directions given by the law enforcement officer;
      (4)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any
lawful order of any law enforcement officer given while the person is stopped,
including but not limited to a specific order to the person to keep the
person’s hands in plain sight.
   (c)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         A.   An officer, agent or employee of this or any other state or the
United States, or to a law enforcement officer, who is authorized to carry
concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry handguns and
is acting within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s or employee’s duties;
         B.   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry
handguns, and who is subject to and in compliance with the requirements of R.C.
§ 109.801, unless the appointing authority of the person has expressly
specified that the exemption provided in this division (c)(1)B. does not apply
to the person.;
         C.   A person’s transportation or storage of a firearm, other than a
firearm described in R.C. § 2923.11(G) to (M), in a motor vehicle for any
lawful purpose if the firearm is not on the actor’s person;
         D.   A person’s storage or possession of a firearm, other than a
firearm described in R.C. § 2923.11(G) to (M), in the actor’s own home for any
lawful purpose.
      (2)   Division (a)(2) of this section does not apply to any person who
has been issued a concealed handgun license that is valid at the time of the
alleged carrying or possession of a handgun or who, at the time of the alleged
carrying or possession of a handgun, is an active duty member of the armed
forces of the United States and is carrying a valid military identification
card and documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets
or exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), unless
the person knowingly is in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (a)(1) of this
section of carrying or having control of a weapon other than a handgun and
other than a dangerous ordnance, that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by
law from having the weapon, and that any of the following applies:
      (1)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for
defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in or was going to or from the
actor’s lawful business or occupation, which business or occupation was of a
character or was necessarily carried on in a manner or at a time or place as to
render the actor particularly susceptible to criminal attack, such as would
justify a prudent person in going armed.
      (2)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for
defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in a lawful activity and had
reasonable cause to fear a criminal attack upon the actor, a member of the
actor’s family, or the actor’s home, such as would justify a prudent person in
going armed.
      (3)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for any
lawful purpose and while in the actor’s own home.
   (e)   (1)   No person who is charged with a violation of this section shall
be required to obtain a concealed handgun license as a condition for the
dismissal of the charge.
      (2)   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty to, or
has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (b)(1) of this section as it
existed prior to June 13, 2022, the person may file an application under R.C. §
2953.35 requesting the expungement of the record of conviction.
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of carrying concealed
weapons. Except as otherwise provided in this division or divisions (f)(2), (f)
(6), and (f)(7) of this section, carrying concealed weapons in violation of
division (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Except as
otherwise provided in this division or divisions (f)(2), (f)(6), and (f)(7) of
this section, if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance
or of any offense of violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is
either loaded or for which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the
weapon involved is dangerous ordnance, carrying concealed weapons in violation
of division (a) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. Except as otherwise provided in divisions (f)(2), (f)(6), and (f)(7)
of this section, if the offense is committed aboard an aircraft, or with
purpose to carry a concealed weapon aboard an aircraft, regardless of the
weapon involved, carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (a) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A person shall not be arrested for a violation of division (a)(2)
of this section solely because the person does not promptly produce a valid
concealed handgun license. If a person is arrested for a violation of division
(a)(2) of this section and is convicted of or pleads guilty to the violation,
the offender shall be punished as follows:
         A.   The offender shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor if both of
the following apply:
            1.   Within ten days after the arrest, the offender presents a
concealed handgun license, which license was valid at the time of the arrest to
the law enforcement agency that employs the arresting officer.
            2.   At the time of the arrest, the offender was not knowingly in a
place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
         B.   The offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined
$500 if all of the following apply:
            1.   The offender previously had been issued a concealed handgun
license, and that license expired within the two years immediately preceding
the arrest.
            2.   Within 45 days after the arrest, the offender presents a
concealed handgun license to the law enforcement agency that employed the
arresting officer, and the offender waives in writing the offender’s right to a
speedy trial on the charge of the violation that is provided in R.C. § 2945.71.
            3.   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
not knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
         C.   If divisions (f)(2)A. and (f)(2)B. and (f)(6) of this section do
not apply, the offender shall be punished under division (f)(1) or (f)(7) of
this section.
 
      (3)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (b)(1) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (4)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (b)(2) or (b)
(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(b)(2) or (b)(4) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. In
addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of division (b)(2) or (b)(4) of this section, the offender’s concealed handgun
license shall be suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2).
      (5)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (b)(3) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (6)   If a person being arrested for a violation of division (a)(2) of
this section is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States
and is carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of
successful completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training
requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), and if at the time of the
violation the person was not knowingly in a place described in R.C. 2923.126
(B), the officer shall not arrest the person for a violation of that division.
If the person is not able to promptly produce a valid military identification
card and documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets
or exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1) and if
the person is not in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B), the officer shall
issue a citation and the offender shall be assessed a civil penalty of not more
than $500. The citation shall be automatically dismissed and the civil penalty
shall not be assessed if both of the following apply:
         A.   Within ten days after the issuance of the citation, the offender
presents a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), which were both valid at the time of the
issuance of the citation to the law enforcement agency that employs the citing
officer.
         B.   At the time of the citation, the offender was not knowingly in a
place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
      (7)   If a person being arrested for a violation of division (a)(2) of
this section is knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B)(5) and is
not authorized to carry a handgun or have a handgun concealed on the person’s
person or concealed ready at hand under that division, the penalty shall be as
follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person
produces a valid concealed handgun license within ten days after the arrest and
has not previously been convicted or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(a)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a minor misdemeanor;
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (a)
(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
         C.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of division
(a)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree;
         D.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of
division (a)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, or convicted of or pleaded guilty to any offense of
violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for
which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is a
dangerous ordnance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (g)   If a law enforcement officer stops a person to question the person
regarding a possible violation of this section, for a traffic stop, or for any
other law enforcement purpose, if the person surrenders a firearm to the
officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the officer,
and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this section
or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise prohibited by
law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not contraband, the officer
shall return the firearm to the person at the termination of the stop. If a
court orders a law enforcement officer to return a firearm to a person pursuant
to the requirement set forth in this division, R.C. § 2923.163(B) applies.
   (h)   For purposes of this section, DEADLY WEAPON or WEAPON does not include
any knife, razor, or cutting instrument if the instrument was not used as a
weapon.
(R.C. § 2923.12)
Statutory reference:
   Carrying concealed handguns, licensing through County Sheriff, see R.C. §§
2923.124 et seq.
   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance on school
premises, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.122
   Conveyance, possession, or control of deadly weapon or dangerous ordinance
in a courthouse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.123
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offense, see R.C.
§ 2923.131
   Possession of firearm in liquor permit premises, felony offense, see R.C. §
2923.121
§ 678.03 POSSESSION OF DEADLY WEAPON WHILE UNDER DETENTION.
   (a)   DETENTION and DETENTION FACILITY have the same meanings as in R.C. §
2921.01.
   (b)   No person under detention at a detention facility shall possess a
deadly weapon.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possession of a deadly
weapon while under detention.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(2) of this section,
possession of a deadly weapon while under detention is a felony to be
prosecuted under state law.
      (2)   If the offender, at the time of the commission of the offense, was
under detention as an alleged or adjudicated delinquent child or unruly child
and if at the time the offender commits the act for which the offender was
under detention it would not be a felony if committed by an adult, possession
of a deadly weapon while under detention is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2923.131)
Statutory reference:
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offenses, see R.C.
§ 2923.131
§ 678.04 USING WEAPONS WHILE INTOXICATED.
   (a)   No person, while under the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse,
shall carry or use any firearm or dangerous ordnance.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using weapons while
intoxicated, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2923.15)
§ 678.05 IMPROPERLY HANDLING FIREARMS IN A MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly discharge a firearm while in or on a motor
vehicle.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded firearm in a
motor vehicle in such a manner that the firearm is accessible to the operator
or any passenger without leaving the vehicle.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a firearm in a motor
vehicle, unless the person may lawfully possess that firearm under applicable
law of this state or the United States, the firearm is unloaded, and the
firearm is carried in one of the following ways:
      (1)   In a closed package, box or case.
      (2)   In a compartment that can be reached only by leaving the vehicle.
      (3)   In plain sight and secured in a rack or holder made for the
purpose.
      (4)   If the firearm is at least 24 inches in overall length as measured
from the muzzle to the part of the stock furthest from the muzzle and if the
barrel is at least 18 inches in length, either in plain sight with the action
open or the weapon stripped, or, if the firearm is of a type on which the
action will not stay open or which cannot easily be stripped, in plain sight.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded handgun in a
motor vehicle if, at the time of that transportation or possession, any of the
following applies:
      (1)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them.
      (2)   The person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine
contains a concentration of alcohol, a listed controlled substance, or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance prohibited for persons operating a
vehicle, as specified in R.C. § 4511.19(A), regardless of whether the person at
the time of the transportation or possession as described in this division is
the operator of or a passenger in the motor vehicle.
   (e)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license or who is an
active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is carrying a
valid military identification card and documentation of successful completion
of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements described
in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), who is the driver or an occupant of a motor vehicle
that is stopped as a result of a traffic stop or a stop for another law
enforcement purpose or is the driver or an occupant of a commercial motor
vehicle that is stopped by an employee of the motor carrier enforcement unit
for the purposes defined in R.C. § 5503.34, and who is transporting or has a
loaded handgun in the motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle in any manner,
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Before or at the time a law enforcement officer asks if the person
is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to disclose that the person
then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the motor vehicle, provided that it
is not a violation of this division if the person fails to disclose that fact
to an officer during the stop and the person already has notified another
officer of that fact during the same stop;
      (2)   Before or at the time an employee of the motor carrier enforcement
unit asks if the person is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to
disclose that the person then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the
commercial motor vehicle, provided that it is not a violation of this division
if the person fails to disclose that fact to an employee of the unit during the
stop and the person already has notified another employee of the unit of that
fact during the same stop;
      (3)   Knowingly fail to remain in the motor vehicle while stopped, or
knowingly fail to keep the person’s hands in plain sight at any time after any
law enforcement officer begins approaching the person while stopped and before
the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the failure is pursuant to and in
accordance with directions given by a law enforcement officer;
      (4)   Knowingly have contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with
the person’s hands or fingers in the motor vehicle at any time after the law
enforcement officer begins approaching and before the law enforcement officer
leaves, unless the person has contact with the loaded handgun pursuant to and
in accordance with directions given by the law enforcement officer.
      (5)   Knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any lawful order of any
law enforcement officer given while the motor vehicle is stopped, including but
not limited to a specific order to the person to keep the person’s hands in
plain sight.
   (f)   (1)   Divisions (a), (b), (c) and (e) of this section do not apply to
any of the following:
         A.   An officer, agent or employee of this or any other state or the
United States, or a law enforcement officer, when authorized to carry or have
loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles and acting within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s or employee’s duties;
         B.   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry or have loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles, and who is
subject to and in compliance with the requirements of R.C. § 109.801, unless
the appointing authority of the person has expressly specified that the
exemption provided in this division (f)(1)B. does not apply to the person.
      (2)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a person if all of
the following circumstances apply:
         A.   The person discharges a firearm from a motor vehicle at a coyote
or groundhog, the discharge is not during the deer gun hunting season as set by
the Chief of the Division of Wildlife of the Department of Natural Resources,
and the discharge at the coyote or groundhog, but for the operation of this
section, is lawful.
         B.   The motor vehicle from which the person discharges the firearm is
on real property that is located in an unincorporated area of a township and
that is either zoned for agriculture or is used for agriculture.
         C.   The person owns the real property described in division (f)(2)B.
of this section, is the spouse or a child of another person who owns that real
property, is a tenant of another person who owns that real property, or is the
spouse or a child of a tenant of another person who owns that real property.
         D.   The person does not discharge the firearm in any of the following
manners:
            1.   While under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
alcohol and a drug of abuse;
            2.   In the direction of a street, highway or other public or
private property used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking;
            3.   At or into an occupied structure that is a permanent or
temporary habitation;
            4.   In the commission of any violation of law, including but not
limited to a felony that includes, as an essential element, purposely or
knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death of or physical harm to
another and that was committed by discharging a firearm from a motor vehicle.
      (3)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a person if all of
the following apply:
         A.   The person possesses a valid all-purpose vehicle permit issued
under R.C. § 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife.
         B.   The person discharges a firearm at a wild quadruped or game bird
as defined in R.C. § 1531.01 during the open hunting season for the applicable
wild quadruped or game bird.
         C.   The person discharges a firearm from a stationary all-purpose
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 1531.01 from private or publicly owned lands or
from a motor vehicle that is parked on a road that is owned or administered by
the Division of Wildlife.
         D.   The person does not discharge the firearm in any of the following
manners:
            1.   While under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
alcohol and a drug of abuse;
            2.   In the direction of a street, a highway or other public or
private property that is used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking;
            3.   At or into an occupied structure that is a permanent or
temporary habitation;
            4.   In the commission of any violation of law, including but not
limited to a felony that includes, as an essential element, purposely or
knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death of or physical harm to
another and that was committed by discharging a firearm from a motor vehicle.
      (4)   Divisions (b) and (c) of this section do not apply to a person if
all of the following circumstances apply:
         A.   At the time of the alleged violation of either of those
divisions, the person is the operator of or a passenger in a motor vehicle.
         B.   The motor vehicle is on real property that is located in an
unincorporated area of a township and that is either zoned for agriculture or
is used for agriculture.
         C.   The person owns the real property described in division (f)(4)B.
of this section, is the spouse or a child of another person who owns that real
property, is a tenant of another person who owns that real property, or is the
spouse or a child of a tenant of another person who owns that real property.
         D.   The person, prior to arriving at the real property described in
division (f)(4)B. of this section, did not transport or possess a firearm in
the motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by division (b) or (c) of this section
while the motor vehicle was being operated on a street, highway or other public
or private property used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking.
      (5)   Divisions (b) and (c) of this section do not apply to a person who
transports or possesses a handgun in a motor vehicle if, at the time of that
transportation or possession, both of the following apply:
         A.   The person transporting or possessing the handgun has been issued
a concealed handgun license that is valid at the time in question or the person
is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         B.   The person transporting or possessing the handgun is not
knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
      (6)   Divisions (b) and (c) of this section do not apply to a person if
all of the following apply:
         A.   The person possesses a valid all-purpose vehicle permit issued
under R.C. § 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife.
         B.   The person is on or in an all-purpose vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 1531.01 or a motor vehicle during the open hunting season for a wild
quadruped or game bird.
         C.   The person is on or in an all-purpose vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 1531.01 on private or publicly owned lands or on or in a motor vehicle that
is parked on a road that is owned or administered by the Division of Wildlife.
   (g)   (1)   The affirmative defenses authorized in R.C. § 2923.12(D)(1) and
(D)(2) are affirmative defenses to a charge under division (b) or (c) of this
section that involves a firearm other than a handgun.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (b) or (c)
of this section of improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle that the
actor transported or had the firearm in the motor vehicle for any lawful
purpose and while the motor vehicle was on the actor’s own property, provided
that this affirmative defense is not available unless the person, immediately
prior to arriving at the actor’s own property, did not transport or possess the
firearm in a motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by division (b) or (c) of
this section while the motor vehicle was being operated on a street, highway or
other public or private property used by the public for vehicular traffic.
   (h)   (1)   No person who is charged with a violation of division (b), (c)
or (d) of this section shall be required to obtain a concealed handgun license
as a condition for the dismissal of the charge.
      (2)   A.   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty
to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (e) of this section as it
existed prior to September 30, 2011, and the conduct that was the basis of the
violation no longer would be a violation of division (e) of this section on or
after September 30, 2011, or if a person is convicted of, was convicted of,
pleads guilty to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (e)(1) or
(e)(2) of this section as it existed prior to June 13, 2022, the person may
file an application under R.C. § 2953.35 requesting the expungement of the
record of conviction.
         B.   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty to,
or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (b) or (c) of this section as
the division existed prior to September 30, 2011 and if the conduct that was
the basis of the violation no longer would be a violation of division (b) or
(c) of this section on or after September 30, 2011 due to the application of
division (f)(5) of this section as it exists on and after September 30, 2011,
the person may file an application under R.C. § 2953.35 requesting the
expungement of the record of conviction.
   (i)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of improperly handling
firearms in a motor vehicle. A violation of division (a) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division
(c) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. A violation of
division (d) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law and, if the loaded handgun is concealed on the person’s person, it is
also a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of
division (e)(1) or (e)(2) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. A violation of division (e)(4) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division (e)(3) or (e)
(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(e)(3) or (e)(5) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. In
addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of division (e)(3) or (e)(5) of this section, the offender’s concealed handgun
license shall be suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2). A violation of
division (b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (j)   If a law enforcement officer stops a motor vehicle for a traffic stop
or any other purpose, if any person in the motor vehicle surrenders a firearm
to the officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the
officer, and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this
section or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise
prohibited by law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not
contraband, the officer shall return the firearm to the person at the
termination of the stop. If a court orders a law enforcement officer to return
a firearm to a person pursuant to the requirement set forth in this division,
R.C. § 2923.163(B) applies.
   (k)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   AGRICULTURE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 519.01.
      (2)   COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4506.25
(A).
      (3)   MOTOR CARRIER ENFORCEMENT UNIT. The Motor Carrier Enforcement Unit
in the Department of Public Safety, Division of State Highway Patrol, that is
created by R.C. § 5503.34.
      (4)   MOTOR VEHICLE, STREET and HIGHWAY. Have the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 4511.01.
      (5)   OCCUPIED STRUCTURE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.01.
      (6)   TENANT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1531.01.
      (7)   UNLOADED.
         A.   With respect to a firearm other than a firearm described in
division D. of this definition, means that no ammunition is in the firearm in
question, no magazine or speed loader containing ammunition is inserted into
the firearm, and one of the following applies:
            1.   There is no ammunition in a magazine or speed loader that is
in the vehicle in question and that may be used with the firearm in question.
            2.   Any magazine or speed loader that contains ammunition and that
may be used with the firearm in question is stored in a compartment within the
vehicle in question that cannot be accessed without leaving the vehicle or is
stored in a container that provides complete and separate enclosure.
         B.   For the purposes of division A.2. of this definition, a CONTAINER
THAT PROVIDES COMPLETE AND SEPARATE ENCLOSURE includes, but is not limited to,
any of the following:
            1.   A package, box, or case with multiple compartments, as long as
the loaded magazine or speed loader and the firearm in question either are in
separate compartments within the package, box, or case, or, if they are in the
same compartment, the magazine or speed loader is contained within a separate
enclosure in that compartment that does not contain the firearm and that closes
using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop closing mechanism, or other
fastener that must be opened to access the contents or the firearm is contained
within a separate enclosure of that nature in that compartment that does not
contain the magazine or speed loader;
            2.   A pocket or other enclosure on the person of the person in
question that closes using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop
closing mechanism, or other fastener that must be opened to access the
contents.
         C.   For the purposes of divisions A. and B. of this definition,
ammunition held in stripper-clips or in en-bloc clips is not considered
ammunition that is loaded into a magazine or speed loader.
         D.   UNLOADED means, with respect to a firearm employing a percussion
cap, flintlock, or other obsolete ignition system, when the weapon is uncapped
or when the priming charge is removed from the pan.
   (l)   Divisions A. and B. of the definition of UNLOADED in division (k) of
this section do not affect the authority of a person who has been issued a
concealed handgun license that is valid at the time in question to have one or
more magazines or speed loaders containing ammunition anywhere in a vehicle,
without being transported as described in those divisions, as long as no
ammunition is in a firearm, other than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as
permitted under any other provision of this chapter. A person who has been
issued a concealed handgun license that is valid at the time in question may
have one or more magazines or speed loaders containing ammunition anywhere in a
vehicle without further restriction, as long as no ammunition is in a firearm,
other than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as permitted under any
provision of this chapter.
(R.C. § 2923.16)
Statutory reference:
   Return of surrendered firearms by law enforcement, see R.C. § 2923.163
§ 678.06 LICENSE OR PERMIT TO POSSESS DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
   (a)   Upon application to the Sheriff of the county or Safety Director or
Police Chief of the municipality where the applicant resides or has the
applicant’s principal place of business, and upon payment of the fee specified
in division (b) of this section, a license or temporary permit shall be issued
to qualified applicants to acquire, possess, carry or use a dangerous ordnance
for the following purposes:
      (1)   Contractors, wreckers, quarriers, mine operators and other persons
regularly employing explosives in the course of a legitimate business, with
respect to explosives and explosive devices acquired, possessed, carried or
used in the course of the business.
      (2)   Farmers, with respect to explosives and explosive devices acquired,
possessed, carried or used for agricultural purposes on lands farmed by them.
      (3)   Scientists, engineers and instructors, with respect to a dangerous
ordnance acquired, possessed, carried or used in the course of bona fide
research or instruction.
      (4)   Financial institutions and armored car company guards, with respect
to automatic firearms lawfully acquired, possessed, carried or used by any such
person while acting within the scope of the person’s duties.
      (5)   In the discretion of the issuing authority, any responsible person,
with respect to a dangerous ordnance lawfully acquired, possessed, carried or
used for a legitimate research, scientific, educational, industrial or other
proper purpose.
   (b)   Application for a license or temporary permit under this section shall
be in writing under oath to the Sheriff of the county or Safety Director or
Police Chief of the municipality where the applicant resides or has the
applicant’s principal place of business. The application shall be accompanied
by an application fee of $50 when the application is for a license, and an
application fee of $5 when the application is for a temporary permit. The fees
shall be paid into the General Revenue Fund of the county or municipality. The
application shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name, age, address, occupation and business address of the
applicant, if the applicant is a natural person, or the name, address and
principal place of business of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation.
      (2)   A description of the dangerous ordnance for which a permit is
requested.
      (3)   A description of the places where and the manner in which the
dangerous ordnance is to be kept, carried and used.
      (4)   A statement of the purposes for which the dangerous ordnance is to
be acquired, possessed, carried or used.
      (5)   Any other information as the issuing authority may require in
giving effect to this section.
   (c)   Upon investigation, the issuing authority shall issue a license or
temporary permit only if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The applicant is not otherwise prohibited by law from acquiring,
having, carrying or using a dangerous ordnance.
      (2)   The applicant is 21 years of age or over, if the applicant is a
natural person.
      (3)   It appears that the applicant has sufficient competence to safely
acquire, possess, carry or use the dangerous ordnance, and that proper
precautions will be taken to protect the security of the dangerous ordnance and
ensure the safety of persons and property.
      (4)   It appears that the dangerous ordnance will be lawfully acquired,
possessed, carried and used by the applicant for a legitimate purpose.
   (d)   The license or temporary permit shall identify the person to whom it
is issued, identify the dangerous ordnance involved and state the purposes for
which the license or temporary permit is issued, state the expiration date, if
any, and list the restrictions on the acquisition, possession, carriage or use
of the dangerous ordnance as the issuing authority considers advisable to
protect the security of the dangerous ordnance and ensure the safety of persons
and property.
   (e)   A temporary permit shall be issued for the casual use of explosives
and explosive devices, and other consumable dangerous ordnance, and shall
expire within 30 days of its issuance. A license shall be issued for the
regular use of consumable dangerous ordnance, or for any non-consumable
dangerous ordnance, which license need not specify an expiration date, but the
issuing authority may specify such expiration date, not earlier than one year
from the date of issuance, as it considers advisable in view of the nature of
the dangerous ordnance and the purposes for which the license is issued.
   (f)   The dangerous ordnance specified in a license or temporary permit may
be obtained by the holder anywhere in the state. Pursuant to R.C. § 2923.18(F),
the holder of a license may use the dangerous ordnance anywhere in the state.
The holder of a temporary permit may use the dangerous ordnance only within the
territorial jurisdiction of the issuing authority.
   (g)   The issuing authority shall forward to the State Fire Marshal a copy
of each license or temporary permit issued pursuant to this section, and a copy
of each record of a transaction in a dangerous ordnance and of each report of a
lost or stolen dangerous ordnance, given to the local law enforcement authority
as required by R.C. § 2923.20(A)(6) and (A)(7) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance. The State Fire Marshal will keep a permanent file of all
licenses and temporary permits issued pursuant to this section, and of all
records of transactions in, and losses or thefts of a dangerous ordnance
forwarded by local law enforcement authorities pursuant to this section.
(R.C. § 2923.18)
§ 678.07 FAILURE TO SECURE DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
   (a)   No person, in acquiring, possessing, carrying or using any dangerous
ordnance, shall negligently fail to take proper precautions:
      (1)   To secure the dangerous ordnance against theft, or against its
acquisition or use by any unauthorized or incompetent person.
      (2)   To ensure the safety of persons and property.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to a secure
dangerous ordnance, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 2923.19)
§ 678.08 UNLAWFUL TRANSACTIONS IN WEAPONS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Recklessly sell, lend, give or furnish any firearm to any person
prohibited by R.C. § 2923.13 or 2923.15, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, from acquiring or using any firearm, or recklessly sell,
lend, give or furnish any dangerous ordnance to any person prohibited by R.C. §
2923.13, 2923.15 or 2923.17, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
from acquiring or using any dangerous ordnance;
      (2)   Possess any firearm or dangerous ordnance with purpose to dispose
of it in violation of division (a)(1) of this section;
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b) of this section,
knowingly solicit, persuade, encourage, or entice a federally licensed firearms
dealer or private seller to transfer a firearm or ammunition to any person in a
manner prohibited by state or federal law;
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b) of this section, with
an intent to deceive, knowingly provide materially false information to a
federally licensed firearms dealer or private seller;
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b) of this section,
knowingly procure, solicit, persuade, encourage, or entice a person to act in
violation of division (a)(3) or (a)(4) of this section;
      (6)   When transferring any dangerous ordnance to another, negligently
fail to require the transferee to exhibit the identification, license or permit
showing the transferee to be authorized to acquire dangerous ordnance pursuant
to R.C. § 2923.17, or negligently fail to take a complete record of the
transaction and forthwith forward a copy of the record to the Sheriff of the
county or Safety Director or Police Chief of the municipality where the
transaction takes place;
      (7)   Knowingly fail to report to law enforcement authorities forthwith
the loss or theft of any firearm or dangerous ordnance in the person’s
possession and under his or her control.
   (b)   Divisions (a)(3), (a)(4), and (a)(5) of this section do not apply to
any of the following:
      (1)   A law enforcement officer who is acting within the scope of the
officer’s duties;
      (2)   A person who is acting in accordance with directions given by a law
enforcement officer described in division (b)(1) of this section.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful transactions in
weapons. A violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), or (a)(5) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A
violation of division (a)(6) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. A violation of division (a)(7) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
   (d)   As used in this section:
      (1)   AMMUNITION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.401.
      (2)   FEDERALLY LICENSED FIREARMS DEALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 5502.63.
      (3)   MATERIALLY FALSE INFORMATION. Information regarding the transfer of
a firearm or ammunition that portrays an illegal transaction as legal or a
legal transaction as illegal.
      (4)   PRIVATE SELLER. A person who sells, offers for sale, or transfers a
firearm or ammunition and who is not a federally licensed firearms dealer.
(R.C. § 2923.20)
§ 678.09 UNDERAGE PURCHASE OF A FIREARM OR HANDGUN.
   (a)   No person under 18 years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase
a firearm.
   (b)   No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase
a handgun; provided, that this division does not apply to the purchase or
attempted purchase of a handgun by a person 18 years of age or older and under
21 years of age, if either of the following applies:
      (1)   The person is a law enforcement officer and has received firearms
training approved by the Ohio Peace Officer Training Council or equivalent
firearms training.
      (2)   The person is an active or reserve member of the armed services of
the United States or the Ohio National Guard, or was honorably discharged from
military service in the active or reserve armed services of the United States
or the Ohio National Guard, and the person has received firearms training from
the armed services or the national guard or equivalent firearms training.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of underage
purchase of a firearm, a delinquent act that would be a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law if it could be committed by an adult. Whoever
violates division (b) of this section is guilty of underage purchase of a
handgun, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 2923.211)
§ 678.10 POINTING AND DISCHARGING FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS.
   (a)   Except as provided in divisions (c) and (d) of this section, no person
shall discharge any air gun, rifle, shotgun, revolver, pistol or other firearm,
or make use of any sling or arrow, within the corporate limits of the
municipality.
   (b)   No person shall, intentionally and without malice, point or aim a
firearm at or toward another or discharge a firearm so pointed or aimed.
   (c)   This section does not extend to cases in which firearms, slings or
arrows are used in self-defense, in the discharge of official duty or in
justifiable homicide.
   (d)   This section does not extend to cases in which BB guns and other air
guns, or slings or arrows, are used in the confines of dwellings, provided the
use is under adult supervision and is approved by the Chief of Police.
   (e)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
§ 678.11 DISCHARGE OF A FIREARM ON OR NEAR PROHIBITED PREMISES.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Without permission from the proper officials and subject to
division (b)(1) of this section, discharge a firearm upon or over a cemetery or
within 100 yards of a cemetery;
      (2)   Subject to division (b)(2) of this section, discharge of a firearm
on a lawn, park, pleasure ground, orchard or other ground appurtenant to a
schoolhouse, church or inhabited dwelling, the property of another or a
charitable institution;
      (3)   Discharge a firearm upon or over a public road or highway.
   (b)   (1)   Division (a)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
while on the person’s own land, discharges a firearm.
      (2)   Division (a)(2) of this section does not apply to a person who owns
any type of property described in that division and who, while on the person’s
own enclosure, discharges a firearm.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of discharge
of a firearm on or near prohibited premises. A violation of division (a)(1) or
(a)(2) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. A violation of
division (a)(3) of this section shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(2) of this section, a
violation of division (a)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (2)   If the violation created a substantial risk of physical harm to any
person, caused serious physical harm to property, caused physical harm to any
person, or caused serious physical harm to any person, a violation of division
(a)(3) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2923.162)
§ 678.12 FIREWORKS.
   (a)   Definitions. Unless otherwise provided, for the purpose of this
chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   1.3G FIREWORKS. Display fireworks consistent with regulations of
the United States Department of Transportation as expressed using the
designation “Division 1.3” in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
      (2)   1.4G FIREWORKS. Consumer fireworks consistent with regulations of
the United States Department of Transportation as expressed using the
designation “Division 1.4” in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
      (3)   BEER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4301.01.
      (4)   BOOBY TRAP. A small tube that has a string protruding from both
ends that has a friction-sensitive composition and that is ignited by pulling
the ends of the string.
      (5)   CIGARETTE LOAD. A small wooden peg that is coated with a small
quantity of explosive composition and that is ignited in a cigarette.
      (6)   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
      (7)   DISCHARGE SITE. An area immediately surrounding the mortars used to
fire aerial shells.
      (8)   FIREWORKS. Any composition or device prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, deflagration or
detonation, except ordinary matches and except as provided in R.C. § 3743.80.
      (9)   FIREWORKS INCIDENT. Any action or omission that occurs at a
fireworks exhibition that results in injury or death, or a substantial risk of
injury or death, to any person, and that involves either of the following:
         A.   The handling or other use, or the results of the handling or
other use, of fireworks or associated equipment or other materials;
         B.   The failure of any person to comply with any applicable
requirement imposed by this section or R.C. Chapter 3743, or any applicable
rule adopted under this section or R.C. Chapter 3743.
      (10)   FIREWORKS INCIDENT SITE. A discharge site or other location at a
fireworks exhibition where a fireworks incident occurs, a location where an
injury or death associated with a fireworks incident occurs, or a location
where evidence of a fireworks incident or an injury or death associated with a
fireworks incident is found.
      (11)   FIREWORKS PLANT. All buildings and other structures in which the
manufacturing of fireworks, or the storage or sale of manufactured fireworks by
a manufacturer, takes place.
      (12)   FOUNTAIN DEVICE. A specific type of 1.4G firework that meets all
of the following criteria:
         A.   It is nonaerial and nonreport producing.
         B.   It is recognized and manufactured in accordance with sections
3.1.1 and 3.5 of APA standard 87-1 (2001 edition).
         C.   It is a ground-based or hand-held sparkler with one or more tubes
containing a nonexplosive pyrotechnic mixture that produces a shower of sparks
upon ignition, with or without additional effects that may include a colored
flame, audible crackling effect, audible whistle effect, or smoke.
         D.   It contains not more than 75 grams of the nonexplosive
pyrotechnic mixture in any individual tube and not more than 500 grams or less
for multiple tubes.
      (13)   HIGHWAY. Any public street, road, alley, way, lane or other public
thoroughfare.
      (14)   INTOXICATING LIQUOR. Had the same meaning as in R.C. § 4301.01.
      (15)   LICENSED BUILDING. A building on the licensed premises of a
licensed manufacturer or wholesaler of fireworks that is approved for occupancy
by the building official having jurisdiction.
      (16)   LICENSED EXHIBITOR OF FIREWORKS or LICENSED EXHIBITOR. A person
licensed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.50 through 3743.55.
      (17)   LICENSED FOUNTAIN DEVICE RETAILER or LICENSED RETAILER. A person
licensed pursuant to R.C. § 3743.26.
      (18)   LICENSED MANUFACTURER OF FIREWORKS or LICENSED MANUFACTURER. A
person licensed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.02 through 3743.08.
      (19)   LICENSED PREMISES. The real estate upon which a licensed
manufacturer or wholesaler of fireworks conducts business.
      (20)   LICENSED WHOLESALER OF FIREWORKS or LICENSED WHOLESALER. A person
licensed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.15 through 3743.21.
      (21)   LIST OF LICENSED EXHIBITORS. The list required by R.C. § 3743.51
(C).
      (22)   LIST OF LICENSED MANUFACTURERS. The list required by R.C. §
3743.03(C).
      (23)   LIST OF LICENSED WHOLESALERS. The list required by R.C. § 3743.16
(C).
      (24)   MANUFACTURING OF FIREWORKS. The making of fireworks from raw
materials, none of which in and of themselves constitute fireworks, or the
processing of fireworks.
      (25)   NAVIGABLE WATERS. Any body of water susceptible of being used in
its ordinary condition as a highway of commerce over which trade and travel is
or may be conducted in the customary modes, but does not include a body of
water that is not capable of navigation by barges, tugboats, and other large
vessels.
      (26)   NOVELTIES and TRICK NOISEMAKERS.
         A.   Devices that produce a small report intended to surprise the
user, including but not limited to booby traps, cigarette loads, party poppers
and snappers;
         B.   Snakes or glow worms;
         C.   Smoke devices;
         D.   Trick matches.
      (27)   PARTY POPPER. A small plastic or paper item that contains not more
than 16 milligrams of friction-sensitive explosive composition that is ignited
by pulling a string protruding from the item, and from which paper streamers
are expelled when the item is ignited.
      (28)   PROCESSING OF FIREWORKS. The making of fireworks from materials
all or part of which in and of themselves constitute fireworks, but does not
include the mere packaging or repackaging of fireworks.
      (29)   RAILROAD. Any railway or railroad that carries freight or
passengers for hire, but does not include auxiliary tracks, spurs and sidings
installed and primarily used in serving a mine, quarry or plant.
      (30)   RETAIL SALE or SELL AT RETAIL. A sale of fireworks to a purchaser
who intends to use the fireworks and not to resell them.
      (31)   SMOKE DEVICE. A tube or sphere that contains pyrotechnic
composition that, upon ignition, produces white or colored smoke as the primary
effect.
      (32)   SNAKE or GLOW WORM. A device that consists of a pressed pellet of
pyrotechnic composition that produces a large snake-like ash upon burning,
which ash expands in length as the pellet burns.
      (33)   SNAPPER. A small paper-wrapped item that contains a minute
quantity of explosive composition coated on small bits of sand and that, when
dropped, implodes.
      (34)   STORAGE LOCATION. A single parcel or contiguous parcels of real
estate approved by the Ohio Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. § 3743.04(I) or
3743.17(F) that are separate from a licensed premises containing a retail
showroom, and which parcel or parcels a licensed manufacturer or wholesaler of
fireworks may use only for the distribution, possession and storage of
fireworks in accordance with this chapter.
      (35)   TRICK MATCH. A kitchen or book match that is coated with a small
quantity of explosive composition and that, upon ignition, produces a small
report or a shower of sparks.
      (36)   WHOLESALE SALE or SELL AT WHOLESALE. A sale of fireworks to a
purchaser who intends to resell the fireworks so purchased.
      (37)   WIRE SPARKLER. A sparkler consisting of a wire or stick coated
with a nonexplosive pyrotechnic mixture that produces a shower of sparks upon
ignition and that contains no more than 100 grams of this mixture.
(R.C. § 3743.01)
   (b)   Manufacturing.
      (1)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall knowingly fail to
comply with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. §
3743.05 or the requirements of R.C. § 3743.06.
      (2)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall fail to maintain
complete inventory, wholesale sale and retail records as required by R.C. §
3743.07, or to permit an inspection of these records or the premises of a
fireworks plant or the wholesaler pursuant to R.C. § 3743.08.
      (3)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to R.C. § 3743.08(B)(1) within
the specified period of time.
      (4)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to R.C. § 3743.08(B)(2) until
the nonconformities are eliminated, corrected or otherwise remedied or the 72-
hour period specified in those divisions has expired, whichever occurs first.
      (5)   No person shall smoke or shall carry a pipe, cigarette or cigar, or
a match, lighter, other flame-producing item or open flame on, or shall carry a
concealed source of ignition into, the premises of a fireworks plant, except as
smoking is authorized in specified lunchrooms or restrooms by a manufacturer
pursuant to R.C. § 3743.06(C).
      (6)   No person shall have possession or control of, or be under the
influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer or controlled substance while on
the premises of a fireworks plant.
      (7)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall negligently fail to
furnish a safety pamphlet to a purchaser of 1.4G fireworks as required by R.C.
§ 3743.47(A).
      (8)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall negligently fail to
have safety glasses available for sale as required by R.C. § 3743.47(B).
(R.C. § 3743.60(E) - (L))
   (c)   Wholesaling.
      (1)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall knowingly fail to comply
with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. § 3743.18 or
the requirements of R.C. § 3743.19.
      (2)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall fail to maintain complete
inventory, wholesale sale and retail records as required by R.C. § 3743.20, or
to permit an inspection of these records or the premises of a fireworks plant
or the wholesaler pursuant to R.C. § 3743.21.
      (3)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to R.C. § 3743.21(B)(1) within
the specified period of time.
      (4)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to R.C. § 3743.21(B)(2) until
the nonconformities are eliminated, corrected or otherwise remedied or the 72-
hour period specified in those divisions has expired, whichever occurs first.
      (5)   No person shall smoke or shall carry a pipe, cigarette or cigar, or
a match, lighter, other flame-producing item or open flame on, or shall carry a
concealed source of ignition into, the premises of a wholesaler of fireworks,
except as smoking is authorized in specified lunchrooms or restrooms by a
wholesaler pursuant to R.C. § 3743.19(D).
      (6)   No person shall have possession or control of, or be under the
influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer or controlled substance while on
the premises of a wholesaler of fireworks.
      (7)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall negligently fail to
furnish a safety pamphlet to a purchaser of 1.4G fireworks as required by R.C.
§ 3743.47(A).
      (8)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall negligently fail to have
safety glasses available for sale as required by R.C. § 3743.47(B).
(R.C. § 3743.61(E) - (L))
   (d)   Purchasing and transporting.
      (1)   No person who purchases fireworks in this municipality shall obtain
possession of the fireworks in this municipality unless the person complies
with R.C. §§ 3743.44 to 3743.46.
      (2)   Except for the purchase of 1.4G fireworks made under R.C. §
3743.45, no person who resides in another state and who purchases fireworks in
this state shall obtain possession of fireworks in this state other than from a
licensed manufacturer or wholesaler, or fail, when transporting 1.3G fireworks,
to transport them directly out of this state within 72 hours after the time of
their purchase.
      (3)   No person who purchases fireworks in this state under R.C. §
3743.45 shall give or sell to any other person in this municipality fireworks
that the person has acquired in this state.
(R.C. § 3743.63)
   (e)   Prohibited activities by exhibitors.
      (1)   An exhibitor of fireworks licensed under R.C. §§ 3743.50 through
3743.55 who wishes to conduct a public fireworks exhibition shall apply for
approval to conduct the exhibition to the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer
and to the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the
designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
having jurisdiction over the premises.
      (2)   The approval required by division (e)(1) of this section shall be
evidenced by the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief
or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police
Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer, signing a permit for the
exhibition. Any exhibitor of fireworks who wishes to conduct a public fireworks
exhibition may obtain a copy of the form from the State Fire Marshal or, if
available, from the Fire Chief, a fire prevention officer, the Police Chief or
other similar chief law enforcement officer, or a designee of the Police Chief
or other similar chief law enforcement officer.
      (3)   Before a permit is signed and issued to a licensed exhibitor of
fireworks, the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in consultation with the
Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of
the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, shall inspect
the premises on which the exhibition will take place and shall determine that,
in fact, the applicant for the permit is a licensed exhibitor of fireworks.
Each applicant shall show his or her license as an exhibitor of fireworks to
the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer.
      (4)   The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and the Police Chief or
other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police
Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, shall give approval to
conduct a public fireworks exhibition only if satisfied, based on the
inspection, that the premises on which the exhibition will be conducted allow
the exhibitor to comply with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal
pursuant to R.C. § 3743.53(B) and (E) and that the applicant is, in fact, a
licensed exhibitor of fireworks. The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in
consultation with the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement
officer or with the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, may inspect the premises immediately prior to the
exhibition to determine if the exhibitor has complied with the rules, and may
revoke a permit for noncompliance with the rules.
      (5)   If the Council has prescribed a fee for the issuance of a permit
for a public fireworks exhibition, the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer
and Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or their
designee, shall not issue a permit until the exhibitor pays the requisite fee.
      (6)   Each exhibitor shall provide an indemnity bond in the amount of at
least $1,000,000 with surety satisfactory to the Fire Chief or fire prevention
officer and to the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
or the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement
officer, conditioned for the payment of all final judgments that may be
rendered against the exhibitor on account of injury, death or loss to person or
property emanating from the fireworks exhibitor, or proof of insurance coverage
of at least $1,000,000 for liability arising from injury, death or loss of
persons or property emanating from the fireworks exhibition. The Council may
require the exhibitor to provide an indemnity bond or proof of insurance
coverage in amounts greater than those required by this division. The Fire
Chief or fire prevention officer and Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, or their designee, shall not issue a permit until the
exhibitor provides the bond or proof of the insurance coverage required by this
division or by the Council.
      (7)   Each permit for a fireworks exhibition issued by the Fire Chief or
fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief
law enforcement officer, shall contain a distinct number, designate the
municipality, and identify the certified fire safety inspector, Fire Chief or
fire prevention officer who will be present before, during and after the
exhibition, where appropriate. A copy of each permit issued shall be forwarded
by the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, or designee of the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, issuing it to the State Fire Marshal. A
permit is not transferable or assignable.
      (8)   The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, or designee of the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, shall keep a record of issued permits
for fireworks exhibitions. In this list, the Fire Chief, fire prevention
officer, Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or
designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
shall list the name of the exhibitor, his or her license number, the premises
on which the exhibition will be conducted, the date and time of the exhibition,
and the number and political subdivision designation of the permit issued to
the exhibitor for the exhibition.
      (9)   The Council shall require that a certified fire safety inspector,
Fire Chief or fire prevention officer be present before, during and after the
exhibition, and shall require the certified fire safety inspector, Fire Chief
or fire prevention officer to inspect the premises where the exhibition is to
take place and determine whether the exhibition is in compliance with this
section and R.C. Chapter 3743.
(R.C. § 3743.54)
      (10)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall fail to comply with the
applicable requirements of the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant
to R.C. § 3743.53(B) and (E) or to comply with R.C. § 3743.53(C) and (D).
      (11)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall conduct a fireworks
exhibition unless a permit has been secured for the exhibition pursuant to R.C.
§ 3743.54 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or if a permit so
secured is revoked by a Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in consultation
with a Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or with a
designee of a Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
pursuant to those sections.
      (12)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall acquire fireworks for use
at a fireworks exhibition other than in accordance with R.C. §§ 3743.54 and
3743.55, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (13)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks or other person associated with
the conduct of a fireworks exhibition shall have possession or control of, or
be under the influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer or controlled
substance while on the premises on which the exhibition is being conducted.
      (14)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall permit an employee to
assist the licensed exhibitor in conducting fireworks exhibitions unless the
employee is registered with the State Fire Marshal under R.C. § 3743.56.
(R.C. § 3743.64)
   (f)   Possession, sale, discharge and advertising; falsification.
      (1)   No person shall possess fireworks in this municipality or shall
possess for sale or sell fireworks in this municipality, except a licensed
manufacturer of fireworks as authorized by R.C. §§ 3743.02 to 3743.08, a
licensed wholesaler of fireworks as authorized by R.C. §§ 3743.15 to 3743.21, a
shipping permit holder as authorized by R.C. § 3743.40, a licensed fountain
device retailer as authorized by R.C. § 3743.27, a person as authorized by R.C.
§§ 3743.44 and 3743.45, or a licensed exhibitor of fireworks as authorized by
R.C. §§ 3743.50 to 3743.55, or as authorized by any municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to any of these statutes, and except as provided in
R.C. § 3743.80 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (f)(8), R.C. §§ 3743.45 and 3743.80
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and except for licensed
exhibitors of fireworks authorized to conduct a fireworks exhibition pursuant
to R.C. §§ 3743.50 through 3743.55 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, no person shall discharge, ignite, or explode any fireworks in this
municipality.
      (3)   No person shall use in a theater or public hall what is technically
known as fireworks showers, or a mixture containing potassium chlorate and
sulphur.
      (4)   No person shall sell fireworks of any kind to a person under 18
years of age. No person under 18 years of age shall enter a fireworks sales
showroom unless that person is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or other
responsible adult. No person under 18 years of age shall touch or possess
fireworks on a licensed premises without the consent of the licensee. A
licensee may eject any person from a licensed premises that is in any way
disruptive to the safe operation of the premises.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 3743.44, no person, other
than a licensed manufacturer, licensed wholesaler, licensed exhibitor or
shipping permit holder shall possess 1.3G fireworks in this municipality.
      (6)   No person shall negligently discharge, ignite, or explode fireworks
while in possession or control of, or under the influence of, any intoxicating
liquor, beer, or controlled substance.
      (7)   No person shall negligently discharge, ignite, or explode fireworks
on the property of another person without that person’s permission to use
fireworks on that property.
(R.C. § 3743.65(A) - (E), (G), (H))
      (8)   Purchase, use, and local regulation of consumer-grade fireworks.
         A.   Any person who intends to obtain possession in this state of 1.4G
fireworks purchased in this state shall obtain possession of the 1.4G fireworks
only from a licensed retailer, licensed manufacturer, or licensed wholesaler
and shall be subject to this division (f)(8).
         B.   Any person authorized under this division (f)(8) to possess 1.4G
fireworks in this state may discharge, ignite, or explode those fireworks on
private property, with authorization from the property owner, on the following
days each year:
            1.   January 1st;
            2.   Chinese new year’s day;
            3.   May 5th;
            4.   The last Monday in May, and the Saturday and Sunday
immediately preceding that day;
            5.   June 19th;
            6.   July 3rd, 4th, and 5th;
            7.   The first Friday, Saturday, and Sunday before and after July
4th;
            8.   The first Monday of September, and the Saturday and Sunday
immediately preceding that day;
            9.   Diwali;
            10.   December 31st.
         C.   Fireworks discharged, ignited, or exploded pursuant to this
division (f)(8) shall not be considered a public exhibition.
         D.   The municipality may do either of the following:
            (a)   Restrict the dates and times a person may discharge, ignite,
or explode fireworks purchased pursuant to this division (f)(8).
            (b)   Ban the discharge, ignition, or explosion of fireworks
purchased pursuant to this division (f)(8).
         E.   This division (f)(8) does not limit the enforcement of any
ordinance, resolution, or statute that regulates noise, disturbance of the
peace, or disorderly conduct.
(R.C. § 3743.45)
   (g)   Transporting and shipping.
      (1)   No person shall transport fireworks in this municipality except in
accordance with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. §
3743.58.
      (2)   As used in this division, FIREWORKS includes only 1.3G and 1.4G
fireworks. No person shall ship fireworks into this municipality by mail,
parcel post or common carrier unless the person possesses a valid shipping
permit issued under R.C. § 3743.40, and the fireworks are shipped directly to
the holder of a license issued under R.C. § 3743.03, 3743.16 or 3743.51.
      (3)   No person shall ship fireworks within this municipality by mail,
parcel post or common carrier unless the fireworks are shipped directly to the
holder of a license issued under R.C. § 3743.01, 3743.16 or 3743.51.
(R.C. § 3743.66)
   (h)   Exceptions. This section does not prohibit or apply to the following:
      (1)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
in emergency situations of pyrotechnic signaling devices and distress signals
for marine, aviation or highway use;
      (2)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of fusees, torpedoes or other signals necessary for the safe operation of
railroads;
      (3)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of blank cartridges in connection with theaters or shows, or in connection with
athletics as signals for ceremonial purposes;
      (4)   The manufacture for, the transportation, storage, possession or use
by, or the sale to the armed forces of the United States and the militia of
this state, as recognized by the Adjutant General of Ohio, of pyrotechnic
devices;
      (5)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices in which paper or plastic
caps containing 0.25 grains or less of explosive material are used, provided
that they are constructed so that a hand cannot come into contact with a cap
when it is in place for explosion, or apply to the manufacture, sale,
possession, transportation, storage or use of those caps;
      (6)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of novelties and trick noisemakers, auto burglar alarms or model rockets and
model rocket motors designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling
recoverable aero models;
      (7)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of wire sparklers;
      (8)   The conduct of radio-controlled special effect exhibitions that use
an explosive black powder charge of not more than one-quarter pound per charge,
and that are not connected in any manner to propellant charges; provided, that
the exhibition complies with all of the following:
         A.   No explosive aerial display is conducted in the exhibition;
         B.   The exhibition is separated from spectators by not less than 200
feet;
         C.   The person conducting the exhibition complies with regulations of
the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms of the United States Department of
the Treasury and the United States Department of Transportation with respect to
the storage and transport of the explosive black powder used in the exhibition.
(R.C. § 3743.80)
   (i)   Forfeiture and disposal. Fireworks manufactured, sold, possessed,
transported or used in violation of this section shall be forfeited by the
offender. The Fire Marshal’s office or certified fire safety inspector’s office
shall dispose of seized fireworks pursuant to the procedures specified in R.C.
§§ 2981.11 to 2981.13 for the disposal of forfeited property by law enforcement
agencies, and the Fire Marshal or that office is not liable for claims for the
loss of or damages to the seized fireworks.
(R.C. § 3743.68(B))
   (j)   Penalty.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (j)(2) or (j)(3) of this
section, whoever violates any provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of R.C. § 3743.60(I) or 3743.61(I), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, a violation of division (b)(5) of this section
or division (c)(5) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (e)(10) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to any other penalties that may be
imposed on a licensed exhibitor of fireworks under this division and unless the
third sentence of this division applies, the person’s license as an exhibitor
of fireworks or as an assistant exhibitor of fireworks shall be suspended. If
the violation of division (e)(10) of this section results in serious physical
harm to persons or serious physical harm to property, the person’s license as
an exhibitor of fireworks or as an assistant exhibitor of fireworks shall be
revoked.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (f)(6) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, a
person may be convicted at the same trial or proceeding of a violation of
division (f)(6) and a violation of R.C. § 2917.11(B), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that constitutes the basis of the charge of the
violation of division (f)(6).
      (5)   Whoever violates division (b)(7), (b)(8), (c)(7), or (c)(8) is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (f)(7) is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3743.99(C), (D), (F) - (H))
§ 678.13 ENDANGERING AIRCRAFT AND AIRPORT OPERATIONS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   AIR GUN. A hand pistol or rifle that propels its projectile by
means of releasing compressed air, carbon dioxide or other gas.
      (2)   AIRPORT OPERATIONAL SURFACE. Any surface of land or water that is
developed, posted or marked so as to give an observer reasonable notice that
the surface is designed and developed for the purpose of storing, parking,
taxiing or operating aircraft, or any surface of land or water that is actually
being used for any of those purposes.
      (3)   FIREARM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2923.11.
      (4)   SPRING-OPERATED GUN. A hand pistol or rifle that propels a
projectile not less than four or more than five millimeters in diameter by
means of a spring.
   (b)   No person shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly throw an object at, or drop an object upon, any moving
aircraft.
      (2)   Knowingly shoot with a bow and arrow, or knowingly discharge a
firearm, air gun or spring-operated gun, at or toward any aircraft.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly or recklessly shoot with a bow and arrow, or
shall knowingly or recklessly discharge a firearm, air gun or spring-operated
gun, upon or over any airport operational surface. This division does not apply
to the following:
      (1)   An officer, agent or employee of this or any other state or of the
United States, or a law enforcement officer, authorized to discharge firearms
and acting within the scope of his or her duties.
      (2)   A person who, with the consent of the owner or operator of the
airport operational surface or the authorized agent of either, is lawfully
engaged in any hunting or sporting activity or is otherwise lawfully
discharging a firearm.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of endangering
aircraft, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation creates any risk
of physical harm to any person, or if the aircraft that is the subject of the
violation is occupied, endangering aircraft is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of endangering
airport operations, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the violation
creates a risk of physical harm to any person or substantial risk of serious
harm to any person, endangering airport operations is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law. In addition to any other penalty or sanction
imposed for the violation, the hunting license or permit of a person who
violates division (c) of this section while hunting shall be suspended or
revoked pursuant to R.C. § 1533.68.
(R.C. § 2909.08(A) - (E))
§ 678.14 POSSESSING CRIMINAL TOOLS.
   (a)   No person shall possess or have under his or her control any
substance, device, instrument or article, with purpose to use it criminally.
   (b)   Each of the following constitutes prima facie evidence of criminal
purpose:
      (1)   Possession or control of any dangerous ordnance, or the materials
or parts for making a dangerous ordnance, in the absence of circumstances
indicating the dangerous ordnance, materials or parts are intended for a
legitimate use.
      (2)   Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument or
article designed or specially adapted for criminal use.
      (3)   Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument or
article commonly used for criminal purposes, under circumstances indicating the
item is intended for criminal use.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing criminal tools.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, possessing criminal tools is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the circumstances indicate that the
substance, device, instrument or article involved in the offense was intended
for use in the commission of a felony, possessing criminal tools is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2923.24)
§ 678.15 POSSESSION OF AN OBJECT INDISTINGUISHABLE FROM A FIREARM IN A SCHOOL
SAFETY ZONE.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly possess an object in a school safety zone if
both of the following apply:
      (1)   The object is indistinguishable from a firearm, whether or not the
object is capable of being fired.
      (2)   The person indicates that the person possesses the object and that
it is a firearm, or the person knowingly displays or brandishes the object and
indicates that it is a firearm.
   (b)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         A.   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or the
United States who is authorized to carry deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance
and is acting within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s duties;
         B.   A law enforcement officer who is authorized to carry deadly
weapons or dangerous ordnance;
         C.   A security officer employed by a board of education or governing
body of a school during the time that the security officer is on duty pursuant
to that contract of employment;
         D.   1.   Any person not described in divisions (b)(1)A. to (b)(1)C.
of this section who has written authorization from the board of education or
governing body of a school to convey deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance into
a school safety zone or to possess a deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance in a
school safety zone and who conveys or possesses the deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance in accordance with that authorization, provided both of the following
apply:
               a.   Either the person has successfully completed the
curriculum, instruction, and training established under R.C. § 5502.703, or the
person has received a certificate of having satisfactorily completed an
approved basic peace officer training program or is a law enforcement officer;
               b.   The board or governing body has notified the public, by
whatever means the affected school regularly communicates with the public, that
the board or governing body has authorized one or more persons to go armed
within a school operated by the board or governing authority.
            2.   A district board or school governing body that authorizes a
person under division (b)(1)D. of this section shall require that person to
submit to an annual criminal records check conducted in the same manner as R.C.
§ 3319.39 or R.C. § 3319.391.
         E.   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance, and who is subject to and in
compliance with the requirements of R.C. § 109.801, unless the appointing
authority of the person has expressly specified that the exemption provided in
division (b)(1)E. of this section does not apply to the person.
      (2)   This section does not apply to premises upon which home schooling
is conducted. This section also does not apply to a school administrator,
teacher or employee who possesses an object that is indistinguishable from a
firearm for legitimate school purposes during the course of employment, a
student who uses an object that is indistinguishable from a firearm under the
direction of a school administrator, teacher or employee, or any other person
who, with the express prior approval of a school administrator, possesses an
object that is indistinguishable from a firearm for a legitimate purpose,
including the use of the object in a ceremonial activity, a play, re-enactment
or other dramatic presentation, school safety training, or a ROTC activity or
another similar use of the object.
      (3)   This section does not apply to a person who conveys or attempts to
convey a handgun into, or possesses a handgun in, a school safety zone if, at
the time of that conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession of the
handgun, all of the following apply:
         A.   The person does not enter into a school building or onto school
premises and is not at a school activity.
         B.   The person has been issued a concealed handgun license that is
valid at the time of the conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession or the
person is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         C.   The person is in the school safety zone in accordance with 18
U.S.C. § 922(q)(2)(B).
         D.   The person is not knowingly in a place described in R.C. §
2923.126(B)(1) or (B)(3) to (B)(8).
      (4)   This section does not apply to a person who conveys or attempts to
convey a handgun into, or possesses a handgun in, a school safety zone if at
the time of that conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession of the handgun
all of the following apply:
         A.   The person has been issued a concealed handgun license that is
valid at the time of the conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession or the
person is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         B.   The person leaves the handgun in a motor vehicle.
         C.   The handgun does not leave the motor vehicle.
         D.   If the person exits the motor vehicle, the person locks the motor
vehicle.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal possession of an
object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, illegal possession of an object
indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of this section, illegal possession of an object indistinguishable from a
firearm in a school safety zone is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (d)   (1)   In addition to any other penalty imposed upon a person who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section, and subject to
division (d)(2) of this section, if the offender has not attained 19 years of
age, regardless of whether the offender is attending or is enrolled in a school
operated by a board of education or for which the Director of Education and
Workforce prescribes minimum standards under R.C. § 3301.07, the court shall
impose upon the offender a class four suspension of the offender’s probationary
driver’s license, restricted license, driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit or probationary commercial driver’s
license that then is in effect from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4)
and shall deny the offender the issuance of any permit or license of that type
during the period of the suspension. If the offender is not a resident of this
state, the court shall impose a class four suspension of the nonresident
operating privilege of the offender from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02
(A)(4).
      (2)   If the offender shows good cause why the court should not suspend
one of the types of licenses, permits or privileges specified in division (d)
(1) of this section or deny the issuance of one of the temporary instruction
permits specified in division (d)(1) of this section, the court in its
discretion may choose not to impose the suspension, revocation or denial
required in division (d)(1) of this section, but the court, in its discretion,
instead may require the offender to perform community service for a number of
hours determined by the court.
   (e)   As used in this section, “object that is indistinguishable from a
firearm” means an object made, constructed or altered so that, to a reasonable
person without specialized training in firearms, the object appears to be a
firearm.
(R.C. § 2923.122(C) - (G))
Statutory reference:
   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance in a school
safety zone, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.122(A), (B)
§ 678.16 CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSES: POSSESSION OF A REVOKED OR SUSPENDED
LICENSE; ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS; POSTING OF SIGNS PROHIBITING POSSESSION.
   (a)   Possession of a revoked or suspended concealed handgun license.
      (1)   No person, except in the performance of official duties, shall
possess a concealed handgun license that was issued and that has been revoked
or suspended.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (a) is guilty of possessing a
revoked or suspended concealed handgun license, a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 2923.1211(B), (C))
   (b)   Additional restrictions. Pursuant to R.C. § 2923.126:
      (1)   A concealed handgun license that is issued under R.C. § 2923.125
shall expire five years after the date of issuance. A licensee who has been
issued a license under that section shall be granted a grace period of 30 days
after the licensee’s license expires during which the licensee’s license
remains valid. Except as provided in divisions (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this
section, a licensee who has been issued a concealed handgun license under R.C.
§ 2923.125 or 2923.1213 may carry a concealed handgun anywhere in this state if
the license is valid when the licensee is in actual possession of a concealed
handgun. The licensee shall give notice of any change in the licensee’s
residence address to the sheriff who issued the license within 45 days after
that change.
      (2)   A valid concealed handgun license does not authorize the licensee
to carry a concealed handgun in any manner prohibited under R.C. § 2923.12(B)
or in any manner prohibited under R.C. § 2923.16. A valid license does not
authorize the licensee to carry a concealed handgun into any of the following
places:
         A.   A police station, sheriff’s office, or state highway patrol
station, premises controlled by the bureau of criminal identification and
investigation; a state correctional institution, jail, workhouse, or other
detention facility; any area of an airport passenger terminal that is beyond a
passenger or property screening checkpoint or to which access is restricted
through security measures by the airport authority or a public agency; or an
institution that is maintained, operated, managed, and governed pursuant to
R.C. § 5119.14(A) or R.C. § 5123.03(A)(1);
         B.   A school safety zone if the licensee’s carrying the concealed
handgun is in violation of R.C. § 2923.122;
         C.   A courthouse or another building or structure in which a
courtroom is located if the licensee’s carrying the concealed handgun is in
violation of R.C. § 2923.123;
         D.   Any premises or open air arena for which a D permit has been
issued under R.C. Chapter 4303, if the licensee’s carrying the concealed
handgun is in violation of R.C. § 2923.121;
         E.   Any premises owned or leased by any public or private college,
university or other institution of higher education, unless the handgun is in a
locked motor vehicle or the licensee is in the immediate process of placing the
handgun in a locked motor vehicle or unless the licensee is carrying the
concealed handgun pursuant to a written policy, rule, or other authorization
that is adopted by the institution’s board of trustees or other governing body
and that authorizes specific individuals or classes of individuals to carry a
concealed handgun on the premises;
         F.   Any church, synagogue, mosque or other place of worship, unless
the church, synagogue, mosque or other place of worship posts or permits
otherwise;
         G.   Any building that is a government facility of this state or a
political subdivision of this state and that is not a building that is used
primarily as a shelter, restroom, parking facility for motor vehicles, or rest
facility and is not a courthouse or other building or structure in which a
courtroom is located that is subject to division (b)(2)C. of this section,
unless the governing body with authority over the building has enacted a
statute, ordinance, or policy that permits a licensee to carry a concealed
handgun into the building;
         H.   A place in which federal law prohibits the carrying of handguns.
      (3)   A.   Nothing in this division (b) shall negate or restrict a rule,
policy or practice of a private employer that is not a private college,
university, or other institution of higher education concerning or prohibiting
the presence of firearms on the private employer’s premises or property,
including motor vehicles owned by the private employer. Nothing in this
division (b) shall require a private employer of that nature to adopt a rule,
policy or practice concerning or prohibiting the presence of firearms on the
private employer’s premises or property, including motor vehicles owned by the
private employer.
         B.   1.   A private employer shall be immune from liability in a civil
action for any injury, death or loss to person or property that allegedly was
caused by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto the premises or
property of the private employer, including motor vehicles owned by the private
employer, unless the private employer acted with malicious purpose. A private
employer is immune from liability in a civil action for any injury, death or
loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by or related to the
private employer’s decision to permit a licensee to bring, or prohibit a
licensee from bringing, a handgun onto the premises or property of the private
employer.
            2.   A political subdivision shall be immune from liability in a
civil action, to the extent and in the manner provided in R.C. Chapter 2744,
for any injury, death or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused
by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto any premises or property
owned, leased or otherwise under the control of the political subdivision. As
used in this division, POLITICAL SUBDIVISION has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2744.01.
            3.   An institution of higher education shall be immune from
liability in a civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or
property that allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a
handgun onto the premises of the institution, including motor vehicles owned by
the institution, unless the institution acted with malicious purpose. An
institution of higher education is immune from liability in a civil action for
any injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by
or related to the institution’s decision to permit a licensee or class of
licensees to bring a handgun onto the premises of the institution.
            4.   A nonprofit corporation shall be immune from liability in a
civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that
allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto the
premises of the nonprofit corporation, including any motor vehicle owned by the
nonprofit corporation, or to any event organized by the nonprofit corporation,
unless the nonprofit corporation acted with malicious purpose. A nonprofit
corporation is immune from liability in a civil action for any injury, death,
or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by or related to the
nonprofit corporation's decision to permit a licensee to bring a handgun onto
the premises of the nonprofit corporation or to any event organized by the
nonprofit corporation. The immunities described in this division apply to an
entity that leases its property to the nonprofit corporation or permits its
property to be used by the nonprofit corporation for any purpose.
         C.   1.   a.   Except as provided in division (b)(3)C.2. of this
section and R.C. § 2923.1214, the owner or person in control of private land or
premises, and a private person or entity leasing land or premises owned by the
state, the United States, or a political subdivision of the state or the United
States, may post a sign in a conspicuous location on that land or on those
premises prohibiting persons from carrying firearms or concealed firearms on or
onto that land or those premises. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, a person who knowingly violates a posted prohibition of that nature
is guilty of criminal trespass in violation of R.C. § 2911.21(A)(4) and is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If a person knowingly violates a
posted prohibition of that nature and the posted land or premises primarily was
a parking lot or other parking facility, the person is not guilty of criminal
trespass under R.C. § 2911.21 or under any other criminal law of this state or
criminal law, ordinance, or resolution of a political subdivision of this
state, and instead is subject only to a civil cause of action for trespass
based on the violation.
               b.   If a person knowingly violates a posted prohibition of the
nature described in this division and the posted land or premises is a child
care center, type A family child care home, or type B family child care home,
unless the person is a licensee who resides in a type A family child care home
or type B family child care home, the person is guilty of aggravated trespass
in violation of R.C. § 2911.211. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the person
previously has been convicted of a violation of this division or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any offense of
violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for
which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is
dangerous ordnance, the offender is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
            2.   A landlord may not prohibit or restrict a tenant who is a
licensee and who on or after September 9, 2008 enters into a rental agreement
with the landlord for the use of residential premises, and the tenant’s guest
while the tenant is present, from lawfully carrying or possessing a handgun on
those residential premises.
            3.   As used in division (b)(3)C. of this section:
               a.   RESIDENTIAL PREMISES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5321.01, except RESIDENTIAL PREMISES does not include a dwelling unit that is
owned or operated by a college or university.
               b.   LANDLORD, TENANT, and RENTAL AGREEMENT. Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 5321.01.
      (4)   A person who holds a valid concealed handgun license issued by
another state that is recognized by the Attorney General pursuant to a
reciprocity agreement entered into pursuant to R.C. § 109.69 or a person who
holds a valid concealed handgun license under the circumstances described in
R.C. § 109.69(B) has the same right to carry a concealed handgun in this state
as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license under R.C. § 2923.125
and is subject to the same restrictions that apply to a person who has been
issued a license under that section that is valid at the time in question.
      (5)   A.   A peace officer has the same right to carry a concealed
handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license
under R.C. § 2923.125, provided that the officer when carrying a concealed
handgun under authority of this division is carrying validating identification.
For purposes of reciprocity with other states, a peace officer shall be
considered to be a licensee in this state.
         B.   An active duty member of the armed forces of the United States
who is carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of
successful completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training
requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1) has the same right to carry a
concealed handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun
license under R.C. § 2923.125 and is subject to the same restrictions as
specified in this division (b).
         C.   A tactical medical professional who is qualified to carry
firearms while on duty under R.C. § 109.771 has the same right to carry a
concealed handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun
license under R.C. § 2923.125.
         D.   A fire investigator who is qualified to carry firearms while on
duty under R.C. § 109.774 has the same right to carry a concealed handgun in
this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license under R.C. §
2923.125.
      (6)   A.   A qualified retired peace officer who possesses a retired
peace officer identification card issued pursuant to division (b)(6)B. of this
section and a valid firearms requalification certification issued pursuant to
division (b)(6)C. of this section has the same right to carry a concealed
handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license
under R.C. § 2923.125 and is subject to the same restrictions that apply to a
person who has been issued a license issued under that section that is valid at
the time in question. For purposes of reciprocity with other states, a
qualified retired peace officer who possesses a retired peace officer
identification card issued pursuant to division (b)(6)B. of this section and a
valid firearms requalification certification issued pursuant to division (b)
(6)C. of this section shall be considered to be a licensee in this state.
         B.   1.   Each public agency of this state or of a political
subdivision of this state that is served by one or more peace officers shall
issue a retired peace officer identification card to any person who retired
from service as a peace officer with that agency, if the issuance is in
accordance with the agency’s policies and procedures and if the person, with
respect to the person’s service with that agency, satisfies all of the
following:
               a.   The person retired in good standing from service as a peace
officer with the public agency, and the retirement was not for reasons of
mental instability.
               b.   Before retiring from service as a peace officer with that
agency, the person was authorized to engage in or supervise the prevention,
detection, investigation or prosecution of, or the incarceration of any person
for, any violation of law and the person had statutory powers of arrest.
               c.   At the time of the person’s retirement as a peace officer
with that agency, the person was trained and qualified to carry firearms in the
performance of the peace officer’s duties.
               d.   Before retiring from service as a peace officer with that
agency, the person was regularly employed as a peace officer for an aggregate
of 15 years or more, or, in the alternative, the person retired from service as
a peace officer with that agency, after completing any applicable probationary
period of that service, due to a service-connected disability, as determined by
the agency.
            2.   A retired peace officer identification card issued to a person
under division (b)(6)B.1. of this section shall identify the person by name,
contain a photograph of the person, identify the public agency of this state or
of the political subdivision of this state from which the person retired as a
peace officer and that is issuing the identification card, and specify that the
person retired in good standing from service as a peace officer with the
issuing public agency and satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (b)
(6)B.1.a. to (b)(6)B.1.d. of this section. In addition to the required content
specified in this division, a retired peace officer identification card issued
to a person under division (b)(6)B.1. of this section may include the firearms
requalification certification described in division (b)(6)C. of this section,
and if the identification card includes that certification, the identification
card shall serve as the firearms requalification certification for the retired
peace officer. If the issuing public agency issues credentials to active law
enforcement officers who serve the agency, the agency may comply with division
(b)(6)B.1. of this section by issuing the same credentials to persons who
retired from service as a peace officer with the agency and who satisfy the
criteria set forth in divisions (b)(6)B.1.a. to (b)(6)B.1.d. of this section,
provided that the credentials so issued to retired peace officers are stamped
with the word “RETIRED.”
            3.   A public agency of this state or of a political subdivision of
this state may charge persons who retired from service as a peace officer with
the agency a reasonable fee for issuing to the person a retired peace officer
identification card pursuant to division (b)(6)B.1. of this section.
         C.   1.   If a person retired from service as a peace officer with a
public agency of this state or of a political subdivision of this state and the
person satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (b)(6)B.1.a. to (b)
(6)B.1.d. of this section, the public agency may provide the retired peace
officer with the opportunity to attend a firearms requalification program that
is approved for purposes of firearms requalification required under R.C. §
109.801. The retired peace officer may be required to pay the cost of the
course.
            2.   If a retired peace officer who satisfies the criteria set
forth in divisions (b)(6)B.1.a. to (b)(6)B.1.d. of this section attends a
firearms requalification program that is approved for purposes of firearms
requalification required under R.C. § 109.801, the retired peace officer’s
successful completion of the firearms requalification program requalifies the
retired peace officer for purposes of division (b)(6) of this section for five
years from the date on which the program was successfully completed, and the
requalification is valid during that five-year period. If a retired peace
officer who satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (b)(6)B.1.a. to (b)
(6)B.1.d. of this section satisfactorily completes such a firearms
requalification program, the retired peace officer shall be issued a firearms
requalification certification that identifies the retired peace officer by
name, identifies the entity that taught the program, specifies that the retired
peace officer successfully completed the program, specifies the date on which
the course was successfully completed, and specifies that the requalification
is valid for five years from that date of successful completion. The firearms
requalification certification for a retired peace officer may be included in
the retired peace officer identification card issued to the retired peace
officer under division (b)(6)B. of this section.
            3.   A retired peace officer who attends a firearms requalification
program that is approved for purposes of firearms requalification required
under R.C. § 109.801 may be required to pay the cost of the program.
      (7)   For the purpose of division (b) of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         A.   FIRE INVESTIGATOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 109.71
         B.   GOVERNING BODY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 154.01.
         C.   GOVERNMENT FACILITY OF THIS STATE OR A POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OF
THIS STATE. Any of the following:
            1.   A building or part of a building that is owned or leased by
the government of this state or a political subdivision of this state and where
employees of the government of this state or the political subdivision
regularly are present for the purpose of performing their official duties as
employees of the state or political subdivision;
            2.   The office of a Deputy Registrar serving pursuant to R.C.
Chapter 4503 that is used to perform deputy registrar functions.
         D.   NONPROFIT CORPORATION. Means any private organization that is
exempt from federal income taxation pursuant to subsection 501(a) and described
in subsection 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         E.   QUALIFIED RETIRED PEACE OFFICER. A person who satisfies all of
the following:
            1.   The person satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (b)
(6)B.1.a. to (b)(6)B.1.d. of this section.
            2.   The person is not under the influence of alcohol or another
intoxicating or hallucinatory drug or substance.
            3.   The person is not prohibited by federal law from receiving
firearms.
         F.   RETIRED PEACE OFFICER IDENTIFICATION CARD. An identification card
that is issued pursuant to division (b)(6)B. of this section to a person who is
a retired peace officer.
         G.   TACTICAL MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
109.71.
         H.   VALIDATING IDENTIFICATION. Means photographic identification
issued by the agency for which an individual serves as a peace officer that
identifies the individual as a peace officer of the agency.
(R.C. § 2923.126)
   (c)   Posting of signs prohibiting possession. Each person, board, or entity
that owns or controls any place or premises identified in R.C. § 2923.126(B) as
a place into which a valid license does not authorize the licensee to carry a
concealed handgun, or a designee of such a person, board, or entity, shall post
in the following one or more conspicuous locations in the premises a sign that
contains a statement in substantially the following form: “Unless otherwise
authorized by law, pursuant to the Ohio Revised Code, no person shall knowingly
possess, have under the person’s control, convey, or attempt to convey a deadly
weapon or dangerous ordnance onto these premises.”
(R.C. § 2923.1212)
§ 678.17 DEFACED FIREARMS.
   (a)   No person shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Change, alter, remove or obliterate the name of the manufacturer,
model, manufacturer’s serial number or other mark of identification on a
firearm.
      (2)   Possess a firearm knowing or having reasonable cause to believe
that the name of the manufacturer, model, manufacturer’s serial number or other
mark of identification on the firearm has been changed, altered, removed or
obliterated.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) of this section is guilty of
defacing identification marks of a firearm. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, defacing identification marks of a firearm is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (a)(1) of this section, defacing
identification marks of a firearm is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of
possessing a defaced firearm. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
possessing a defaced firearm is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
division (a)(2) of this section, possessing a defaced firearm is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (c)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any firearm on which no
manufacturer’s serial number was inscribed at the time of its manufacture.
(R.C. § 2923.201)
CHAPTER 698: PENALTIES AND SENTENCING
Section
   
698.01   Definitions
   
698.02   Penalties for misdemeanor
   
698.03   Imposing sentence for misdemeanor
   
698.04   Organizational penalties
   
698.05   Multiple sentences
   
698.06   Suspension of driver’s license
CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Administration, enforcement and public service, see
Ch. 654
   Burden and degree of proof, see R.C. § 2901.05
   Classification of offenses, see §
606.02
   Criminal law jurisdiction, see §
606.05
   Criteria for probation; conditions for probation, see R.C. § 2951.02
   Culpable mental states, see §
606.08
   Definition of “imprisoned”, see R.C. § 1.05
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Degree of offense; charge and verdict; prior conviction, see R.C. § 2945.75
   Limitation on prosecutions, see §
606.06
   Obstructing justice, see §
654.07
   Offenses defined, see §
606.03
   Organizational criminal liability, see §
606.09
   Payment of costs and expenses on change of venue, see R.C. § 2931.31
   Personal accountability for organizational conduct, see §
606.10
   Procedure on change of venue, see R.C. § 2931.29
   Requirements for criminal liability, see §
606.07
   Restitution, see R.C. § 2929.281
   Rules of construction, see §
606.04
   Satisfaction of fine; credit for time served, see R.C. § 2947.14
   Sentencing for sexually oriented offenses; sexual predators; registration,
see §
666.99
   Transfer of prisoner on change of venue, see R.C. § 2931.30
   Treatment of drug dependent persons in lieu of conviction, see R.C. §
2951.041
   Venue, see R.C. § 2901.12
§ 698.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   DANGEROUS OFFENDER. A person who has committed an offense, whose
history, character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or she will
be a danger to others, and whose conduct has been characterized by a pattern of
repetitive, compulsive or aggressive behavior with heedless indifference to the
consequences.
   (b)   REPEAT OFFENDER. A person who has a history of persistent criminal
activity and whose character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or
she will commit another offense. It is prima facie evidence that a person is a
REPEAT OFFENDER if any of the following applies:
      (1)   Having been convicted of one or more offenses of violence, as
defined in R.C. § 2901.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent offense of
violence;
      (2)   Having been convicted of one or more sexually oriented offenses, as
defined in R.C. § 2950.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent sexually
oriented offense;
      (3)   Having been convicted of one or more theft offenses, as defined in
R.C. § 2913.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for one or more
of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent theft offense;
      (4)   Having been convicted of one or more felony drug abuse offenses, as
defined in R.C. § 2925.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent felony drug
abuse offense;
      (5)   Having been convicted of two or more felonies, and having been
imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such offense, the person commits a
subsequent offense;
      (6)   Having been convicted of three or more offenses of any type or
degree other than traffic offenses, alcoholic intoxication offenses, or minor
misdemeanors, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such
offense, the person commits a subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 2935.36(E))
§ 698.02 PENALTIES FOR MISDEMEANOR.
   (a)   Considerations in misdemeanor sentencing.
      (1)   A court that sentences an offender for a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor violation of any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, or of any
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised Code, shall be guided
by the overriding purposes of misdemeanor sentencing. The overriding purposes
of misdemeanor sentencing are to protect the public from future crime by the
offender and others and to punish the offender. To achieve those purposes, the
sentencing court shall consider the impact of the offense upon the victim and
the need for changing the offender’s behavior, rehabilitating the defender, and
making restitution to the victim of the offense, the public, or the victim and
the public.
      (2)   A sentence imposed for a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation
of an Ohio Revised Code provision or for a violation of a municipal ordinance
that is subject to division (a)(1) of this section shall be reasonably
calculated to achieve the two overriding purposes of misdemeanor sentencing set
forth in division (a)(1) of this section, commensurate with and not demeaning
to the seriousness of the offender’s conduct and its impact upon the victim,
and consistent with sentences imposed for similar offenses committed by similar
offenders.
      (3)   A court that imposes a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor
or minor misdemeanor violation of an Ohio Revised Code provision or for a
violation of a municipal ordinance that is subject to division (a)(1) of this
section shall not base the sentence upon the race, ethnic background, gender or
religion of the offender.
      (4)   Divisions (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section shall not apply to any
offense that is disposed of by a traffic violations bureau of any court
pursuant to Traffic Rule 13 and shall not apply to any violation of any
provision of the Ohio Revised Code that is a minor misdemeanor and that is
disposed of without a court appearance. Divisions (a)(1) to (a)(3) of this
section do not affect any penalties established by the municipality for a
violation of its ordinances that are not substantially equivalent to a
misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised
Code.
(R.C. § 2929.21)
   (b)   Misdemeanor jail terms.
      (1)   Except as provided in §
666.99 or
698.03 of this code or R.C. § 2929.22 or 2929.23 or division (b)(5) of this
section and unless another term is required or authorized pursuant to law, if
the sentencing court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor
elects or is required to impose a jail term on the offender pursuant to this
chapter, the court shall impose a definite jail term that shall be one of the
following:
         A.   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than 180 days;
         B.   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than 90 days;
         C.   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than 60 days;
         D.   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than 30 days.
      (2)   A.   A court that sentences an offender to a jail term under
division (b) of this section may permit the offender to serve the sentence in
intermittent confinement or may authorize a limited release of the offender as
provided in division (d)(2) of this section. The court retains jurisdiction
over every offender sentenced to jail to modify the jail sentence imposed at
any time, but the court shall not reduce any mandatory jail term.
         B.   1.   If a prosecutor, as defined in R.C. § 2935.01, has filed a
notice with the court that the prosecutor wants to be notified about a
particular case and if the court is considering modifying the jail sentence of
the offender in that case, the court shall notify the prosecutor that the court
is considering modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case. The
prosecutor may request a hearing regarding the court’s consideration of
modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, and, if the
prosecutor requests a hearing, the court shall notify the eligible offender of
the hearing.
            2.   If the prosecutor requests a hearing regarding the court’s
consideration of modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, the
court shall hold the hearing before considering whether or not to release the
offender from the offender’s jail sentence.
      (3)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under division (b)
of this section and the court assigns the offender to a County Jail that has
established a County Jail Industry Program pursuant to R.C. § 5147.30, the
court shall specify, as part of the sentence, whether the offender may be
considered for participation in the program. During the offender’s term in the
County Jail, the court retains jurisdiction to modify its specification
regarding the offender’s participation in the County Jail Industry Program.
      (4)   If a person sentenced to a jail term pursuant to division (b) of
this section, the court may impose as part of the sentence pursuant to R.C. §
2929.28 a reimbursement sanction, and, if the local detention facility in which
the term is to be served is covered by a policy adopted pursuant to R.C. §
307.93, 341.14, 341.19, 341.21, 341.23, 753.02, 753.04, 753.16, 2301.56 or
2947.19 and 2929.37, both of the following apply:
         A.   The court shall specify both of the following as part of the
sentence:
            1.   If the person is presented with an itemized bill pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.37 for payment of the costs of confinement, the person is required
to pay the bill in accordance with that section.
            2.   If the person does not dispute the bill described in division
(b)(4)A.1. of this section and does not pay the bill by the times specified in
R.C. § 2929.37, the Clerk of the Court may issue a certificate of judgment
against the person as described in that section.
         B.   The sentence automatically includes any certificate of judgment
issued as described in division (b)(4)A.2. of this section.
      (5)   A.   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
misdemeanor violation of R.C. § 2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241 or 2907.25, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and to a specification of the
type described in R.C. § 2941.1421 and if the court imposes a jail term on the
offender for the misdemeanor violation, the court may impose upon the offender
an additional definite jail term as follows:
            1.   Subject to division (b)(5)A.2. of this section, an additional
definite jail term of not more than 60 days;
            2.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one or more misdemeanor or felony violations of R.C. § 2907.22,
2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241 or 2907.25, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and also was convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1421 regarding one or more
of those violations, an additional definite jail term of not more than 120
days.
         B.   In lieu of imposing an additional definite jail term under
division (b)(5)A. of this section, the court may directly impose on the
offender a sanction that requires the offender to wear a real-time processing,
continual tracking electronic monitoring device during the period of time
specified by the court. The period of time specified by the court shall equal
the duration of an additional jail term that the court could have imposed upon
the offender under division (b)(5)A. of this section. A sanction imposed under
this division shall commence on the date specified by the court, provided that
the sanction shall not commence until after the offender has served the jail
term imposed for the misdemeanor violation of R.C. § 2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241
or 2907.25, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and any
residential sanction imposed for the violation under division (d) of this
section or R.C. § 2929.26. A sanction imposed under this division shall be
considered to be a community control sanction for purposes of division (c) of
this section or R.C. § 2929.25, and all provisions of this Code and the Ohio
Revised Code that pertain to community control sanctions shall apply to a
sanction imposed under this division, except to the extent that they would by
their nature be clearly inapplicable. The offender shall pay all costs
associated with a sanction imposed under this division, including the cost of
the use of the monitoring device.
      (6)   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor
violation of R.C. § 2903.13 and also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1423 that charges that the
victim of the violation was a woman whom the offender knew was pregnant at the
time of the violation, the court shall impose on the offender a mandatory jail
term that is a definite term of at least 30 days.
      (7)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under this division
(b), the sentencing court retains jurisdiction over the offender and the jail
term. Upon motion of either party or upon the court’s own motion, the court, in
the court’s sole discretion and as the circumstances warrant, may substitute
one or more community control sanctions under division (d) or (e) of this
section for any jail days that are not mandatory jail days.
(R.C. § 2929.24)
   (c)   Misdemeanor community control sanctions.
      (1)   A.   Except as provided in §§
666.99 and
698.03 of this code or R.C. §§ 2929.22 and 2929.23 or when a jail term is
required by law, in sentencing an offender for a misdemeanor, other than a
minor misdemeanor, the sentencing court may do either of the following:
            1.   Directly impose a sentence that consists of one or more
community control sanctions authorized by divisions (d), (e) or (f) of this
section. The court may impose any other conditions of release under a community
control sanction that the court considers appropriate. If the court imposes a
jail term upon the offender, the court may impose any community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions in addition to the jail
term.
            2.   Impose a jail term under division (b) of this section from the
range of jail terms authorized under that division for the offense, suspend all
or a portion of the jail term imposed, and place the offender under a community
control sanction or combination of community control sanctions authorized under
divisions (d), (e) or (f) of this section.
         B.   The duration of all community control sanctions imposed upon an
offender and in effect for an offender at any time shall not exceed five years.
         C.   At sentencing, if a court directly imposes a community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions pursuant to division (c)
(1)A.1. of this section, the court shall state the duration of the community
control sanctions imposed and shall notify the offender that if any of the
conditions of the community control sanctions are violated the court may do any
of the following:
            1.   Impose a longer time under the same community control sanction
if the total time under all of the offender’s community control sanctions does
not exceed the five-year limit specified in division (c)(1)B. of this section;
            2.   Impose a more restrictive community control sanction under
division (d), (e) or (f) of this section, but the court is not required to
impose any particular sanction or sanctions;
            3.   Impose a definite jail term from the range of jail terms
authorized for the offense under division (b) of this section.
      (2)   If a court sentences an offender to any community control sanction
or combination of community control sanctions pursuant to division (c)(1)A.1.
of this section, the sentencing court retains jurisdiction over the offender
and the period of community control for the duration of the period of community
control. Upon the motion of either party or on the court’s own motion, the
court, in the court’s sole discretion and as the circumstances warrant, may
modify the community control sanctions or conditions of release previously
imposed, substitute a community control sanction or condition of release for
another community control sanction or condition of release previously imposed,
or impose an additional community control sanction or condition of release.
      (3)   A.   If a court sentences an offender to any community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions authorized under
division (d), (e) or (f) of this section, the court shall place the offender
under the general control and supervision of the court or of a Department of
Probation in the jurisdiction that serves the court for purposes of reporting
to the court a violation of any of the conditions of the sanctions imposed. If
the offender resides in another jurisdiction and a department of probation has
been established to serve the municipal court or county court in that
jurisdiction, the sentencing court may request the municipal court or the
county court to receive the offender into the general control and supervision
of that department of probation for purposes of reporting to the sentencing
court a violation of any of the conditions of the sanctions imposed. The
sentencing court retains jurisdiction over any offender whom it sentences for
the duration of the sanction or sanctions imposed.
         B.   The sentencing court shall require as a condition of any
community control sanction that the offender abide by the law and not leave the
state without the permission of the court or the offender’s probation officer.
In the interests of doing justice, rehabilitating the offender, and ensuring
the offender’s good behavior, the court may impose additional requirements on
the offender. The offender’s compliance with the additional requirements also
shall be a condition of the community control sanction imposed upon the
offender.
      (4)   A.   If the court imposing sentence upon an offender sentences the
offender to any community control sanction or combination of community control
sanctions authorized under division (d), (e) or (f) of this section, and the
offender violates any of the conditions of the sanctions, the public or private
person or entity that supervises or administers the program or activity that
comprises the sanction shall report the violation directly to the sentencing
court or to the Department of Probation or probation officer with general
control and supervision over the offender. If the public or private person or
entity reports the violation to the Department of Probation or probation
officer, the department or officer shall report the violation to the sentencing
court.
         B.   Except as provided in division (c)(4)C. of this section, if an
offender violates any condition of a community control sanction, the sentencing
court may impose upon the violator one or more of the following penalties:
            1.   A longer time under the same community control sanction if the
total time under all of the community control sanctions imposed on the violator
does not exceed the five-year limit specified in division (c)(1)B. of this
section;
            2.   A more restrictive community control sanction;
            3.   A combination of community control sanctions, including a jail
term.
         C.   If an offender was acting pursuant to R.C. § 2925.11(B)(2)(b), or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a related provision under
R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14, or R.C. § 2925.141, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and in so doing violated the conditions of a
community control sanction based on a minor drug possession offense, as defined
in R.C. § 2925.11, or violated R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. §
2925.141, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the sentencing
court shall not impose any of the penalties described in division (c)(4)B. of
this section based on the violation.
         D.   If the court imposes a jail term upon a violator pursuant to
division (c)(4)B. of this section, the total time spent in jail for the
misdemeanor offense and the violation of a condition of the community control
sanction shall not exceed the maximum jail term available for the offense for
which the sanction that was violated was imposed. The court may reduce the
longer period of time that the violator is required to spend under the longer
sanction or the more restrictive sanction imposed under division (c)(4)B. of
this section by all or part of the time the violator successfully spent under
the sanction that was initially imposed.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if an offender, for
a significant period of time, fulfills the conditions of a community control
sanction imposed pursuant to division (d), (e) or (f) of this section in an
exemplary manner, the court may reduce the period of time under the community
control sanction or impose a less restrictive community control sanction.
Fulfilling the conditions of a community control sanction does not relieve the
offender of a duty to make restitution under division (f) of this section.
(R.C. § 2929.25)
   (d)   Community residential sanction.
      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law, the court
imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor misdemeanor, may
impose upon the offender any community residential sanction or combination of
community residential sanctions under this division (d). Community residential
sanctions include but are not limited to the following:
         A.   A term of up to 180 days in a halfway house or a term in a
halfway house not to exceed the longest jail term available for the offense,
whichever is shorter, if the political subdivision that would have
responsibility for paying the costs of confining the offender in a jail has
entered into a contract with the halfway house for use of the facility for
misdemeanor offenders;
         B.   If the offender is an eligible offender, as defined in R.C. §
307.932, a term in a community alternative sentencing center or district
community alternative sentencing center established and operated in accordance
with that section, in the circumstances specified in that section, with one of
the conditions of the sanction being that the offender successfully complete
the portion of the sentence to be served in the center.
      (2)   A sentence to a community residential sanction under division (d)
(1)B. of this section shall be in accordance with R.C. § 307.932. In all other
cases, the court that sentences an offender to a community residential sanction
under this division (d) may do either or both of the following:
         A.   Permit the offender to serve the offender’s sentence in
intermittent confinement, overnight, on weekends or at any other time or times
that will allow the offender to continue at the offender’s occupation or care
for the offender’s family;
         B.   Authorize the offender to be released so that the offender may
seek or maintain employment, receive education or training, receive treatment,
perform community service, or otherwise fulfill an obligation imposed by law or
by the court. A release pursuant to this division shall be only for the
duration of time that is needed to fulfill the purpose of the release and for
travel that reasonably is necessary to fulfill the purposes of release.
      (3)   The court may order that a reasonable portion of the income earned
by the offender upon a release pursuant to division (d)(2) of this section be
applied to any financial sanction imposed under division (f) of this section.
      (4)   No court shall sentence any person to a prison term for a
misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor, or to a jail term for a minor misdemeanor.
      (5)   If a court sentences a person who has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a misdemeanor to a community residential sanction as described in
division (d)(1) of this section, at the time of reception and at other times
the person in charge of the operation of the halfway house, community
alternative sentencing center, district community alternative sentencing
center, or other place at which the offender will serve the residential
sanction determines to be appropriate, the person in charge of the operation of
the halfway house, community alternative sentencing center, district community
alternative sentencing center, or other place may cause the convicted offender
to be examined and tested for tuberculosis, HIV infection, hepatitis, including
but not limited to hepatitis A, B and C, and other contagious diseases. The
person in charge of the operation of the halfway house, community alternative
sentencing center, district community alternative sentencing center, or other
place at which the offender will serve the residential sanction may cause a
convicted offender in the halfway house, community alternative sentencing
center, district community alternative sentencing center, or other place who
refuses to be tested or treated for tuberculosis, HIV infection, hepatitis,
including but not limited to hepatitis A, B and C, or another contagious
disease to be tested and treated involuntarily.
      (6)   The municipality may enter into a contract with a halfway house for
use of the halfway house to house misdemeanor offenders under a sanction
imposed under division (d)(1)A. of this section.
(R.C. § 2929.26)
   (e)   Nonresidential sanction where jail term is not mandatory.
      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law, the court
imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor misdemeanor, may
impose upon the offender any nonresidential sanction or combination of
nonresidential sanctions authorized under this division. Nonresidential
sanctions include but are not limited to the following:
         A.   A term of day reporting;
         B.   A term of house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous
alcohol monitoring or both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol
monitoring, a term of electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring
without house arrest, or a term of house arrest without electronic monitoring
or continuous alcohol monitoring;
         C.   A term of community service of up to 500 hours for misdemeanor of
the first degree or 200 hours for a misdemeanor of the second, third or fourth
degree;
         D.   A term in a drug treatment program with a level of security for
the offender as determined necessary by the court;
         E.   A term of intensive probation supervision;
         F.   A term of basic probation supervision;
         G.   A term of monitored time;
         H.   A term of drug and alcohol use monitoring, including random drug
testing;
         I.   A curfew term;
         J.   A requirement that the offender obtain employment;
         K.   A requirement that the offender obtain education or training;
         L.   Provided the court obtains the prior approval of the victim, a
requirement that the offender participate in victim-offender mediation;
         M.   If authorized by law, suspension of the offender’s privilege to
operate a motor vehicle, immobilization or forfeiture of the offender’s motor
vehicle, a requirement that the offender obtain a valid motor vehicle
operator’s license, or any other related sanction;
         N.   A requirement that the offender obtain counseling if the offense
is a violation of R.C. § 2919.25 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance or a violation of R.C. § 2903.13 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance involving a person who was a family or household member at
the time of the violation, if the offender committed the offense in the
vicinity of one or more children who are not victims of the offense, and if the
offender or the victim of the offense is a parent, guardian, custodian or
person in loco parentis of one or more of those children. This division does
not limit the court in requiring that the offender obtain counseling for any
offense or in any circumstance not specified in this division.
      (2)   If the court imposes a term of community service pursuant to
division (e)(1)C. of this section, the offender may request that the court
modify the sentence to authorize the offender to make a reasonable
contribution, as determined by the court, to the general fund of the county,
municipality, or other local entity that provides funding to the court. The
court may grant the request if the offender demonstrates a change in
circumstances from the date the court imposes the sentence or that the
modification would otherwise be in the interests of justice. If the court
grants the request, the offender shall make a reasonable contribution to the
court, and the clerk of the court shall deposit that contribution into the
general fund of the county, municipality, or other local entity that provides
funding to the court. If more than one entity provides funding to the court,
the clerk shall deposit a percentage of the reasonable contribution equal to
the percentage of funding the entity provides to the court in that entity’s
general fund.
      (3)   In addition to the sanctions authorized under division (e)(1) of
this section, the court imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a
minor misdemeanor, upon an offender who is not required to serve a mandatory
jail term may impose any other sanction that is intended to discourage the
offender or other persons from committing a similar offense if the sanction is
reasonably related to the overriding purposes and principles of misdemeanor
sentencing.
      (4)   The court imposing a sentence for a minor misdemeanor may impose a
term of community service in lieu of all or part of a fine. The term of
community service imposed for a minor misdemeanor shall not exceed 30 hours.
After imposing a term of community service, the court may modify the sentence
to authorize a reasonable contribution, as determined by the court, to the
appropriate general fund as provided in division (e)(2) of this section.
(R.C. § 2929.27)
   (f)   Financial sanctions.
      (1)   In addition to imposing court costs pursuant to R.C. § 2947.23, the
court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor, including a minor
misdemeanor, may sentence the offender to any financial sanction or combination
of financial sanctions authorized under this division (f) and, if the offender
is being sentenced for a criminal offense as defined in R.C. § 2930.01, shall
sentence the offender to make restitution pursuant to this division (f) and
R.C. § 2929.281. If the court, in its discretion or as required by this
division (f), imposes one or more financial sanctions, the financial sanctions
that may be imposed pursuant to this division (f) include, but are not limited
to, the following:
         A.   Restitution.
            1.   Unless the misdemeanor offense could be disposed of by the
traffic violations bureau serving the court under Traffic Rule 13, restitution
by the offender to the victim of the offender’s crime or the victim’s estate,
in an amount based on the victim's economic loss. The court may not impose
restitution as a sanction pursuant to this division if the offense could be
disposed of by the traffic violations bureau serving the court under Traffic
Rule 13. If the court requires restitution, the court shall order that the
restitution be made to the victim in open court or to the adult probation
department that serves the jurisdiction or the clerk of the court on behalf of
the victim.
            2.   The court shall determine the amount of restitution to be paid
by the offender. The victim, victim’s representative, victim’s attorney, if
applicable, the prosecutor or the prosecutor’s designee, and the offender may
provide information relevant to the determination of the amount of restitution.
The amount the court orders as restitution shall not exceed the amount of the
economic loss suffered by the victim as a direct and proximate result of the
commission of the offense. If the court imposes restitution for the cost of
accounting or auditing done to determine the extent of economic loss, the court
may order restitution for any amount of the victim’s costs of accounting or
auditing provided that the amount of restitution is reasonable and does not
exceed the value of property or services stolen or damaged as a result of the
offense. If the court decides to or is required to impose restitution, the
court shall hold an evidentiary hearing on restitution if the offender, victim,
victim’s representative, victim’s attorney, if applicable, or victim’s estate
disputes the amount of restitution. The court shall determine the amount of
full restitution by a preponderance of the evidence.
            3.   All restitution payments shall be credited against any
recovery of economic loss in a civil action brought by the victim or the
victim’s estate against the offender. No person may introduce evidence of an
award of restitution under this division (f) in a civil action for purposes of
imposing liability against an insurer under R.C. § 3937.18.
            4.   The court may order that the offender pay a surcharge, of not
more than 5% of the amount of the restitution otherwise ordered, to the entity
responsible for collecting and processing restitution payments.
            5.   The victim, victim’s attorney, if applicable, or the attorney
for the victim’s estate may request that the prosecutor in the case file a
motion, or the offender may file a motion, for modification of the payment
terms of any restitution ordered. If the court grants the motion, it may modify
the payment terms as it determines appropriate but shall not reduce the amount
of restitution ordered, except as provided in R.C. § 2929.281(A).
         B.   Fines. A fine of the type described in divisions (f)(1)B.1. and
(f)(1)B.2. of this section payable to the appropriate entity as required by
law:
            1.   A fine in the following amount:
               a.   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than
$1,000;
               b.   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than $750;
               c.   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than $500;
               d.   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than $250;
               e.   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than $150.
            2.   A state fine or cost as defined in R.C. § 2949.111.
         C.   Reimbursement.
            1.   Reimbursement by the offender of any or all of the costs of
sanctions incurred by the government, including but not limited to the
following:
               a.   All or part of the costs of implementing any community
control sanction, including a supervision fee under R.C. § 2951.021 and the
costs of global positioning system device monitoring;
               b.   All or part of the costs of confinement in a jail or other
residential facility, including but not limited to a per diem fee for room and
board, the costs of medical and dental treatment, and the costs of repairing
property damaged by the offender while confined;
               c.   All or part of the cost of purchasing and using an
immobilizing or disabling device, including a certified ignition interlock
device, or a remote alcohol monitoring device that a court orders an offender
to use under R.C. § 4510.13.
            2.   The amount of reimbursement under division (f)(1)C.1. of this
section shall not exceed the total amount of reimbursement the offender is able
to pay and shall not exceed the actual cost of the sanctions. The court may
collect any amount of reimbursement the offender is required to pay under that
division. If the court does not order reimbursement under that division,
confinement costs may be assessed pursuant to a repayment policy adopted under
R.C. § 2929.37. In addition, the offender may be required to pay the fees
specified in R.C. § 2929.38 in accordance with that section.   
      (2)   A.   If the court determines a hearing is necessary, the court may
hold a hearing to determine whether the offender is able to pay the financial
sanction imposed pursuant to this division (f) or court costs or is likely in
the future to be able to pay the sanction or costs.
         B.   If the court determines that the offender is indigent and unable
to pay the financial sanction or court costs, the court shall consider imposing
and may impose a term of community service under division (e)(1) of this
section in lieu of imposing a financial sanction or court costs. If the court
does not determine that the offender is indigent, the court may impose a term
of community service under division (e)(1) of this section in lieu of or in
addition to imposing a financial sanction under this division (f) and in
addition to imposing court costs. The court may order community service for a
minor misdemeanor pursuant to division (e)(4) of this section in lieu of or in
addition to imposing a financial sanction under this section and in addition to
imposing court costs. If a person fails to pay a financial sanction or court
costs, the court may order community service in lieu of the financial sanction
or court costs.
      (3)   A.   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon the
offender pursuant to division (f)(1)C. of this section to pay the costs
incurred by a county pursuant to any sanction imposed under division (d), (e)
or (f) of this section or in operating a facility used to confine offenders
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (d) of this section to the County
Treasurer. The County Treasurer shall deposit the reimbursements in the
county’s General Fund. The county shall use the amounts deposited in the Fund
to pay the costs incurred by the county pursuant to any sanction imposed under
division (d), (e) or (f) of this section or in operating a facility used to
confine offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (d) of this
section.
         B.   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon the offender
pursuant to division (f)(1)C. of this section to pay the costs incurred by a
municipal corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed under division (d), (e)
or (f) of this section or in operating a facility used to confine offenders
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (d) of this section to the
Treasurer of the municipal corporation. The Treasurer shall deposit the
reimbursements in the municipal corporation’s General Fund. The municipal
corporation shall use the amounts deposited in the Fund to pay the costs
incurred by the municipal corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed under
division (d), (e) or (f) of this section or in operating a facility used to
confine offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (d) of this
section.
         C.   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed pursuant to
division (f)(1)C. of this section for the costs incurred by a private provider
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (d), (e) or (f) of this section
to the provider.
      (4)   A.   In addition to any other fine that is or may be imposed under
this section, the court imposing sentence upon an offender for misdemeanor
domestic violence or menacing by stalking may impose a fine of not less than
$70 nor more than $500, which shall, except as provided in divisions (f)(4)B.
and (f)(4)C. of this section, be transmitted to the Treasurer of Ohio to be
credited to the address confidentiality program fund created by R.C. § 111.48.
         B.   A court that imposes a fine under division (f)(4)A. of this
section may retain up to 25% of amounts collected in satisfaction of the fine
to cover administrative costs.
         C.   A court that imposes a fine under division (f)(4)A. of this
section may assign up to 25% of amounts collected in satisfaction of the fine
to reimburse the prosecuting attorney for costs associated with prosecution of
the offense.
      (5)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this division (f)(5), a
financial sanction imposed under division (f)(1) of this section is a judgment
in favor of the state or the political subdivision that operates the court that
imposed the financial sanction, and the offender subject to the financial
sanction is the judgment debtor. A financial sanction of reimbursement imposed
pursuant to division (f)(1)C.1.a. of this section upon an offender is a
judgment in favor of the entity administering the community control sanction,
and the offender subject to the financial sanction is the judgment debtor. A
financial sanction of reimbursement imposed pursuant to division (f)(1)C.1.b.
of this section upon an offender confined in a jail or other residential
facility is a judgment in favor of the entity operating the jail or other
residential facility, and the offender subject to the financial sanction is the
judgment debtor. A financial sanction of restitution imposed pursuant to
division (f)(1)A. of this section is an order in favor of the victim of the
offender’s criminal act that can be collected through a certificate of judgment
as described in division (f)(5)B.1. of this section, through execution as
described in division (f)(5)B.2. of this section or through an order as
described in division (f)(5)B.3. of this section and the offender shall be
considered for purposes of the collection as a judgment debtor.
         B.   Once a financial sanction is imposed as a judgment or order under
this division, the victim, private provider, state or political subdivision may
do any of the following:
            1.   Obtain from the Clerk of the Court in which the judgment was
entered, at no charge, a certificate of judgment that shall be in the same
manner and form as a certificate of judgment issued in a civil action;
            2.   Obtain execution of the judgment or order through any
available procedure, including any of the procedures identified in R.C. §
2929.18(D)(1) and (D)(2) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
            3.   Obtain an order for the assignment of wages of the judgment
debtor under R.C. § 1321.33 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (6)   The civil remedies authorized under division (f)(5) of this section
for the collection of the financial sanction supplement, but do not preclude,
enforcement of the criminal sentence.
      (7)   Each court imposing a financial sanction upon an offender under
this division (f) may designate the Clerk of the Court or another person to
collect the financial sanction. The Clerk, or another person authorized by law
or the court to collect the financial sanction may do the following:
         A.   Enter into contracts with one or more public agencies or private
vendors for the collection of amounts due under the sanction. Before entering
into a contract for the collection of amounts due from an offender pursuant to
any financial sanction imposed pursuant to this division (f), a court shall
comply with R.C. §§ 307.86 to 307.92.
         B.   Permit payment of all or any portion of the sanction in
installments, by financial transaction device if the court is a county court or
a municipal court operated by a county, or by any other reasonable method, in
any time, and on any terms that the court considers just. If the court is a
county court or a municipal court operated by a county, the acceptance of
payments by any financial transaction device shall be governed by the policy
adopted by the Board of County Commissioners of the county pursuant to R.C. §
301.28. If the court is a municipal court not operated by a county, the Clerk
may pay any fee associated with processing an electronic transfer out of public
money or may charge the fee to the offender.
         C.   To defray administrative costs, charge a reasonable fee to an
offender who elects a payment plan rather than a lump sum payment of any
financial sanction.
      (8)   No financial sanction imposed under this division (f) shall
preclude a victim from bringing a civil action against the offender.
      (9)   If the court imposes restitution, fines, fees, or incarceration
costs on a business or corporation, it is the duty of the person authorized to
make disbursements from assets of the business or corporation to pay the
restitution, fines, fees, or incarceration costs from those assets.
(R.C. § 2929.28)
§ 698.03 IMPOSING SENTENCE FOR MISDEMEANOR.
   (a)   (1)   Unless a mandatory jail term is required to be imposed by R.C. §
1547.99(G), 4510.14(B) or 4511.19(G), or any other provision of the Revised
Code, or any municipal ordinance, a court that imposes a sentence under this
chapter upon an offender for a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor has discretion
to determine the most effective way to achieve the purposes and principles of
sentencing set forth in § 698.02.
      (2)   Unless a specific sanction is required to be imposed or is
precluded from being imposed by the section setting forth an offense or the
penalty for an offense or by any provision of § 666.99 or 698.02 of this code
or R.C. §§ 2929.23 to 2929.28, a court that imposes a sentence upon an offender
for a misdemeanor may impose on the offender any sanction or combination of
sanctions under § 698.02(b) to (f). The court shall not impose a sentence that
imposes an unnecessary burden on local government resources.
   (b)   (1)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, the
court shall consider all of the following factors:
         A.   The nature and circumstances of the offense or offenses;
         B.   Whether the circumstances regarding the offender and the offense
or offenses indicate that the offender has a history of persistent criminal
activity and that the offender’s character and condition reveal a substantial
risk that the offender will commit another offense;
         C.   Whether the circumstances regarding the offender and the offense
or offenses indicate that the offender’s history, character and condition
reveal a substantial risk that the offender will be a danger to others and that
the offender’s conduct has been characterized by a pattern of repetitive,
compulsive or aggressive behavior with heedless indifference to the
consequences;
         D.   Whether the victim’s youth, age, disability or other factor made
the victim particularly vulnerable to the offense or made the impact of the
offense more serious;
         E.   Whether the offender is likely to commit future crimes in
general, in addition to the circumstances described in divisions (b)(1)B. and
(b)(1)C. of this section;
         F.   Whether the offender has an emotional, mental, or physical
condition that is traceable to the offender’s service in the armed forces of
the United States and that was a contributing factor in the offender’s
commission of the offense or offenses;
         G.   The offender’s military service record.
      (2)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, if the
offender enters an Alford plea, the sentencing court shall not consider whether
the offender showed genuine remorse for the offense.
      (3)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, in
addition to complying with division (b)(1) of this section, the court may
consider any other factors that are relevant to achieving the purposes and
principles of sentencing set forth in §
698.02(a).
   (c)   Before imposing a jail term as a sentence for a misdemeanor, a court
shall consider the appropriateness of imposing a community control sanction or
a combination of community control sanctions under §
698.02(c), (d), (e), and (f). A court may impose the longest jail term
authorized under §
698.02(b) only upon offenders who commit the worst forms of the offense or upon
offenders whose conduct and response to prior sanctions for prior offenses
demonstrate that the imposition of the longest jail term is necessary to deter
the offender from committing a future criminal offense.
   (d)   (1)   A sentencing court shall consider any relevant oral and written
statement made by the victim, the victim’s representative, the victim’s
attorney, if applicable, the defendant, the defense attorney, and the
prosecuting authority regarding sentencing for a misdemeanor. This division
does not create any rights to notice other than those rights authorized by R.C.
Chapter 2930.
      (2)   At the time of sentencing for a misdemeanor or as soon as possible
after sentencing, the court shall notify the victim of the offense of the
victim’s right to file an application for an award of reparations pursuant to
R.C. §§ 2743.51 to 2743.72.
(R.C. § 2929.22)
§ 698.04 ORGANIZATIONAL PENALTIES.
   (a)   Regardless of the other penalties provided in §
698.02, an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to §
606.09 shall be fined by the court as follows:
      (1)   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than $5,000;
      (2)   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than $4,000;
      (3)   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than $3,000;
      (4)   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than $2,000;
      (5)   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than $1,000;
      (6)   For a misdemeanor not specifically classified, not more than
$2,000;
      (7)   For a minor misdemeanor not specifically classified, not more than
$1,000.
   (b)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not specifically
classified, and the section defining the offense or penalty plainly indicates a
purpose to impose the penalty provided for violation upon organizations, then
that penalty shall be imposed in lieu of the penalty provided in this section.
   (c)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not specifically
classified, and the penalty provided includes a higher fine than that provided
in this section, then the penalty imposed shall be pursuant to the penalty
provided for violation of the section defining the offense.
   (d)   This section does not prevent the imposition of available civil
sanctions against an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to §
606.09, either in addition to or in lieu of a fine imposed pursuant to this
section.
(R.C. § 2929.31)
§ 698.05 MULTIPLE SENTENCES.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, R.C. § 2929.14(C)
or 2971.03(D) or (E), a prison term, jail term or sentence of imprisonment
shall be served concurrently with any other prison term, jail term or sentence
of imprisonment imposed by a court of this municipality, the state, another
state or the United States. Except as provided in division (b)(2) of this
section, a jail term or sentence of imprisonment for misdemeanor shall be
served concurrently with a prison term or sentence of imprisonment for felony
served in a state or federal correctional institution.
   (b)   (1)   A jail term or sentence of imprisonment for a misdemeanor shall
be served consecutively to any other prison term, jail term or sentence of
imprisonment when the trial court specifies that it is to be served
consecutively or when it is imposed for a misdemeanor violation of R.C. §
2907.322, 2921.34 or 2923.131. When consecutive sentences are imposed for
misdemeanors under this division, the term to be served is the aggregate of the
consecutive terms imposed, except that the aggregate term to be served shall
not exceed 18 months.
      (2)   A jail term or sentence of imprisonment imposed for a misdemeanor
violation of R.C. § 4510.14, 4510.16, 4510.21 or 4511.19, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be served consecutively to a prison term
that is imposed for a felony violation of R.C. § 2903.06, 2903.08 or 4511.19 or
a felony violation of R.C. § 2903.04 involving the operation of a vehicle by
the offender and that is served in a state correctional institution when the
trial court specifies that it is to be served consecutively. When consecutive
jail terms or sentences of imprisonment and prison terms are imposed for one or
more misdemeanors and one or more felonies under this division, the term to be
served is the aggregate of the consecutive terms imposed, and the offender
shall serve all terms imposed for a felony before serving any term imposed for
a misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2929.41)
§ 698.06 SUSPENSION OF DRIVER’S LICENSE.
   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4510.07 or in any other provision of
the Revised Code, whenever an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of any provision of this code of ordinances that is substantially
equivalent to a provision of the Revised Code, and a court is permitted or
required to suspend a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit for a violation of that provision, a court, in addition to any other
penalties authorized by law, may suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privileges for the period
of time the court determines appropriate, but the period of suspension imposed
for the violation of the provision of this code of ordinances shall not exceed
the period of suspension that is permitted or required to be imposed for the
violation of the provision of the Revised Code to which the provision of this
code of ordinances is substantially equivalent.
(R.C. § 4510.05)
PART EIGHT - BUSINESS REGULATION AND TAXATION CODE
   
TITLE TWO - Business Regulations
      
Chap. 804.   Peddlers and Solicitors
      
Chap. 808.   Video Service Provider
   
TITLE FOUR - Taxation
      
Chap. 890.   General Tax Provisions
      
Chap. 892.   Earned Income Tax
TITLE TWO - BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      
Chap. 804.   Peddlers and Solicitors
      
Chap. 808.   Video Service Provider
CHAPTER 804: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
804.01   Definitions
   
804.02   License required
   
804.03   Exceptions
   
804.04   License application requirements
   
804.05   License issuance; expiration
   
804.06   Appeals
   
804.07   Carrying or exhibiting license; identification
   
804.08   Hours regulated; days prohibited
   
804.09   Peddling prohibited where signs posted
   
804.10   Harassing or annoying prospective customers
   804.10   Application for license to solicit door-to-door
   
804.99   Penalty
§ 804.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GOODS or WARE. Includes any item of personal property, including, but not
limited to, merchandise, appliances, magazines, magazine subscriptions, books,
photographs and produce, but excluding newspapers.
   ITINERANT MERCHANT or VENDOR. A person with a fixed place of business who
has been located in the village for a period of less than one year and who
offers for sale goods or wares.
   PEDDLER. A person with no fixed place of business who carries wares or goods
with him or her, which he or she is prepared to sell at the time he or she
solicits business and who deals primarily with consumers.
   PERSON. An individual, partnership or corporation.
   SOLICITOR or CANVASSER. A person with no fixed place of business who deals
primarily with consumers and who takes orders for goods for future delivery or
for personal services to be furnished in the future, whether by telephone or by
house-to-house or business-to-business canvassing.   
(Ord. 768, passed 4-22-2008)
§ 804.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No peddler, solicitor or canvasser or any itinerant merchant shall solicit
sales of sell, offers for sale, barter or exchange goods, wares or personal
services without first obtaining from the Fiscal Officer a license to do so.
The license fee is $10, payable to the village. Only cash, credit cards, money
orders or cashier checks will be accepted. No checks.
(Ord. 768, passed 4-22-2008)
§ 804.03 EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   No owner of any product of his or her own raising, or the manufacturer
of any articles manufactured by him or her, need obtain a license to vend or
sell, by himself or herself or his or her agent, any such article or product,
nor shall the licensing provisions of this chapter apply to persons selling by
sample only.
   (b)   The licensing provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a person
making delivery of goods, wares or merchandise therefor sold by an
establishment having a permanent place of business; or to a person making sales
of the following items of daily household consumption: baked goods, fruits and
vegetables or dairy products; or to a person soliciting the purchase of goods,
wares, merchandise or gifts for or on behalf of any recognized educational,
civic, religious or charitable organization.
(Ord. 768, passed 4-22-2008)
§ 804.04 LICENSE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   License for peddlers, solicitors and itinerant merchants shall be
obtained for a fee of $10 from the Fiscal Officer. The applicant shall furnish
a recent photograph, not more than one year old and approximately a three-inch
by three-inch square and shall fill out the application giving his or her name,
home address, name and address of the person by whom employed, length of
service with such employer, all places of residence and all employment during
the preceding year, the nature and character of the goods to be sold or
services to be furnished by the applicant, names of other towns in which the
applicant has recently conducted a business for which licenses are herein
required and a personal description of the applicant. Fingerprints of the
applicant shall also be furnished in duplicate.
   (b)   Such applicant shall be made at least ten days before the license is
required in order to give the Fiscal Officer an opportunity to investigate the
moral character of the applicant.
(Ord. 768, passed 4-22-2008)
§ 804.05 LICENSE ISSUANCE; EXPIRATION.
   If the Fiscal Officer determines, after a reasonable investigation, that the
applicant is of good moral character and proposes to engage in a lawful
commercial or professional enterprise, a license shall be issued which shall
expire on December 31 of the year in which the license is issued.
(Ord. 768, passed 4-22-2008)
§ 804.06 APPEALS.
   Any applicant who has applied for a license in accordance with this chapter,
and to whom the Fiscal Officer has, after investigation, denied a license,
shall be entitled to appeal to Council. Notice of such appeal shall be filed
with the Fiscal Officer within five days after the denial of the license by the
Fiscal Officer. Council, on appeal, may grant or reject the application for a
license.
(Ord. 768, passed 4-22-2008)
§ 804.07 CARRYING OR EXHIBITING LICENSE; IDENTIFICATION.
   The license shall be exhibited in the place of business by itinerant
merchants, and shall be carried by any peddler or solicitor at all times when
peddling or soliciting and shall be exhibited to any person solicited or any
police officer on request. In the case of peddlers or solicitors, an
identification badge shall be issued which shall be worn while engaging in
business.
(Ord. 768, passed 4-22-2008)
§ 804.08 HOURS REGULATED; DAYS PROHIBITED.
   All business done under a license issued by virtue of this chapter shall be
conducted between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on weekdays, except by
previous appointment with the owner. No business shall be conducted on Sunday
or on the following specified legal holidays, or any other holiday, except by
previous appointment with the owner: New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Martin
Luther King Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
(Ord. 768, passed 4-22-2008)
§ 804.09 PEDDLING PROHIBITED WHERE SIGNS POSTED.
   No peddler, canvasser or solicitor shall knock at the door of or ring the
bell of any private home, apartment or apartment building in the village where
there is displayed at the entrance a notice reading “No Solicitors, Peddlers or
Canvassers Allowed” or which otherwise clearly purports to prohibit persons
from doing so, unless such person is or has been invited upon such premises by
the owner, lessee or occupant thereof.
(Ord. 768, passed 4-22-2008)
§ 804.10 HARASSING OR ANNOYING PROSPECTIVE CUSTOMERS.
   No peddler, solicitor or canvasser shall vex, annoy or harass any person by
importuning such person to purchase or to look at his or her goods or wares;
nor shall any peddler, solicitor or canvasser enter any private house or
residence without being invited to come in.
(Ord. 768, passed 4-22-2008)
§ 804.10 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE TO SOLICIT DOOR-TO-DOOR.
 
APPLICATION FOR LICENSE TO SOLICIT DOOR-TO-DOOR
 
1. Risingsun Village Ordinance No.                            requires persons offering merchandise or services door-to-door in the Village to complete this application and contain a license. There will be a $10 fee. A picture identification (driver’s license, etc.) is required. The ID will be photocopied and kept with your application. (Print legibly)
 
2. You must carry the license issued by the Fiscal Officer with you at all times while conducting business in the Village.
 
3. You must exhibit the license to a resident of any household or to any police officer who asks to see it.
 
4. Solicitation hours are limited to 10:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
 
5. Violations of Ordinance No.                             are punishable as a minor misdemeanor offense. Each day the violation continues shall be charged as a separate offense.
 
Full Name                                                                                                                                                         
 
Home Address                                                                                                                                          
 
Name of Business you Represent                                                                                                                           
 
Business Address                                                                        Business phone (           )                                    
If self employed, number where you can be reached
 
Supervisor/Owner of Business                                                      Phone number (           )                                     
 
Please list all addresses where you have lived in the preceding (12) months:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Please list the name, address and phone number of all your employers for the past twelve (12) months:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
 
Please describe the goods, merchandise or services you intend to offer in the Village of Risingsun. Also provide the price range for said goods or services.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
 
(Ord. 768, passed 4-22-2008)
§ 804.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and fined not more than $50 for each offense. Each day’s continued
violation shall be a separate offense.
(Ord. 768, passed 4-22-2008)
CHAPTER 808: VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDERS
Section
   
808.01   VSP fee calculation
   
808.02   Fee payments
   
808.03   Notice of fee
§ 808.01 VSP FEE CALCULATION.
   This Village Council hereby establishes a VSP fee that is calculated by
applying a VSP fee percentage of 5% to the video service provider’s gross
revenues, as defined in § 1332.32(B) of the Video Law. All video service
providers and cable television operators providing video service in the village
shall apply the VSP fee percentage against gross revenues, as defined in the
Video Law.
(Ord. 805, passed 3-22-2011)
§ 808.02 FEE PAYMENTS.
   Not sooner than 45 nor later than 60 days after the end of each calendar
quarter, a video service provider shall pay a video service provider fee to
each municipal corporation and each township in which it offers video service.
The fee shall be calculated quarterly by determining the provider’s gross
revenue for the preceding calendar quarter, as described in R.C. § 1332.32(B),
and multiplying the result by the percentage, specified in R.C. § 1332.32(C)(1)
(a) or (C)(1)(b).
(R.C. § 1332.32(A)) (Ord. 805, passed 3-22-2011)
§ 808.03 NOTICE OF FEE.
   The Mayor is authorized and directed to provide any video service provider
with notice of the VSP fee percentage as determined by this Council in §
808.01, which notice shall be given by certified mail, upon receipt of notice
from such video service provider that it will begin providing video service in
the village pursuant to a state-issued video service authorization.
(Ord. 805, passed 3-22-2011)
TITLE FOUR - TAXATION
      
Chap. 890.   General Tax Provisions
      
Chap. 892.   Earned Income Tax
CHAPTER 890: GENERAL TAX PROVISIONS
Section
   
890.01   Adopting tax ordinance for current expenses and other expenditures
§ 890.01 ADOPTING TAX ORDINANCE FOR CURRENT EXPENSES AND OTHER EXPENDITURES.
   Pursuant to R.C. § 5705.28(B)(2)(a), the village does hereby adopt the tax
ordinance for the revenues and expenditures of the village for the calendar
year beginning January 1, 2022.
(Ord. O2021-008, passed 6-22-2021)
CHAPTER 892: EARNED INCOME TAX
Section
   
892.01   Purpose
   
892.02   Adoption of tax code
   
892.03   Collection of tax after termination of ordinance
   
892.04   Authority to levy tax
   
892.05   Purposes of tax; rate
   
892.06   Allocation of funds
   
892.07   Effective date
   
892.08   Definitions
   
892.09   Determining municipal taxable income for individuals
   
892.10   Domicile
   
892.11   Exemption for member or employee of general assembly and certain
judges
   
892.12   Collection at source; withholding from qualifying wages
   
892.13   Collection at source; occasional entrant
   
892.14   Collection at source; casino and VLT
   
892.15   Determining municipal taxable income for taxpayers who are not
individuals
   
892.16   Net profit; income subject to net profit tax; alternative
apportionment
   
892.17   Consolidated federal income tax return
   
892.18   Tax credit for businesses that foster new jobs in the state
   
892.19   Tax credits to foster job retention
   
892.20   Declaration of estimated tax
   
892.21   Refundable credit for qualifying loss
   
892.22   Credit for person working in joint economic development district or
zone
   
892.23   Credit for tax beyond statute for obtaining refund
   
892.24   Return and payment of tax
   
892.25   Return and payment of tax; individuals serving in combat zone
   
892.26   Use of state business gateway; types of filings authorized
   
892.27   Extension of time to file
   
892.28   Amended returns
   
892.29   Refunds
   
892.30   Penalty, interest, fees and charges
   
892.31   Audit
   
892.32   Rounding
   
892.33   Authority of Tax Administrator; administrative powers of the Tax
Administrator
   
892.34   Authority of Tax Administrator; compromise of claim and payment over
time
   
892.35   Authority of Tax Administrator; right to examine
   
892.36   Authority of Tax Administrator; requiring identifying information
   
892.37   Confidentiality
   
892.38   Fraud
   
892.39   Opinion of the Tax Administrator
   
892.40   Assessment; appeal based on presumption of delivery
   
892.41   Local Board of Tax Review; appeal to Local Board of Tax Review
   
892.42   Actions to recover; statute of limitations
   
892.43   Adoption of rules
   
892.44   Filing net profit taxes; election to be subject to provisions of this
chapter
   
892.45   Definitions
   
892.46   Applicability; taxable situs; apportionment
   
892.47   Information provided to Tax Administrator; confidentiality
   
892.48   Filing of annual return; remittance; disposition of funds
   
892.49   Electronic filing
   
892.50   Consolidated returns
   
892.51   Failure to pay tax
   
892.52   Declaration of estimated taxes
   
892.53   Additional penalties
   
892.54   Assessments against taxpayer
   
892.55   Refund applications
   
892.56   Amended returns
   
892.57   Examination of records and other documents and persons
   
892.58   Credits
   
892.59   Reckless violations; penalties
   
892.60   Collection after termination of chapters
   
892.61   Election to be subject to R.C. §§ 718.80 to 718.95
   
892.99   Penalty
§ 892.01 PURPOSE.
   To provide funds for the purposes of general municipal operations, bond
retirement payments, maintenance, new equipment, extension and enlargement of
municipal services and facilities and capital improvements of the village,
there shall be, and hereby is, levied a tax on income as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.02 ADOPTION OF TAX CODE.
   The village income tax code is adopted in its entirety and codified as
Chapter 892, as attached hereto the ordinance incorporated herein as “Exhibit
A” and incorporated herein.
(Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.03 COLLECTION OF TAX AFTER TERMINATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (a)   This chapter shall continue effective insofar as the levy of taxes is
concerned and insofar as the collection of taxes levied hereunder and actions
or proceedings for collecting any tax so levied or enforcing any provisions of
this chapter are concerned; until all of said taxes levied in the aforesaid
period are fully paid and any and all suits and prosecutions for the collection
of said taxes or for the punishment of violations of this chapter shall have
been fully terminated.
   (b)   Annual returns due for all or any part of the last effective year of
this chapter shall be due on the date provided herein as though the same were
continuing.
(Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.04 AUTHORITY TO LEVY TAX.
   (a)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 715.013(A), a municipal corporation may levy a
tax on income and a withholding tax if such taxes are levied in accordance with
the provisions and limitations specified in this chapter. On or after January
1, 2016, the ordinance or resolution levying such taxes, as adopted or amended
by the legislative authority of the municipal corporation, shall include all of
the following:
      (1)   A statement that the tax is an annual tax levied on the income of
every person residing in or earning or receiving income in the municipal
corporation and that the tax shall be measured by municipal taxable income;
      (2)   A statement that the municipal corporation is levying the tax in
accordance with the limitations specified in this chapter and that the
resolution or ordinance thereby incorporates the provisions of this chapter;
      (3)   The rate of the tax;
      (4)   Whether, and the extent to which, a credit, as described in
division (d) below, will be allowed against the tax;
      (5)   The purpose or purposes of the tax; and
      (6)   Any other provision necessary for the administration of the tax,
provided that the provision does not conflict with any provision of this
chapter.
   (b)   Any municipal corporation that, on or before March 23, 2015, levies an
income tax at a rate in excess of 1% may continue to levy the tax at the rate
specified in the original ordinance or resolution, provided that such rate
continues in effect as specified in the original ordinance or resolution.
   (c)   (1)   No municipal corporation shall tax income at other than a
uniform rate.
      (2)   A.   Except as provided in division (b) above, no municipal
corporation shall levy a tax on income at a rate in excess of 1% without having
obtained the approval of the excess by a majority of the electors of the
municipality voting on the question at a general, primary or special election.
The legislative authority of the municipal corporation shall file with the
Board of Elections at least 90 days before the day of the election, a copy of
the ordinance together with a resolution specifying the date the election is to
be held and directing the board of elections to conduct the election. The
ballot shall be in the following form: “Shall the ordinance providing for a ___
percent levy on income for (brief description of the purpose of the proposed
levy) be passed?”
 
FOR THE INCOME TAX
AGAINST THE INCOME TAX
   
         B.   In the event of an affirmative vote, the proceeds of the levy may
be used only for the specified purpose.
   (d)   A municipal corporation may, by ordinance or resolution, grant a
credit to residents of the municipal corporation for all or a portion of the
taxes paid to any municipal corporation, in the state or elsewhere, by the
resident or by a pass-through entity owned, directly or indirectly, by a
resident, on the resident’s distributive or proportionate share of the income
of the pass-through entity. A municipal corporation is not required to refund
taxes not paid to the municipal corporation.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a municipal corporation
that levies an income tax in effect for taxable years beginning before January
1, 2016, may continue to administer and enforce the provisions of such tax for
all taxable years beginning before January 1, 2016, provided that the
provisions of such tax are consistent with this chapter as it existed prior to
March 23, 2015.
   (f)   Nothing in this chapter authorizes a municipal corporation to levy a
tax on income, or to administer or collect such a tax or penalties or interest
related to such a tax, contrary to the provisions and limitations specified in
this chapter. No municipal corporation shall enforce an ordinance or resolution
that conflicts with the provisions of this chapter.
   (g)   (1)   This division (g) applies to a municipal corporation that, at
the time of entering into a written agreement under division (g)(2) below,
shares the same territory as a city, local or exempted village school district,
to the extent that not more than 30% of the territory of the municipal
corporation is located outside the school district and a portion of the
territory of the school district that is not located within the municipal
corporation is located within another municipal corporation having a population
of $400,000 or more according to the federal decennial census most recently
completed before the agreement is entered into under division (g)(2) below.
      (2)   The legislative authority of a municipal corporation to which this
division (g) applies may propose to the electors an income tax, one of the
purposes of which shall be to provide financial assistance to the school
district described in division (g)(1) above. Prior to proposing the tax, the
legislative authority shall negotiate and enter into a written agreement with
the Board of Education of that school district specifying the tax rate; the
percentage or amount of tax revenue to be paid to the school district or the
method of establishing or determining that percentage or amount, which may be
subject to change periodically; the purpose for which the school district will
use the money; the first year the tax will be levied; the date of the election
on the question of the tax; and the method and schedule by which, and the
conditions under which, the municipal corporation will make payments to the
school district. The tax shall otherwise comply with the provisions and
limitations specified in this chapter.
(R.C. § 718.04) (Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.05 PURPOSES OF TAX; RATE.
   (a)   Purpose of tax. To provide funds for the purpose of general municipal
operation, capital improvements, sanitary sewer improvements and bond
retirement for the village, there shall be, and hereby is, levied tax on
salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation and net profits as
hereinafter provided.
   (b)   Rate of tax. One percent per year.
(Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.06 ALLOCATION OF FUNDS.
   The allocation of funds is as follows:
 
General Fund 100%
 
(Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 2024-002, passed 2-17-2024)
§ 892.07 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter and the collection of taxes hereunder becomes effective as of
January 1, 2020.
(Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.08 DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   Any term used in this chapter that is not otherwise defined in this
chapter has the same meaning as when used in a comparable context in laws of
the United States relating to federal income taxation or in R.C. Title LVII,
unless a different meaning is clearly required. If a term used in this chapter
that is not otherwise defined in this chapter is used in a comparable context
in both the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax and in
R.C. Title LVII and the use is not consistent, then the use of the term in the
laws of the United States relating to federal income tax shall control over the
use of the term in R.C. Title LVII.
   (b)   For purposes of this section, the singular shall include the plural,
and the masculine shall include the feminine and the gender-neutral.
   (c)   As used in this chapter:
      ADJUSTED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME. For a person required to file as a C
corporation or for a person that has elected to be taxed as a C corporation
under the definition for NET PROFIT division D., means a C corporation’s
federal taxable income before net operating losses and special deductions as
determined under the Internal Revenue Code, adjusted as follows:
         A.   Deduct intangible income to the extent included in federal
taxable income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether the
intangible income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets held
for the production of income;
         B.   Add an amount equal to 5% of intangible income deducted under
division A. above, but excluding that portion of intangible income directly
related to the sale, exchange or other disposition of property described in
I.R.C. § 1221;
         C.   Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the computation of
federal taxable income if the losses directly relate to the sale, exchange or
other disposition of an asset described in I.R.C. §§ 1221 or 1231;
         D.   1.   Except as provided in division D.2. below, deduct income and
gain included in federal taxable income to the extent the income and gain
directly relate to the sale, exchange or other disposition of an asset
described in I.R.C. §§ 1221 or 1231.
            2.   Division (1)D.1. above does not apply to the extent the income
or gain is income or gain described in I.R.C. §§ 1245 or 1250.
         E.   Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a deduction in
the computation of federal taxable income;
          F.   In the case of a real estate investment trust or regulated
investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to, distributions
to or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of investors and allowed
as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income;
         G.   Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded in
computing federal taxable income, any income derived from a transfer agreement
or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement under R.C. § 4313.02;
         H.   1.   a.   Except as limited by divisions H.2., H.3. and H.4.
below, deduct any net operating loss incurred by the person in a taxable year
beginning on or after January 1, 2017.
               b.   The amount of such net operating loss shall be deducted
from net profit that is reduced by exempt income to the extent necessary to
reduce municipal taxable income to zero, with any remaining unused portion of
the net operating loss carried forward to not more than five consecutive
taxable years following the taxable year in which the loss was incurred, but in
no case for more years than necessary for the deduction to be fully utilized.
            2.   No person shall use the deduction allowed by this division H.
to offset qualifying wages.
            3.   a.   For taxable years beginning in 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021 or
2022, a person may not deduct, for purposes of an income tax levied by a
municipal corporation that levies an income tax before January 1, 2016, more
than 50% of the amount of the deduction otherwise allowed by division H.1.
above.
               b.   For taxable years beginning in 2023 or thereafter, a person
may deduct, for purposes of an income tax levied by a municipal corporation
that levies an income tax before January 1, 2016, the full amount allowed by
division H.1. above.
            4.   Any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward deduction that is
available must be utilized before a taxpayer may deduct any amount pursuant to
this division H.
            5.   Nothing in division H.3.a. above precludes a person from
carrying forward, for use with respect to any return filed for a taxable year
beginning after 2018, any amount of net operating loss that was not fully
utilized by operation of division H.3.a. above. To the extent that an amount of
net operating loss that was not fully utilized in one or more taxable years by
operation of division H.3.a. above is carried forward for use with respect to a
return filed for a taxable year beginning in 2019, 2020, 2021 or 2022, the
limitation described in division H.3.a. above shall apply to the amount carried
forward.
         I.   Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity owned, directly or
indirectly, by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer’s federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that net profit in
the group’s federal taxable income in accordance with §
892.17(e)(3)B.; and
         J.   1.   Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity owned,
directly or indirectly, by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer’s federal
taxable income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that loss in
the group’s federal taxable income in accordance with §
892.17(e)(3)B.
            2.   If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is not a disregarded
entity that has made the election described in the definition for TAXPAYER
division B., is not a publicly traded partnership that has made the election
described in the definition for NET PROFIT division D. and is not an
individual, the taxpayer shall compute adjusted federal taxable income under
this section as if the taxpayer were a C corporation, except guaranteed
payments and other similar amounts paid or accrued to a partner, former
partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member or former member shall not be
allowed as a deductible expense unless such payments are in consideration for
the use of capital and treated as payment of interest under I.R.C. § 469 or
United States Treasury regulations. Amounts paid or accrued to a qualified
self-employed retirement plan with respect to a partner, former partner,
shareholder, former shareholder, member or former member of the taxpayer,
amounts paid or accrued to or for health insurance for a partner, former
partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member or former member and amounts
paid or accrued to or for life insurance for a partner, former partner,
shareholder, former shareholder, member or former member shall not be allowed
as a deduction.
            3.   Nothing in division A. above shall be construed as allowing
the taxpayer to add or deduct any amount more than once or shall be construed
as allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or accrued for purposes
of federal self-employment tax.
      ASSESSMENT.
         A.   Any of the following:
            1.   A written finding by the Tax Administrator that a person has
underpaid municipal income tax, or owes penalty and interest, or any
combination of tax, penalty or interest to the municipal corporation;
            2.   A full or partial denial of a refund request issued under §
892.29(b)(2);
            3.   A Tax Administrator’s denial of a taxpayer’s request for use
of an alternative apportionment method, issued under §
892.16(b)(2); or
            4.   A Tax Administrator’s requirement for a taxpayer to use an
alternative apportionment method, issued under §
892.16(b)(3).
         B.   For purposes of division A. above, an assessment shall commence
the person’s time limitation for making an appeal to the Local Board of Tax
Review pursuant to §
892.41, and shall have ASSESSMENT written in all capital letters at the top of
such finding.
         C.   ASSESSMENT does not include notice(s) denying a request for
refund issued under §
892.29(b)(3), a billing statement notifying a taxpayer of current or past-due
balances owed to the municipal corporation, a Tax Administrator’s request for
additional information, a notification to the taxpayer of mathematical errors
or a Tax Administrator’s other written correspondence to a person or taxpayer
that does not meet the criteria prescribed by division (1) above.
      AUDIT. The examination of a person or the inspection of the books,
records, memoranda or accounts of a person, ordered to appear before the Tax
Administrator, for the purpose of determining liability for a municipal income
tax.
      BOARD OF REVIEW. Has same meaning as LOCAL BOARD OF TAX REVIEW.
      CALENDAR QUARTER. The three-month period ending on the last day of March,
June, September or December.
      CASINO OPERATOR and CASINO FACILITY. Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
3772.01.
      CERTIFIED MAIL, EXPRESS MAIL, UNITED STATES MAIL, POSTAL SERVICE AND
SIMILAR TERMS. Include any delivery service authorized pursuant to R.C. §
5703.056.
      COMPENSATION. Any form of remuneration paid to an employee for personal
services.
      DISREGARDED ENTITY. A single member limited liability company, a
qualifying subchapter S subsidiary or another entity if the company, subsidiary
or entity is a disregarded entity for federal income tax purposes.
      DOMICILE. The true, fixed and permanent home of the taxpayer to which,
whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return.
      EXEMPT INCOME. All of the following:
         A.   The military pay or allowances of members of the armed forces of
the United States or members of their reserve components, including the
National Guard of any state;
         B.   1.   Except as provided in division B.2. below, intangible
income.
            2.   A municipal corporation that taxed any type of intangible
income on March 29, 1988, pursuant to § 3 of S.B. 238 of the 116th General
Assembly, may continue to tax that type of income if a majority of the electors
of the municipal corporation voting on the question of whether to permit the
taxation of that type of intangible income after 1988 voted in favor thereof at
an election held on November 8, 1988.
         C.   Social security benefits, railroad retirement benefits,
unemployment compensation, pensions, retirement benefit payments, payments from
annuities and similar payments made to an employee or to the beneficiary of an
employee under a retirement program or plan, disability payments received from
private industry or local, state or federal governments or from charitable,
religious or educational organizations and the proceeds of sickness, accident
or liability insurance policies. As used in this division C., UNEMPLOYMENT
COMPENSATION does not include supplemental unemployment compensation described
in I.R.C. § 3402(o)(2);
         D.   The income of religious, fraternal, charitable, scientific,
literary or educational institutions to the extent such income is derived from
tax-exempt real estate, tax-exempt tangible or intangible property or tax-
exempt activities;
         E.   Compensation paid under R.C. §§ 3501.28 or 3501.36 to a person
serving as a precinct election official to the extent that such compensation
does not exceed $1,000 for the taxable year. Such compensation in excess of
$1,000 for the taxable year may be subject to taxation by a municipal
corporation. A municipal corporation shall not require the payer of such
compensation to withhold any tax from that compensation;
         F.   Dues, contributions and similar payments received by charitable,
religious, educational or literary organizations or labor unions, lodges and
similar organizations;
         G.   Alimony and child support received;
         H.   Awards for personal injuries or for damages to property from
insurance proceeds or otherwise, excluding compensation paid for lost salaries
or wages or awards for punitive damages;
         I.   Income of a public utility when that public utility is subject to
the tax levied under R.C. §§ 5727.24 or 5727.30. This division I. does not
apply for purposes of R.C. Chapter 5745;
         J.   Gains from involuntary conversions, interest on federal
obligations, items of income subject to a tax levied by the state and that a
municipal corporation is specifically prohibited by law from taxing and income
of a decedent’s estate during the period of administration, except such income
from the operation of a trade or business;
         K.   Compensation or allowances excluded from federal gross income
under I.R.C. § 107;
         L.   Employee compensation that is not qualifying wages as defined in
the definition for QUALIFYING WAGES;
         M.   Compensation paid to a person employed within the boundaries of a
United States Air Force base under the jurisdiction of the United States Air
Force that is used for the housing of members of the United States Air Force
and is a center for Air Force operations, unless the person is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile. If the compensation is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile, tax on such income shall be payable
only to the municipal corporation of residence or domicile;
         N.   An S corporation shareholder’s distributive share of net profits
of the S corporation, other than any part of the distributive share of net
profits that represents wages, as defined in I.R.C. § 3121(a), or net earnings
from self-employment, as defined in I.R.C. § 1402(a);
         O.   For tax years 2024 and after, the income of individuals under 18
years of age;
         P.   1.   Except as provided in division P.2. or P.3. below,
compensation that is not qualifying wages paid to a nonresident individual for
personal services performed in the municipality on not more than 20 days in a
taxable year.
            2.   The exemption provided in division P.1. above does not apply
under either of the following circumstances.
               a.   The individual’s base of operation is located in the
municipality.
               b.   The individual is a professional athlete, professional
entertainer or public figure, and the compensation is paid for the performance
of services in the individual’s capacity as a professional athlete,
professional entertainer or public figure. For purposes of this division
P.2.b., PROFESSIONAL ATHLETE, PROFESSIONAL ENTERTAINER and PUBLIC FIGURE have
the same meanings as in §
892.13.
            3.   Compensation to which this division P. applies shall be
treated as earned or received at the individual’s base of operation. If the
individual does not have a base of operation, the compensation shall be treated
as earned or received where the individual is domiciled.
            4.   For purposes of this division P., BASE OF OPERATION means the
location where an individual owns or rents an office, storefront or similar
facility to which the individual regularly reports and at which the individual
regularly performs personal services for compensation.
         Q.   Compensation paid to a person for personal services performed for
a political subdivision on property owned by the political subdivision,
regardless of whether the compensation is received by an employee of the
subdivision or another person performing services for the subdivision under a
contract with the subdivision, if the property on which services are performed
is annexed to a municipal corporation pursuant to R.C. § 709.023 on or after
March 27, 2013, unless the person is subject to such taxation because of
residence. If the compensation is subject to taxation because of residence,
municipal income tax shall be payable only to the municipal corporation of
residence; and
         R.   1.   Income the taxation of which is prohibited by the
constitution or laws of the United States.
            2.   Any item of income that is exempt income of a pass-through
entity under this definition is exempt income of each owner of the pass-through
entity to the extent of that owner’s distributive or proportionate share of
that item of the entity’s income.
      FORM 2106. Internal Revenue Service form 2106 filed by a taxpayer
pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      GENERIC FORM. An electronic or paper form that is not prescribed by a
particular municipal corporation and that is designed for reporting taxes
withheld by an employer, agent of an employer or other payer, estimated
municipal income taxes or annual municipal income tax liability, including a
request for refund.
      INCOME. Includes he following:
         A.   1.   For residents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages,
commissions and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by
the resident, including the resident’s distributive share of the net profit of
pass-through entities owned, directly or indirectly, by the resident and any
net profit of the resident, except as provided in the definition for NET PROFIT
division D.
            2.   For the purposes of division A.1. above, the following apply.
               a.   Any net operating loss of the resident incurred in the
taxable year and the resident’s distributive share of any net operating loss
generated in the same taxable year and attributable to the resident’s ownership
interest in a pass-through entity shall be allowed as a deduction, for that
taxable year and the following five taxable years, against any other net profit
of the resident or the resident’s distributive share of any net profit
attributable to the resident’s ownership interest in a pass-through entity
until fully utilized, subject to division A.4. below
               b.   The resident’s distributive share of the net profit of each
pass-through entity owned, directly or indirectly, by the resident shall be
calculated without regard to any net operating loss that is carried forward by
that entity from a prior taxable year and applied to reduce the entity’s net
profit for the current taxable year.
            3.   Division A.2. above does not apply with respect to any net
profit or net operating loss attributable to an ownership interest in an S
corporation unless shareholders’ distributive shares of net profits from S
corporations are subject to tax in the municipal corporation as provided in the
definition for EXEMPT INCOME division N.
            4.   Any amount of a net operating loss used to reduce a taxpayer’s
net profit for a taxable year shall reduce the amount of net operating loss
that may be carried forward to any subsequent year for use by that taxpayer. In
no event shall the cumulative deductions for all taxable years with respect to
a taxpayer’s net operating loss exceed the original amount of that net
operating loss available to that taxpayer.
         B.   In the case of nonresidents, all income, salaries, qualifying
wages, commissions and other compensation from whatever source earned or
received by the nonresident for work done, services performed or rendered or
activities conducted in the municipality, including any net profit of the
nonresident, but excluding the nonresident’s distributive share of the net
profit or loss of only pass-through entities owned, directly or indirectly, by
the nonresident;
         C.   For taxpayers that are not individuals, net profit of the
taxpayer; and
         D.   Lottery, sweepstakes, gambling and sports winnings; winnings from
games of chance; and prizes and awards. If the taxpayer is a professional
gambler for federal income tax purposes, the taxpayer may deduct related
wagering losses and expenses to the extent authorized under the Internal
Revenue Code and claimed against such winnings. Credit for tax withheld or paid
to another municipal corporation on such winnings paid to the municipal
corporation where winnings occur is limited to the credit as specified in §
892.21.
      INTANGIBLE INCOME.
         A.   Income of any of the following types: income yield, interest,
capital gains, dividends or other income arising from the ownership, sale,
exchange or other disposition of intangible property, including, but not
limited to, investments, deposits, money or credits as those terms are defined
in R.C. Chapter 5701, and patents, copyrights, trademarks, trade names,
investments in real estate investment trusts, investments in regulated
investment companies and appreciation on deferred compensation.
         B.   INTANGIBLE INCOME does not include prizes, awards or other income
associated with any lottery winnings, gambling winnings or other similar games
of chance.
      INTERNAL REVENUE CODE. The “Internal Revenue Code of 1986”, as amended,
found at 26 U.S.C. § __. For example, where reference is made to “§ 1221 of the
Internal Revenue Code,” the complete citation would then be, 26 U.S.C. § 1221.
      LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY. A limited liability company formed under R.C.
Chapter 1705 or 1706 or under the laws of another state.
      LOCAL BOARD OF TAX REVIEW and BOARD OF TAX REVIEW. The entity created
under §
892.41.
      MUNICIPAL CORPORATION. In general terms, a status conferred upon a local
government unit by state law, giving the unit certain autonomous operating
authority, such as the power of taxation, power of eminent domain, police power
and regulatory power and includes a joint economic development district or
joint economic development zone that levies an income tax under R.C. §§
715.691, 715.70, 715.71 or 715.72.
      MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME.
         A.   Means the following:
            1.   For a person other than an individual, income reduced by
exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and then, as
applicable, apportioned or situs to the municipality under § 892.16 and further
reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the person
for the municipality;
            2.   a.   For an individual who is a resident of a municipality
other than a qualified municipal corporation, income reduced by exempt income
to the extent otherwise included in income, then reduced as provided in
division B. below, and further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss
carryforward available to the individual for the municipality.
               b.   For an individual who is a resident of a qualified
municipal corporation, state adjusted gross income reduced by income exempted
and increased by deductions excluded, by the qualified municipal corporation
from the qualified municipal corporation’s tax on or before December 31, 2013.
If a qualified municipal corporation, on or before December 31, 2013, exempts
income earned by individuals who are not residents of the qualified municipal
corporation and net profit of persons that are not wholly located within the
qualified municipal corporation, such individual or person shall have no
municipal taxable income for the purposes of the tax levied by the qualified
municipal corporation and may be exempted by the qualified municipal
corporation from the requirements of R.C. § 718.03.
            3.   For an individual who is a nonresident of the municipality,
income reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and
then, as applicable, apportioned or situs to the municipality under § 892.16,
then reduced as provided in division B. below, and further reduced by any pre-
2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the individual for the
municipality.
         B.   In computing the municipal taxable income of a taxpayer who is an
individual, the taxpayer may subtract, as provided in division A.2.a. or A.3.
above, the amount of the individual’s employee business expenses reported on
the individual’s form 2106 that the individual deducted for federal income tax
purposes for the taxable year, subject to the limitation imposed by I.R.C. §
67. For the municipal corporation in which the taxpayer is a resident, the
taxpayer may deduct all such expenses allowed for federal income tax purposes.
For a municipal corporation in which the taxpayer is not a resident, the
taxpayer may deduct such expenses only to the extent the expenses are related
to the taxpayer’s performance of personal services in that nonresident
municipal corporation.
      MUNICIPALITY. The Village of Risingsun.
      NET OPERATING LOSS. A loss incurred by a person in the operation of a
trade or business. NET OPERATING LOSS does not include unutilized losses
resulting from basis limitations, at-risk limitations or passive activity loss
limitations.
      NET PROFIT.
         A.   For a person other than an individual, means adjusted federal
taxable income.
         B.   NET PROFIT for a person who is an individual means the
individual’s net profit required to be reported on Schedule C, Schedule E or
Schedule F reduced by any net operating loss carried forward. For the purposes
of division A. above, the net operating loss carried forward shall be
calculated and deducted in the same manner as provided in the definition for
ADJUSTED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME division H.1.
         C.   For the purposes of this chapter, and notwithstanding division A.
above, NET PROFIT of a disregarded entity shall not be taxable as against that
disregarded entity, but shall instead be included in the net profit of the
owner of the disregarded entity.
         D.   1.   For purposes of this chapter, PUBLICLY TRADED PARTNERSHIP
means any partnership, an interest in which is regularly traded on an
established securities market. A PUBLICLY TRADED PARTNERSHIP may have any
number of partners.
            2.   For the purposes of this chapter, and not withstanding any
other provision of this chapter, the net profit of a publicly traded
partnership that makes the election described in this division D. shall be
taxed as if the partnership were a C corporation, and shall not be treated as
the net profit or income of any owner of the partnership.
            3.   A publicly traded partnership that is treated as a partnership
for federal income tax purposes and that is subject to tax on its net profits
in one or more municipal corporations in this state may elect to be treated as
a C corporation for municipal income tax purposes. The publicly traded
partnership shall make the election in every municipal corporation in which the
partnership is subject to taxation on its net profits. The election shall be
made on the annual tax return filed in each such municipal corporation. Once
the election is made, the election is binding for a five-year period beginning
with the first taxable year of the initial election. The election continues to
be binding for each subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to
discontinue filing municipal income tax returns as a C corporation for
municipal purposes under division D.4. below.
            4.   An election to discontinue filing as a C corporation must be
made in the first year following the last year of a five-year election period
in effect under division D.3. above. The election to discontinue filing as a C
corporation is binding for a five-year period beginning with the first taxable
year of the election and continues to be binding for each subsequent five-year
period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing municipal income tax
returns as a partnership for municipal purposes. An election to discontinue
filing as a partnership must be made in the first year following the last year
of a five-year election period.
            5.   The publicly traded partnership shall not be required to file
the election with any municipal corporation in which the partnership is not
subject to taxation on its net profits, but this division D. applies to all
municipal corporations in which an individual owner of the partnership resides.
            6.   The individual owners of the partnership not filing as a C
corporation shall be required to file with their municipal corporation of
residence, and report partnership distribution of net profit.
      NONRESIDENT. An individual that is not a resident of the municipality.
      OHIO BUSINESS GATEWAY. The online computer network system, created under
R.C. § 125.30, that allows persons to electronically file business reply forms
with state agencies and includes any successor electronic filing and payment
system.
      OTHER PAYER. Any person, other than an individual’s employer or the
employer’s agent, that pays an individual any amount included in the federal
gross income of the individual. OTHER PAYER includes casino operators and video
lottery terminal sales agents.
      PASS-THROUGH ENTITY. A partnership not treated as an association taxable
as a C corporation for federal income tax purposes, a limited liability company
not treated as an association taxable as a C corporation for federal income tax
purposes, an S corporation or any other class of entity from which the income
or profits of the entity are given pass-through treatment for federal income
tax purposes. PASS-THROUGH ENTITY does not include a trust, estate, grantor of
a grantor trust or disregarded entity.
      PENSION. Any amount paid to an employee or former employee that is
reported to the recipient on an IRS form 1099-R, or successor form. PENSION
does not include deferred compensation or amounts attributable to nonqualified
deferred compensation plans, reported as FICA/Medicare wages on an IRS form W-
2, wage and tax statement or successor form.
      PERSON. Includes individuals, firms, companies, joint stock companies,
business trusts, estates, trusts, partnerships, limited liability partnerships,
limited liability companies, associations, C corporations, S corporations,
governmental entities and any other entity.
      POSTAL SERVICE. The United States postal service, or private delivery
service delivering documents and packages within an agreed upon delivery
schedule, or any other carrier service delivering the item.
      POSTMARK DATE, DATE OF POSTMARK AND SIMILAR TERMS. Include the date
recorded and marked by a delivery service and recorded electronically to a
database kept in the regular course if its business and marked on the cover in
which the payment or document is enclosed, the date on which the payment or
document was given to the delivery service for delivery.
      PRE-2017 NET OPERATING LOSS CARRYFORWARD.
         A.   Means any net operating loss incurred in a taxable year beginning
before January 1, 2017, to the extent such loss was permitted, by a resolution
or ordinance of the municipality that was adopted by the municipality before
January 1, 2016, to be carried forward and utilized to offset income or net
profit generated in such municipality in future taxable years.
         B.   For the purpose of calculating municipal taxable income, any PRE-
2017 NET OPERATING LOSS CARRYFORWARD may be carried forward to any taxable
year, including taxable years beginning in 2017 or thereafter, for the number
of taxable years provided in the resolution or ordinance or until fully
utilized, whichever is earlier.
      QUALIFIED MUNICIPAL CORPORATION. A municipal corporation that, by
resolution or ordinance adopted on or before December 31, 2011, adopted STATE
ADJUSTED GROSS INCOME, as defined by R.C. § 5747.01, as the income subject to
tax for the purposes of imposing a municipal income tax.
      QUALIFYING WAGES. Wages, as defined in I.R.C. § 3121(a), without regard
to any wage limitations, adjusted as follows:
         A.   Deduct the following amounts:
            1.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes
compensation attributable to a plan or program described in I.R.C. § 125;
            2.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes payment
on account of a disability related to sickness or an accident paid by a party
unrelated to the employer, agent of an employer or other payer; and
            3.   Any amount included in wages that is exempt income.
         B.   Add the following amounts:
            1.   Any amount not included in wages solely because the employee
was employed by the employer before April 1, 1986;
            2.   Any amount not included in wages because the amount arises
from the sale, exchange or other disposition of a stock option, the exercise of
a stock option or the sale, exchange or other disposition of stock purchased
under a stock option. This division B.2. applies only to those amounts
constituting ordinary income;
            3.   Any amount not included in wages if the amount is an amount
described in I.R.C. §§ 401(k), 403(b) or 457. This division B.3. applies only
to employee contributions and employee deferrals;
            4.   Any amount that is supplemental unemployment compensation
benefits described in I.R.C. § 3402(o)(2) and not included in wages;
            5.   Any amount received that is treated as self-employment income
for federal tax purposes in accordance with I.R.C. § 1402(a)(8); and
            6.   Any amount not included in wages if all of the following
apply:
               a.   For the taxable year the amount is employee compensation
that is earned outside of the United States and that either is included in the
taxpayer’s gross income for federal income tax purposes or would have been
included in the taxpayer’s gross income for such purposes if the taxpayer did
not elect to exclude the income under I.R.C. § 911;
               b.   For no preceding taxable year did the amount constitute
wages as defined in I.R.C. § 3121(a);
               c.   For no succeeding taxable year will the amount constitute
wages; and
               d.   For any taxable year the amount has not otherwise been
added to wages pursuant to either this division B. or R.C. § 718.03, as that
section existed before the effective date of H.B. 5 of the 130th General
Assembly, March 23, 2015.
      RELATED ENTITY. Any of the following:
         A.   An individual stockholder, or a member of the stockholder’s
family enumerated in I.R.C. § 318, if the stockholder and the members of the
stockholder’s family own directly, indirectly, beneficially or constructively,
in the aggregate, at least 50% of the value of the taxpayer’s outstanding
stock;
         B.   A stockholder, or a stockholder’s partnership, estate, trust or
corporation, if the stockholder and the stockholder’s partnerships, estates,
trusts or corporations own directly, indirectly, beneficially or
constructively, in the aggregate, at least 50% of the value of the taxpayer’s
outstanding stock;
         C.   A corporation, or a party related to the corporation in a manner
that would require an attribution of stock from the corporation to the party or
from the party to the corporation under division D. below, provided the
taxpayer owns directly, indirectly, beneficially or constructively, at least
50% of the value of the corporation’s outstanding stock; and
         D.   The attribution rules described in I.R.C. § 318 apply for the
purpose of determining whether the ownership requirements in divisions A. to C.
above have been met.
      RELATED MEMBER. A person that, with respect to the taxpayer during all or
any portion of the taxable year, is either a related entity, a component
member, as defined in I.R.C. § 1563(b), or a person to or from whom there is
attribution of stock ownership, in accordance with I.R.C. § 1563(e), except,
for purposes of determining whether a person is a RELATED MEMBER under this
division, “20%” shall be substituted for “5%” wherever “5%” appears in I.R.C. §
1563(e).
      RESIDENT. An individual who is domiciled in the municipality as
determined under §
892.10.
      S CORPORATION. A person that has made an election under I.R.C. Subchapter
S of Chapter 1 of Subtitle A for its taxable year.
      SCHEDULE C. Internal Revenue Service schedule C (form 1040) filed by a
taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      SCHEDULE E. Internal Revenue Service schedule E (form 1040) filed by a
taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      SCHEDULE F. Internal Revenue Service schedule F (form 1040) filed by a
taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      SINGLE MEMBER LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY. A limited liability company that
has one direct member.
      SMALL EMPLOYER. Any employer that had total revenue of less than $500,000
during the preceding taxable year. For purposes of this definition, TOTAL
REVENUE means receipts of any type or kind, including, but not limited to,
sales receipts; payments; rents; profits; gains, dividends and other investment
income; commissions; premiums; money; property; grants; contributions;
donations; gifts; program service revenue; patient service revenue; premiums;
fees, including premium fees and service fees; tuition payments; unrelated
business revenue; reimbursements; any type of payment from a governmental unit,
including grants and other allocations; and any other similar receipts reported
for federal income tax purposes or under generally accepted accounting
principles. SMALL EMPLOYER does not include the federal government; any state
government, including any state agency or instrumentality; any political
subdivision; or any entity treated as a government for financial accounting and
reporting purposes.
      TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The individual charged with direct responsibility for
administration of an income tax levied by a municipal corporation in accordance
with this chapter, and also includes the following:
         A.   A municipal corporation acting as the agent of another municipal
corporation;
         B.   A person retained by a municipal corporation to administer a tax
levied by the municipal corporation, but only if the municipal corporation does
not compensate the person in whole or in part on a contingency basis; and
         C.   The Central Collection Agency (CCA) or the Regional Income Tax
Agency (RITA) or their successors in interest, or another entity organized to
perform functions similar to those performed by the Central Collection Agency
and the Regional Income Tax Agency.
      TAX RETURN PREPARER. Any individual described in I.R.C. § 7701(a)(36) and
26 C.F.R. § 301.7701-15.
      TAXABLE YEAR. The corresponding tax reporting period as prescribed for
the taxpayer under the Internal Revenue Code.
      TAXPAYER.
         A.   A person subject to a tax levied on income by a municipal
corporation in accordance with this chapter. TAXPAYER does not include a
grantor trust or, except as provided in division B.1. below, a disregarded
entity.
         B.   1.   A single member limited liability company that is a
disregarded entity for federal tax purposes may be a separate taxpayer from its
single member in all state municipal corporations in which it either filed as a
separate taxpayer or did not file for its taxable year ending in 2003, if all
of the following conditions are met.
               a.   The limited liability company’s single member is also a
limited liability company.
               b.   The limited liability company and its single member were
formed and doing business in one or more state municipal corporations for at
least five years before January 1, 2004.
               c.   Not later than December 31, 2004, the limited liability
company and its single member each made an election to be treated as a separate
taxpayer under R.C. § 718.01(L) as this section existed on December 31, 2004.
               d.   The limited liability company was not formed for the
purpose of evading or reducing state municipal corporation income tax liability
of the limited liability company or its single member.
               e.   The state municipal corporation that was the primary place
of business of the sole member of the limited liability company consented to
the election.
            2.   For purposes of division B.1.e. above, a municipal corporation
was the primary place of business of a limited liability company if, for the
limited liability company’s taxable year ending in 2003, its income tax
liability was greater in that municipal corporation than in any other municipal
corporation in the state, and that tax liability to that municipal corporation
for its taxable year ending in 2003 was at least $400,000.
      TAXPAYERS’ RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The rights provided to taxpayers
in R.C. §§ 718.11, 718.12, 718.19, 718.23, 718.36, 718.37, 718.38, 5717.011 and
5717.03 and any corresponding ordinances of the municipality, and the
responsibilities of taxpayers to file, report, withhold, remit and pay
municipal income tax and otherwise comply with R.C. Chapter 718 and
resolutions, ordinances and rules adopted by a municipal corporation for the
imposition and administration of a municipal income tax.
      VIDEO LOTTERY TERMINAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3770.21.
      VIDEO LOTTERY TERMINAL SALES AGENT. A lottery sales agent licensed under
R.C. Chapter 3770 to conduct video lottery terminals on behalf of the state,
pursuant to R.C. § 3770.21.
(Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 2024-002, passed 2-17-2024)
Editor’s note:
   Most definitions can be found in R.C. § 718.01.
§ 892.09 DETERMINING MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME FOR INDIVIDUALS.
   (a)   “Municipal taxable income” for a resident of the municipality is
calculated as follows:
      (1)   “Income” reduced by “exempt income” to the extent such exempt
income is otherwise included in income, reduced by allowable employee business
expense deduction as found in §
892.08 in division (b) of the definition for MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME, further
reduced by any “pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward” equals “municipal
taxable income”.
         A.   INCOME is defined in §
892.08.
            1.   QUALIFYING WAGES is defined in §
892.08.
            2.   NET PROFIT is included in INCOME, and is defined in §
892.08. This section also provides that the net operating loss carryforward
shall be calculated and deducted in the same manner as provided in §
892.08. Treatment of net profits received by an individual taxpayer from rental
real estate is provided in §
892.16(e).
            3.   Section
892.08 provides the following: offsetting and net operating loss carryforward
treatment in the definition for INCOME division A.2.a.; resident’s distributive
share of net profit from pass-through entity treatment in the definition for
INCOME division A.2.b.; treatment of S corporation distributive share of net
profit in the hands of the shareholder in the definition for INCOME division
A.3.; restriction of amount of loss permitted to be carried forward for use by
taxpayer in a subsequent taxable year in the definition for INCOME division
A.4.
            4.   PASS-THROUGH ENTITY is defined in §
892.08.
         B.   EXEMPT INCOME is defined in §
892.08.
         C.   Allowable employee business expense deduction is described in §
892.08 , and is subject to the limitations provided in that section.
         D.   PRE-2017 NET OPERATING LOSS CARRYFORWARD is defined in §
892.08.
   (b)   “Municipal taxable income” for a nonresident of the municipality is
calculated as follows:
         (1)   “Income” reduced by “exempt income” to the extent such exempt
income is otherwise included in income, as applicable, apportioned or situs to
the municipality as provided in §
892.16, reduced by allowable employee business expense deduction as found in §
181.08 in the definition for MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME division (b), further
reduced by any “pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward” equals “municipal
taxable income”.
         A.   INCOME is defined in §
892.08.
            1.   QUALIFYING WAGES is defined in §
892.08.
            2.   NET PROFIT is included in INCOME, and is defined in §
892.08. This section also provides that the net operating loss carryforward
shall be calculated and deducted in the same manner as provided in §
892.08. NET PROFIT for a nonresident individual includes any net profit of the
nonresident, but excludes the distributive share of net profit or loss of only
pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by the nonresident.
            3.   PASS-THROUGH ENTITY is defined in §
892.08.
         B.   EXEMPT INCOME is defined in §
892.08.
         C.   “Apportioned or situs to the municipality as provided in §
892.16 of this chapter” includes the apportionment of net profit income
attributable to work done or services performed in the municipality. Treatment
of net profits received by an individual taxpayer from rental real estate is
provided in §
892.16(e).
         D.   “Allowable employee business expense deduction”, as described in
§
892.08 , is subject to the limitations provided in that section. For a
nonresident of the municipality, the deduction is limited to the extent the
expenses are related to the performance of personal services by the nonresident
in the municipality.
         E.   PRE-2017 NET OPERATING LOSS CARRYFORWARD is defined in §
892.08.
(Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.10 DOMICILE.
   (a)   (1)   An individual is presumed to be domiciled in a municipal
corporation for all or part of a taxable year if the individual was domiciled
in the municipal corporation on the last day of the immediately preceding
taxable year or if the Tax Administrator reasonably concludes that the
individual is domiciled in the municipal corporation for all or part of the
taxable year.
      (2)   An individual may rebut the presumption of domicile described in
division (a)(1) above if the individual establishes, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that the individual was not domiciled in the municipal corporation
for all or part of the taxable year.
   (b)   For the purpose of determining whether an individual is domiciled in a
municipal corporation for all or part of a taxable year, only the following
factors shall be considered:
      (1)   The location of financial institutions in which the individual or
the individual’s spouse have any accounts, including, but not limited to,
checking, savings, certificates of deposit or individual retirement accounts;
      (2)   The location of issuers of credit cards to the individual or the
individual’s spouse or of any other persons making installment loans to the
individual or the individual’s spouse;
      (3)   The location of institutional lenders which have made loans to, or
which are guaranteed by, the individual or the individual’s spouse;
      (4)   The location of investment facilities, brokerage firms, realtors,
financial advisors or consultants used by the individual or the individual’s
spouse;
      (5)   The location of either the insurance company that issued or the
insurance agent that sold any policy of insurance to the individual or the
individual’s spouse, including, but not limited to, life, health, disability,
automobile or homeowner’s insurance;
      (6)   The location of law firms, accounting firms and similar
professionals utilized by the individual or the individual’s spouse for legal,
tax, accounting, financial or retirement services;
      (7)   The location of physicians, dentists, osteopaths, optometrists or
other health care providers, or veterinarians utilized by the individual or the
individual’s spouse;
      (8)   The location of organizations described in I.R.C. § 501(c) to which
the individual or the individual’s spouse make contributions or other payments
or in which they participate as a congregant, member, board member, committee
member, adviser or consultant;
      (9)   The location of burial plots owned by the individual or the
individual’s spouse;
      (10)   The location of business ventures or business entities in which
the individual or the individual’s spouse has a more than 25% ownership
interest or in which the individual exercises, either individually or jointly,
significant control over the affairs of the venture or entity;
      (11)   The recitation of residency or domicile in a will, trust or other
estate planning document;
      (12)   The location of the individual’s friends; dependents, as defined
in I.R.C. § 152; and family members other than the individual’s spouse, if the
individual is not legally separated from the individual’s spouse under a decree
of divorce or separate maintenance, as provided in I.R.C. § 7703(a)(2);
      (13)   The location of educational institutions attended by the
individual’s dependents, as defined in I.R.C. § 152, to the extent that tuition
paid to such educational institution is based on the residency of the
individual or the individual’s spouse in the municipal corporation where the
educational institution is located;
      (14)   The location of trustees, executors, guardians or other
fiduciaries named in estate planning documents of the individual or the
individual’s spouse;
      (15)   The location of all businesses at which the individual or the
individual’s spouse makes purchases of tangible personal property;
      (16)   The location where the individual married;
      (17)   The location or identity of recipients of political contributions
made by the individual or the individual’s spouse;
      (18)   The number of contact periods the individual has with the
municipal corporation. For the purposes of this division, an individual has one
“contact period” with a municipal corporation if the individual is away
overnight from the individual’s abode located outside of the municipal
corporation and while away overnight from that abode spends at least some
portion, however minimal, of each of two consecutive days in the municipal
corporation;
      (19)   The individual’s domicile in other taxable years;
      (20)   The location at which the individual is registered to vote;
      (21)   The address on the individual’s driver’s license;
      (22)   The location of real estate for which the individual claimed a
property tax exemption or reduction allowed on the basis of the individual’s
residence or domicile;
      (23)   The location and value of abodes owned or leased by the
individual;
      (24)   Declarations, written or oral, made by the individual regarding
the individual’s residency; and
      (25)   The primary location at which the individual is employed.
(R.C. § 718.012) (Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.11 EXEMPTION FOR MEMBER OR EMPLOYEE OF GENERAL ASSEMBLY AND CERTAIN
JUDGES.
   (a)   No municipal corporation other than the municipal corporation of
residence shall levy a tax on the income of any member or employee of the state
general assembly, including the lieutenant governor, which income is received
as a result of services rendered as such member or employee and is paid from
appropriated funds of the state.
   (b)   No municipal corporation other than the municipal corporation of
residence and the City of Columbus shall levy a tax on the income of the Chief
Justice or a Justice of the Supreme Court received as a result of services
rendered as the Chief Justice or Justice. No municipal corporation other than
the municipal corporation of residence shall levy a tax on the income of a
judge sitting by assignment of the Chief Justice or on the income of a district
court of appeals judge sitting in multiple locations within the district,
received as a result of services rendered as a judge.
(R.C. § 718.50) (Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.12 COLLECTION AT SOURCE; WITHHOLDING FROM QUALIFYING WAGES.
   (a)   (1)   Each employer, agent of an employer or other payer located or
doing business in a municipal corporation that imposes a tax on income in
accordance with this chapter shall withhold from each employee an amount equal
to the qualifying wages of the employee earned by the employee in the municipal
corporation multiplied by the applicable rate of the municipal corporation’s
income tax, except for qualifying wages for which withholding is not required
under R.C. § 718.011 or division (d) or (f) below. An employer, agent of an
employer or other payer shall deduct and withhold the tax from qualifying wages
on the date that the employer, agent or other payer directly, indirectly or
constructively pays the qualifying wages to, or credits the qualifying wages to
the benefit of, the employee.
      (2)   In addition to withholding the amounts required under division (a)
(1) above, an employer, agent of an employer or other payer may also deduct and
withhold, on the request of an employee, taxes for the municipal corporation in
which the employee is a resident.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(2) below, an employer, agent
of an employer or other payer shall remit to the Tax Administrator of a
municipal corporation the greater of the income taxes deducted and withheld or
the income taxes required to be deducted and withheld by the employer, agent or
other payer according to the following schedule.
         A.   Taxes required to be deducted and withheld shall be remitted
monthly to the Tax Administrator if the total taxes deducted and withheld or
required to be deducted and withheld by the employer, agent or other payer on
behalf of the municipal corporation in the preceding calendar year exceeded
$2,399, or if the total amount of taxes deducted and withheld or required to be
deducted and withheld on behalf of the municipal corporation in any month of
the preceding calendar quarter exceeded $200. Payments under this division (b)
(1)A. shall be made to the Tax Administrator not later than 15 days after the
last day of each month.
         B.   Any employer, agent of an employer or other payer not required to
make payments under division (b)(1)A. above of taxes required to be deducted
and withheld shall make quarterly payments to the Tax Administrator not later
than the last day of the month following the last day of each calendar quarter.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (b)(1) above, a municipal corporation may
require, by resolution, ordinance or rule, an employer, agent of an employer or
other payer to do any of the following:
         A.   Remit taxes deducted and withheld semimonthly to the Tax
Administrator if the total taxes deducted and withheld or required to be
deducted and withheld on behalf of the municipal corporation in the preceding
calendar year exceeded $11,999, or if the total amount of taxes deducted and
withheld or required to be deducted and withheld on behalf of the municipal
corporation in any month of the preceding calendar year exceeded $1,000. The
payment under this division (b)(2)A. shall be made to the Tax Administrator not
later than one of the following:
            1.   If the taxes were deducted and withheld or required to be
deducted and withheld during the first 15 days of a month, the third banking
day after the fifteenth day of that month; and
            2.   If the taxes were deducted and withheld or required to be
deducted and withheld after the fifteenth day of a month and before the first
day of the immediately following month, the third banking day after the last
day of that month.
         B.   Make payment by electronic funds transfer to the Tax
Administrator of all taxes deducted and withheld on behalf of the municipal
corporation if the employer, agent of an employer or other payer is required to
make payments electronically for the purpose of paying federal taxes withheld
on payments to employees under I.R.C. § 6302, 26 C.F.R. § 31.6302-1 or any
other federal statute or regulation. The payment of tax by electronic funds
transfer under this division does not affect an employer’s, agent’s or other
payer’s obligation to file any return as required under this section.
   (c)   An employer, agent of an employer or other payer shall make and file a
return showing the amount of tax withheld by the employer, agent or other payer
from the qualifying wages of each employee and remitted to the Tax
Administrator. Unless the Tax Administrator requires all individual taxpayers
to file a tax return under R.C. § 718.05, a return filed by an employer, agent
or other payer under this division shall be accepted by a Tax Administrator and
municipal corporation as the return required of an employee whose sole income
subject to the tax under this chapter is the qualifying wages reported by the
employee’s employer, agent of an employer or other payer.
   (d)   An employer, agent of an employer or other payer is not required to
withhold municipal income tax with respect to an individual’s disqualifying
disposition of an incentive stock option if, at the time of the disqualifying
disposition, the individual is not an employee of either the corporation with
respect to whose stock the option has been issued or of such corporation’s
successor entity.
   (e)   (1)   An employee is not relieved from liability for a tax by the
failure of the employer, agent of an employer or other payer to withhold the
tax as required under this chapter or by the employer’s, agent’s or other
payer’s exemption from the requirement to withhold the tax.
      (2)   The failure of an employer, agent of an employer or other payer to
remit to the municipal corporation the tax withheld relieves the employee from
liability for that tax unless the employee colluded with the employer, agent or
other payer in connection with the failure to remit the tax withheld.
   (f)   Compensation deferred before June 26, 2003 is not subject to any
municipal corporation income tax or municipal income tax withholding
requirement to the extent the deferred compensation does not constitute
qualifying wages at the time the deferred compensation is paid or distributed.
   (g)   Each employer, agent of an employer or other payer required to
withhold taxes is liable for the payment of that amount required to be
withheld, whether or not such taxes have been withheld, and such amount shall
be deemed to be held in trust for the municipal corporation until such time as
the withheld amount is remitted to the Tax Administrator.
   (h)   On or before the last day of February of each year, an employer shall
file a withholding reconciliation return with the Tax Administrator listing the
names, addresses and Social Security numbers of all employees from whose
qualifying wages tax was withheld or should have been withheld for the
municipal corporation during the preceding calendar year, the amount of tax
withheld, if any, from each such employee, the total amount of qualifying wages
paid to such employee during the preceding calendar year, the name of every
other municipal corporation for which tax was withheld or should have been
withheld from such employee during the preceding calendar year, any other
information required for federal income tax reporting purposes on Internal
Revenue Service form W-2 or its equivalent form with respect to such employee
and other information as may be required by the Tax Administrator.
   (i)   The officer or the employee of the employer, agent of an employer or
other payer with control or direct supervision of or charged with the
responsibility for withholding the tax or filing the reports and making
payments as required by this section shall be personally liable for a failure
to file a report or pay the tax due as required by this section. The
dissolution of an employer, agent of an employer or other payer does not
discharge the officer’s or employee’s liability for a failure of the employer,
agent of an employer or other payer to file returns or pay any tax due.
   (j)   An employer is required to deduct and withhold municipal income tax on
tips and gratuities received by the employer’s employees and constituting
qualifying wages only to the extent that the tips and gratuities are under the
employer’s control. For the purposes of this division (j), a tip or gratuity is
under the employer’s control if the tip or gratuity is paid by the customer to
the employer for subsequent remittance to the employee, or if the customer pays
the tip or gratuity by credit card, debit card or other electronic means.
   (k)   A Tax Administrator shall consider any tax withheld by an employer at
the request of an employee when such tax is not otherwise required to be
withheld by this chapter to be tax required to be withheld and remitted for the
purposes of this section.
(R.C. § 718.03) (Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.13 COLLECTION AT SOURCE; OCCASIONAL ENTRANT.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   EMPLOYER. Includes a person that is a related member to or of an
employer.
      (2)   FIXED LOCATION. A permanent place of doing business in this state,
such as an office, warehouse, storefront or similar location owned or
controlled by an employer.
      (3)   PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK.
         A.   The fixed location to which an employee is required to report for
employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis. If the employee is not
required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis to a
fixed location, PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK means the worksite location in this
state to which the employee is required to report for employment duties on a
regular and ordinary basis. If the employee is not required to report for
employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis to a fixed location or
worksite location, PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK means the location in this state at
which the employee spends the greatest number of days in a calendar year
performing services for or on behalf of the employee’s employer.
         B.   If there is not a single municipal corporation in which the
employee spent the “greatest number of days in a calendar year” performing
services for or on behalf of the employer, but instead there are two or more
municipal corporations in which the employee spent an identical number of days
that is greater than the number of days the employee spent in any other
municipal corporation, the employer shall allocate any of the employee’s
qualifying wages subject to division (b)(1)A. below among those two or more
municipal corporations. The allocation shall be made using any fair and
reasonable method, including, but not limited to, an equal allocation among
such municipal corporations or an allocation based upon the time spent or sales
made by the employee in each such municipal corporation. A municipal
corporation to which qualifying wages are allocated under this division shall
be the employee’s PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK with respect to those qualifying
wages for the purposes of this section.
         C.   For the purposes of this division, the location at which an
employee spends a particular day shall be determined in accordance with
division (b)(2) below, except that “location” shall be substituted for
“municipal corporation” wherever “municipal corporation” appears in that
division.
      (4)   PROFESSIONAL ATHLETE. An athlete who performs services in a
professional athletic event for wages or other remuneration.
      (5)   PROFESSIONAL ENTERTAINER. A person who performs services in the
professional performing arts for wages or other remuneration on a per-event
basis.
      (6)   PUBLIC FIGURE. A person of prominence who performs services at
discrete events, such as speeches, public appearances or similar events, for
wages or other remuneration on a per-event basis.
      (7)   WORKSITE LOCATION. A construction site or other temporary worksite
in this state at which the employer provides services for more than 20 days
during the calendar year. WORKSITE LOCATION does not include the home of an
employee.
   (b)   (1)   Subject to divisions (c), (e), (f) below, an employer is not
required to withhold municipal income tax on qualifying wages paid to an
employee for the performance of personal services in a municipal corporation
that imposes such a tax if the employee performed such services in the
municipal corporation on 20 or fewer days in a calendar year, unless one of the
following conditions applies.
         A.   The employee’s principal place of work is located in the
municipal corporation.
         B.   The employee performed services at one or more presumed worksite
locations in the municipal corporation. For the purposes of this division,
PRESUMED WORKSITE LOCATION means a construction site or other temporary
worksite in this state at which the employer provides services that can
reasonably be expected by the employer to last more than 20 days in a calendar
year. Services can “reasonably be expected by the employer to last more than 20
days” if either of the following applies at the time the services commence:
            1.   The nature of the services are such that it will require more
than 20 days of actual services to complete the services; or
            2.   The agreement between the employer and its customer to perform
services at a location requires the employer to perform actual services at the
location for more than 20 days.
         C.   The employee is a resident of the municipal corporation and has
requested that the employer withhold tax from the employee’s qualifying wages
as provided in R.C. § 718.03.
         D.   The employee is a professional athlete, professional entertainer
or public figure, and the qualifying wages are paid for the performance of
services in the employee’s capacity as a professional athlete, professional
entertainer or public figure.
      (2)   For the purposes of division (b)(1) above, an employee shall be
considered to have spent a day performing services in a municipal corporation
only if the employee spent more time performing services for or on behalf of
the employer in that municipal corporation than in any other municipal
corporation on that day. For the purposes of determining the amount of time an
employee spent in a particular location, the time spent performing one or more
of the following activities shall be considered to have been spent at the
employee’s principal place of work:
         A.   Traveling to the location at which the employee will first
perform services for the employer for the day;
         B.   Traveling from a location at which the employee was performing
services for the employer to any other location;
         C.   Traveling from any location to another location in order to pick
up or load, for the purpose of transportation or delivery, property that has
been purchased, sold, assembled, fabricated, repaired, refurbished, processed,
remanufactured or improved by the employee’s employer;
         D.   Transporting or delivering property described in division (b)
(2)C. above, provided that, upon delivery of the property, the employee does
not temporarily or permanently affix the property to real estate owned, used or
controlled by a person other than the employee’s employer; and
         E.   Traveling from the location at which the employee makes the
employee’s final delivery or pick-up for the day to either the employee’s
principal place of work or a location at which the employee will not perform
services for the employer.
   (c)   If the principal place of work of an employee is located in a
municipal corporation that imposes an income tax in accordance with this
chapter, the exception from withholding requirements described in division (b)
(1) above shall apply only if, with respect to the employee’s qualifying wages
described in that division, the employer withholds and remits tax on such
qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employee’s principal
place of work is located.
   (d)   (1)   Except as provided in division (d)(2) below, if, during a
calendar year, the number of days an employee spends performing personal
services in a municipal corporation exceeds the 20-day threshold described in
division (b)(1) above, the employer shall withhold and remit tax to that
municipal corporation for any subsequent days in that calendar year on which
the employer pays qualifying wages to the employee for personal services
performed in that municipal corporation.
      (2)   An employer required to begin withholding tax for a municipal
corporation under division (d)(1) above may elect to withhold tax for that
municipal corporation for the first 20 days on which the employer paid
qualifying wages to the employee for personal services performed in that
municipal corporation.
      (3)   If an employer makes the election described in division (d)(2)
above, the taxes withheld and paid by such an employer during those first 20
days to the municipal corporation in which the employee’s principal place of
work is located are refundable to the employee.
   (e)   (1)   Without regard to the number of days in a calendar year on which
an employee performs personal services in any municipal corporation, an
employer shall withhold municipal income tax on all of the employee’s
qualifying wages for a taxable year and remit that tax only to the municipal
corporation in which the employer’s fixed location is located if the employer
qualifies as a small employer, as defined in R.C. § 718.01.
      (2)   To determine whether an employer qualifies as a small employer for
a taxable year, a Tax Administrator may require the employer to provide the Tax
Administrator with the employer’s federal income tax return for the preceding
taxable year.
   (f)   Divisions (b)(1) and (d) above shall not apply to the extent that a
Tax Administrator and an employer enter into an agreement regarding the manner
in which the employer shall comply with the requirements of R.C. § 718.03.
   (g)   (1)   In the case of a person performing personal services at a
petroleum refinery located in a municipal corporation that imposes a tax on
income, an employer is not required to withhold municipal income tax on the
qualifying wages of such a person if the person performs those services on 12
or fewer days in a calendar year, unless the principal place of work of the
employer is located in another municipal corporation in this state that imposes
a tax applying to compensation paid to the person for services performed on
those days and the person is not liable to that other municipal corporation for
tax on the compensation paid for such services. For the purposes of this
division, a PETROLEUM REFINERY is a facility with a standard industrial
classification code facility classification of 2911, petroleum refining.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (d) above, if, during a calendar year, the
number of days an individual performs personal services at a petroleum refinery
exceeds 12, the employer shall withhold tax for the municipal corporation for
the first 12 days for which the employer paid qualifying wages to the
individual and for all subsequent days in the calendar year on which the
individual performed services at the refinery.
(R.C. § 718.011) (Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.14 COLLECTION AT SOURCE; CASINO AND VLT.
   As used in this section, SPORTS GAMING FACILITY and TYPE B SPORTS GAMING
PROPRIETOR have the same meanings as in R.C. § 3775.01 and LOTTERY SPORTS
GAMING has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3770.23.
   (a)   A municipal corporation shall require the following persons to
withhold and remit municipal income tax with respect to amounts other than
qualifying wages as provided in this section:
      (1)   A casino facility or a casino operator, as defined in Ohio Const.,
Art. XV, § 6(C)(9) and R.C. § 3772.01, respectively;
      (2)   A lottery sales agent conducting video lottery terminals on behalf
of the state; and
      (3)   A type B sports gaming proprietor offering sports gaming at a
sports gaming facility.
   (b)   If a person’s winnings at a casino facility or sports gaming facility
are an amount for which reporting to the Internal Revenue Service of the amount
is required by I.R.C. § 6041, as amended, a casino operator or sports gaming
proprietor shall deduct and withhold municipal income tax from the person’s
winnings at the rate of the tax imposed by the municipal corporation in which
the casino facility or sports gaming facility is located.
   (c)   Amounts deducted and withheld by a casino operator or sports gaming
proprietor are held in trust for the benefit of the municipal corporation to
which the tax is owed.
      (1)   On or before the tenth day of each month, the casino operator or
sports gaming proprietor shall file a return electronically with the Tax
Administrator of the municipal corporation, providing the name, address and
Social Security number of the person from whose winnings amounts were deducted
and withheld, the amount of each such deduction and withholding during the
preceding calendar month, the amount of the winnings from which each such
amount was withheld, the type of casino gaming or sports gaming that resulted
in such winnings and any other information required by the Tax Administrator.
With this return, the casino operator or sports gaming proprietor shall remit
electronically to the municipal corporation all amounts deducted and withheld
during the preceding month.
      (2)   Annually, on or before January 31, a casino operator or sports
gaming proprietor shall file an annual return electronically with the Tax
Administrator of the municipal corporation in which the casino facility or
sports gaming facility is located, indicating the total amount deducted and
withheld during the preceding calendar year. The casino operator or sports
gaming proprietor shall remit electronically with the annual return any amount
that was deducted and withheld and that was not previously remitted. If the
name, address or Social Security number of a person or the amount deducted and
withheld with respect to that person was omitted on a monthly return for that
reporting period, that information shall be indicated on the annual return.
      (3)   Annually, on or before January 31, a casino operator or sports
gaming proprietor shall issue an information return to each person with respect
to whom an amount has been deducted and withheld during the preceding calendar
year. The information return shall show the total amount of municipal income
tax deducted from the person’s winnings during the preceding year. The casino
operator or sports gaming proprietor shall provide to the Tax Administrator a
copy of each information return issued under this division. The Administrator
may require that such copies be transmitted electronically.
      (4)   A casino operator or sports gaming proprietor that fails to file a
return and remit the amounts deducted and withheld shall be personally liable
for the amount withheld and not remitted. Such personal liability extends to
any penalty and interest imposed for the late filing of a return or the late
payment of tax deducted and withheld.
      (5)   A.   If a casino operator or sports gaming proprietor sells the
casino facility or sports gaming facility, or otherwise quits the casino or
sports gaming business, the amounts deducted and withheld along with any
penalties and interest thereon are immediately due and payable. The successor
shall withhold an amount of the purchase money that is sufficient to cover the
amounts deducted and withheld along with any penalties and interest thereon
until the predecessor casino operator or sports gaming proprietor produces
either of the following:
            1.   A receipt from the Tax Administrator showing that the amounts
deducted and withheld and penalties and interest thereon have been paid; and
            2.   A certificate from the Tax Administrator indicating that no
amounts are due.
         B.   If the successor fails to withhold purchase money, the successor
is personally liable for the payment of the amounts deducted and withheld and
penalties and interest thereon.
      (6)   The failure of a casino operator or sports gaming proprietor to
deduct and withhold the required amount from a person’s winnings does not
relieve that person from liability for the municipal income tax with respect to
those winnings.
   (d)   If a person’s prize award from a video lottery terminal or from
lottery sports gaming offered in a video lottery terminal facility is an amount
for which reporting to the Internal Revenue Service is required by I.R.C. §
6041, as amended, the video lottery sales agent shall deduct and withhold
municipal income tax from the person’s prize award at the rate of the tax
imposed by the municipal corporation in which the video lottery terminal
facility is located.
   (e)   Amounts deducted and withheld by a video lottery sales agent are held
in trust for the benefit of the municipal corporation to which the tax is owed.
      (1)   The video lottery sales agent shall issue to a person from whose
prize award an amount has been deducted and withheld a receipt for the amount
deducted and withheld, and shall obtain from the person receiving a prize award
the person’s name, address and Social Security number in order to facilitate
the preparation of returns required by this section.
      (2)   On or before the tenth day of each month, the video lottery sales
agent shall file a return electronically with the Tax Administrator of the
municipal corporation providing the names, addresses and Social Security
numbers of the persons from whose prize awards amounts were deducted and
withheld, the amount of each such deduction and withholding during the
preceding calendar month, the amount of the prize award from which each such
amount was withheld and any other information required by the Tax
Administrator. With the return, the video lottery sales agent shall remit
electronically to the Tax Administrator all amounts deducted and withheld
during the preceding month.
      (3)   A video lottery sales agent shall maintain a record of all receipts
issued under this division (e) and shall make those records available to the
Tax Administrator upon request. Such records shall be maintained in accordance
with R.C. § 5747.17 and any rules adopted pursuant thereto.
      (4)   Annually, on or before January 31, each video lottery terminal
sales agent shall file an annual return electronically with the Tax
Administrator of the municipal corporation in which the facility is located
indicating the total amount deducted and withheld during the preceding calendar
year. The video lottery sales agent shall remit electronically with the annual
return any amount that was deducted and withheld and that was not previously
remitted. If the name, address or Social Security number of a person or the
amount deducted and withheld with respect to that person was omitted on a
monthly return for that reporting period, that information shall be indicated
on the annual return.
      (5)   Annually, on or before January 31, a video lottery sales agent
shall issue an information return to each person with respect to whom an amount
has been deducted and withheld during the preceding calendar year. The
information return shall show the total amount of municipal income tax deducted
and withheld from the person’s prize award by the video lottery sales agent
during the preceding year. A video lottery sales agent shall provide to the Tax
Administrator of the municipal corporation a copy of each information return
issued under this division (e)(5). The Tax Administrator may require that such
copies be transmitted electronically.
      (6)   A video lottery sales agent who fails to file a return and remit
the amounts deducted and withheld is personally liable for the amount deducted
and withheld and not remitted. Such personal liability extends to any penalty
and interest imposed for the late filing of a return or the late payment of tax
deducted and withheld.
   (f)   (1)   If a video lottery sales agent ceases to operate video lottery
terminals, the amounts deducted and withheld along with any penalties and
interest thereon are immediately due and payable. The successor of the video
lottery sales agent that purchases the video lottery terminals from the agent
shall withhold an amount from the purchase money that is sufficient to cover
the amounts deducted and withheld and any penalties and interest thereon until
the predecessor video lottery sales agent operator produces either of the
following:
         A.   A receipt from the Tax Administrator showing that the amounts
deducted and withheld and penalties and interest thereon have been paid; and
         B.   A certificate from the Tax Administrator indicating that no
amounts are due.
      (2)   If the successor fails to withhold purchase money, the successor is
personally liable for the payment of the amounts deducted and withheld and
penalties and interest thereon.
   (g)   The failure of a video lottery sales agent to deduct and withhold the
required amount from a person’s prize award does not relieve that person from
liability for the municipal income tax with respect to that prize award.
   (h)   If a casino operator, sports gaming proprietor or lottery sales agent
files a return late, fails to file a return, remits amounts deducted and
withheld late or fails to remit amounts deducted and withheld as required under
this section, the Tax Administrator of a municipal corporation may impose the
following applicable penalty:
      (1)   For the late remittance of, or failure to remit, tax deducted and
withheld under this section, a penalty equal to 50% of the tax deducted and
withheld; and
      (2)   For the failure to file, or the late filing of, a monthly or annual
return, a penalty of $500 for each return not filed or filed late. Interest
shall accrue on past due amounts deducted and withheld at the rate prescribed
in R.C. § 5703.47.
   (i)   Amounts deducted and withheld on behalf of a municipal corporation
shall be allowed as a credit against payment of the tax imposed by the
municipal corporation and shall be treated as taxes paid for purposes of R.C. §
718.08. This division applies only to the person for whom the amount is
deducted and withheld.
   (j)   The Tax Administrator shall prescribe the forms of the receipts and
returns required under this section.
(R.C. § 718.031) (Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.15 DETERMINING MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME FOR TAXPAYERS WHO ARE NOT
INDIVIDUALS.
   “Municipal taxable income” for a taxpayer who is not an individual for the
municipality is calculated as follows: “income” reduced by “exempt income” to
the extent otherwise included in income, multiplied by apportionment, further
reduced by any “pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward” equals “municipal
taxable income”.
   (a)   “Income” for a taxpayer that is not an individual means the “net
profit” of the taxpayer.
      (1)   NET PROFIT for a person other than an individual is defined in §
892.08.
      (2)   ADJUSTED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME is defined in §
892.08.
   (b)   EXEMPT INCOME is defined in §
892.08.
   (c)   APPORTIONMENT means the apportionment as determined by §
892.16.
   (d)   PRE-2017 NET OPERATING LOSS CARRYFORWARD is defined in §
892.08.
(Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.16 NET PROFIT; INCOME SUBJECT TO NET PROFIT TAX; ALTERNATIVE
APPORTIONMENT.
   This section applies to any taxpayer engaged in a business or profession in
the municipality unless the taxpayer is an individual who resides in the
municipality or the taxpayer is an electric company, combined company, or
telephone company that is subject to and required to file reports under R.C.
Chapter 5745.
   (a)   Unless otherwise herein excepted, net profit from a business or
profession conducted both within and without the boundaries of the municipality
shall be considered as having a taxable situs in the municipality for purposes
of municipal income taxation in the same proportion as the average ratio of the
following:
      (1)   A.   The average original cost of the real property and tangible
personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession
in the municipality during the taxable period to the average original cost of
all of the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in
the business or profession during the same period, wherever situated.
         B.   As used in division (a)(1)A. above, tangible personal or real
property shall include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the value
of such property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental thereon
by eight;
      (2)   Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the taxable
period to individuals employed in the business or profession for services
performed in the municipality to wages, salaries, and other compensation paid
during the same period to individuals employed in the business or profession,
wherever the individual's services are performed, excluding compensation from
which taxes are not required to be withheld under this chapter;
      (3)   Total gross receipts of the business or profession from sales and
rentals made and services performed during the taxable period in the
municipality to total gross receipts of the business or profession during the
same period from sales, rentals, and services, wherever made or performed.
   (b)   (1)   If the apportionment factors described in division (a) of this
section do not fairly represent the extent of a taxpayer's business activity in
the municipality, the taxpayer may request, or the Tax Administrator of the
municipality may require, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or any
portion of the income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method
involving one or more of the following:
         A.   Separate accounting;
         B.   The exclusion of one or more of the factors;
         C.   The inclusion of one or more additional factors that would
provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the taxpayer to the
municipality;
         D.   A modification of one or more of the factors.
      (2)   A taxpayer request to use an alternative apportionment method shall
be in writing and shall accompany a tax return, timely filed appeal of an
assessment, or timely filed amended tax return. The taxpayer may use the
requested alternative method unless the Tax Administrator denies the request in
an assessment issued within the period prescribed by this chapter.
      (3)   A Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer to use an alternative
apportionment method as described in division (b)(1) of this section only by
issuing an assessment to the taxpayer within the period prescribed by this
chapter.
      (4)   Nothing in division (b) of this section nullifies or otherwise
affects any alternative apportionment arrangement approved by a Tax
Administrator or otherwise agreed upon by both the Tax Administrator and
taxpayer before January 1, 2016.
   (c)   As used in division (a)(2) of this section, WAGES, SALARIES, AND OTHER
COMPENSATION includes only wages, salaries, or other compensation paid to an
employee for services performed at any of the following locations:
      (1)   A location that is owned, controlled, used by, rented to, or under
the possession of one of the following:
         A.   The employer;
         B.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of the employer, or a
related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient;
         C.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of a person described in
division (c)(1)B. of this section, or a related member of such a vendor,
customer, client, or patient.
      (2)   Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing, investigation,
inquiry, review, court-martial or similar administrative, judicial, or
legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted, provided that the
compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of, the employer
or that the employee's presence at the location directly or indirectly benefits
the employer;
      (3)   Any other location, if the Tax Administrator determines that the
employer directed the employee to perform the services at the other location in
lien of a location described in division (c)(1) or (2) of this section solely
in order to avoid or reduce the employer's municipal income tax liability. If a
Tax Administrator makes such a determination, the employer may dispute the
determination by establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the Tax
Administrator's determination was unreasonable.
   (d)   For the purposes of division (a)(3) of this section and except as
provided in division (i) of this section, receipts from sales and rentals made
and services performed shall be situs to a municipal corporation as follows:
      (1)   Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property shall be
situs to the municipal corporation in which the sale originated. For the
purposes of this division, a sale of property originates in a municipal
corporation if regardless of where title passes, the property meets any of the
following criteria:
         A.   The property is shipped to or delivered within the municipal
corporation from a stock of goods located within the municipal corporation.
         B.   The property is delivered within the municipal corporation from a
location outside the municipal corporation, provided the taxpayer is regularly
engaged through its own employees in the solicitation or promotion of sales
within such municipal corporation and the sales result from such solicitation
or promotion.
         C.   The property is shipped from a place within the municipal
corporation to purchasers outside the municipal corporation, provided that the
taxpayer is not, through its own employees, regularly engaged in the
solicitation or promotion of sales at the place where delivery is made.
      (2)   Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be situs to the
municipal corporation to the extent that such services are performed in the
municipal corporation.
      (3)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from the sale of
real property located in the municipal corporation shall be situs to the
municipal corporation.
      (4)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from rents and
royalties from real property located in the municipal corporation shall be
situs to the municipal corporation.
      (5)   Gross receipts from rents and royalties from tangible personal
property shall be situs to the municipal corporation based upon the extent to
which the tangible personal property is used in the municipal corporation.
   (e)   The net profit received by an individual taxpayer from the rental of
real estate owned directly by the individual or by a disregarded entity owned
by the individual shall be subject to tax only by the municipal corporation in
which the property generating the net profit is located and the municipal
corporation in which the individual taxpayer that receives the net profit
resides. A municipal corporation shall allow such taxpayers to elect to use
separate accounting for the purpose of calculating net profit situs under this
division to the nrnnicipal corporation in which the property is located.
   (f)   (1)   Except as provided in division (f)(2) of this section,
commissions received by a real estate agent or broker relating to the sale,
purchase, or lease of real estate shall be situs to the municipal corporation
in which the real estate is located. Net profit reported by the real estate
agent or broker shall be allocated to a municipal corporation based upon the
ratio of the commissions the agent or broker received from the sale, purchase,
or lease of real estate located in the municipal corporation to the commissions
received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate everywhere in the
taxable year.
      (2)   An individual who is a resident of a municipal corporation that
imposes a municipal income tax shall report the individual's net profit from
all real estate activity on the individual's annual tax return for that
municipal corporation. The individual may claim a credit for taxes the
individual paid on such net profit to another municipal corporation to the
extent that such credit is allowed under this chapter.
   (g)   (1)   If, in computing a taxpayer's adjusted federal taxable income,
the taxpayer deducted any amount with respect to a stock option granted to an
employee, and if the employee is not required to include in the employee's
income any such amount or a portion thereof because it is exempted from
taxation under this chapter by a municipal corporation to which the taxpayer
has apportioned a portion of its net profit, the taxpayer shall add the amount
that is exempt from taxation to the taxpayer's net profit that was apportioned
to that municipal corporation. In no case shall a taxpayer be required to add
to its net profit that was apportioned to that municipal corporation any amount
other than the amount upon which the employee would be required to pay tax were
the amount related to the stock option not exempted from taxation.
      (2)   This division applies solely for the purpose of making an
adjustment to the amount of a taxpayer's net profit that was apportioned to a
municipal corporation under this section.
   (h)   When calculating the ratios described in division (a) of this section
for the purposes of that division or division (b) of this section, the owner of
a disregarded entity shall include in the owner’s ratios the property, payroll,
and gross receipts of such disregarded entity.
   (i)   (1)   As used in this division:
         A.   QUALIFYING REMOTE EMPLOYEE OR OWNER. An individual who is an
employee of a taxpayer or who is a partner or member holding an ownership
interest in a taxpayer that is treated as a partnership for federal income tax
purposes, provided that the individual meets both of the following criteria:
            1.   The taxpayer has assigned the individual to a qualifying
reporting location.
            2.   The individual is permitted or required to perform services
for the taxpayer at a qualifying remote work location.
         B.   QUALIFYING REMOTE WORK LOCATION. A permanent or temporary
location at which an employee or owner chooses or is required to perform
services for the taxpayer, other than a reporting location of the taxpayer or
any other location owned or controlled by a customer or client of the taxpayer.
QUALIFYING REMOTE WORK LOCATION may include the residence of an employee or
owner and may be located outside of a municipal corporation that imposes an
income tax in accordance with this chapter. An employee or owner may have more
than one qualifying remote work location during a taxable year.
         C.   REPORTING LOCATION. Either of the following:
            1.   A permanent or temporary place of doing business, such as an
office, warehouse, storefront, construction site, or similar location, that is
owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the taxpayer:
            2.   Any location in this state owned or controlled by a customer
or client of the taxpayer, provided that the taxpayer is required to withhold
taxes under state law or any other section on qualifying wages paid to an
employee for the performance of personal services at that location.
         D.   QUALIFYING REPORTING LOCATION. One of the following:
            1.   The reporting location in this state at which an employee or
owner performs services for the taxpayer on a regular or periodic basis during
the taxable year;
            2.   If no reporting location exists in this state for an employee
or owner under division (i)(1)D.1. of this section, the reporting location in
this state at which the employee's or owner's supervisor regularly or
periodically reports during the taxable year;
            3.   If no reporting location exists in this state for an employee
or owner under division (i)(1)D.1. or 2. of this section, the location that the
taxpayer otherwise assigns as the employee's or owner's qualifying reporting
location, provided the assignment is made in good faith and is recorded and
maintained in the taxpayer's business records. A taxpayer may change the
qualifying reporting location designated for an employee or owner under this
division at any time.
      (2)   A.   For tax years ending on or after December 31, 2023, a taxpayer
may elect to apply the provisions of this division to the apportionment of its
net profit from a business or profession. For taxpayers that make this
election, the provisions of division (a) of this section apply to such
apportionment except as otherwise provided in this division.
         B.   A taxpayer shall make the election allowed under this division in
writing on or with the taxpayer's net profit return or, if applicable, a timely
filed amended net profit return or a timely filed appeal of an assessment. The
election applies to the taxable year for which that return or appeal is filed
and for all subsequent taxable years until the taxpayer revokes the election.
The taxpayer shall make the initial election with the Tax Administrator of each
municipal corporation with which, after applying the apportionment provisions
authorized in this division, the taxpayer is required to file a net profit tax
return for that taxable year. A taxpayer shall not be required to notify the
Tax Administrator of a municipal corporation in which a qualifying remote
employee's or owner's qualifying remote work location is located unless the
taxpayer is otherwise required to file a net profit return with that municipal
corporation due to business operations that are unrelated to the employee's or
owner's activity at the qualifying remote work location.
         C.   After the taxpayer makes the initial election, the election
applies to every municipal corporation in which the taxpayer conducts business.
The taxpayer shall not be required to file a net profit return with a municipal
corporation solely because a qualifying remote employee's or owner's qualifying
remote work location is located in such municipal corporation.
         D.   Nothing in this division prohibits a taxpayer from making a new
election under this division after properly revoking a prior election.
      (3)   For the purpose of calculating the ratios described in division (a)
of this section, all of the following apply to a taxpayer that has made the
election described in division (i)(2):
         A.   For the purpose of division (a)(1) of this section, the average
original cost of any tangible personal property used by a qualifying remote
employee or owner at that individual's qualifying remote work location shall be
sitused to that individual's qualifying reporting location.
         B.   For the purpose of division (a)(2) of this section, any wages,
salaries, and other compensation paid during the taxable period to a qualifying
remote employee or owner for services performed at that individual's qualifying
remote work location shall be sitused to that individual's qualifying reporting
location.
         C.   For the purpose of division (a)(3) of this section, and
notwithstanding division (d) of this section, any gross receipts of the
business or profession from services performed during the taxable period by a
qualifying remote employee or owner for services performed at that individual's
qualifying remote work location shall be sitused to that individual's
qualifying reporting location.
      (4)   Nothing in this division prevents a taxpayer from requesting, or a
Tax Administrator from requiring, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or
a portion of the income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method as
described in division (b) of this section. However, a Tax Administrator shall
not require an alternative apportionment method in such a manner that it would
require a taxpayer to file a net profit return with a municipal corporation
solely because a qualifying remote employee's or owner's qualifying remote work
location is located in the municipal corporation.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, nothing in this
division is intended to affect the withholding of taxes on qualifying wages
pursuant to any section of this chapter.
(R.C. § 718.02) (Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 2024-002, passed 2-17-2024)
§ 892.17 CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL INCOME TAX RETURN.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   AFFILIATED GROUP OF CORPORATIONS. An affiliated group as defined in
I.R.C. § 1504, except that if such a group includes at least one incumbent
local exchange carrier that is primarily engaged in the business of providing
local exchange telephone service in this state, the AFFILIATED GROUP shall not
include any incumbent local exchange carrier that would otherwise be included
in the GROUP.
      (2)   CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL INCOME TAX RETURN. A consolidated return filed
for federal income tax purposes pursuant to I.R.C. § 1501.
      (3)   CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME. The consolidated taxable
income of an affiliated group of corporations, as computed for the purposes of
filing a consolidated federal income tax return, before consideration of net
operating losses or special deductions. CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME
does not include income or loss of an incumbent local exchange carrier that is
excluded from the affiliated group under division (a)(1) above.
      (4)   INCUMBENT LOCAL EXCHANGE CARRIER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4927.01.
      (5)   LOCAL EXCHANGE TELEPHONE SERVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5727.01.
   (b)   (1)   For taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016, a
taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations may elect to
file a consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable year if at least
one member of the affiliated group of corporations is subject to the municipal
income tax in that taxable year and if the affiliated group of corporations
filed a consolidated federal income tax return with respect to that taxable
year. The election is binding for a five-year period beginning with the first
taxable year of the initial election unless a change in the reporting method is
required under federal law. The election continues to be binding for each
subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing
consolidated municipal income tax returns under division (b)(2) below or a
taxpayer receives permission from the Tax Administrator. The Tax Administrator
shall approve such a request for good cause shown.
      (2)   An election to discontinue filing consolidated municipal income tax
returns under this section must be made in the first year following the last
year of a five-year consolidated municipal income tax return election period in
effect under division (b)(1) above. The election to discontinue filing a
consolidated municipal income tax return is binding for a five-year period
beginning with the first taxable year of the election.
      (3)   An election made under division (b)(1) or (b)(2) above is binding
on all members of the affiliated group of corporations subject to a municipal
income tax.
      (4)   When a taxpayer makes the election allowed under R.C. § 718.80, a
valid election made by the taxpayer under division (b)(1) or (b)(2) above is
binding upon the Tax Commissioner for the remainder of the five-year period.
      (5)   When an election made under R.C. § 718.80 is terminated, a valid
election made under R.C. § 718.86 is binding upon the Tax Administrator for the
remainder of the five-year period.
   (c)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations
that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a taxable year shall
file a consolidated municipal income tax return for that taxable year if the
Tax Administrator determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that
intercompany transactions have not been conducted at arm’s length and that
there has been a distortive shifting of income or expenses with regard to
allocation of net profits to the municipal corporation. A taxpayer that is
required to file a consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable year
shall file a consolidated municipal income tax return for all subsequent
taxable years unless the taxpayer requests and receives written permission from
the Tax Administrator to file a separate return or a taxpayer has experienced a
change in circumstances.
   (d)   A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated municipal income tax return in
the same manner as is required under the United States Department of Treasury
regulations that prescribe procedures for the preparation of the consolidated
federal income tax return required to be filed by the common parent of the
affiliated group of which the taxpayer is a member.
   (e)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (e)(2), (e)(3) and (e)
(4) below, corporations that file a consolidated municipal income tax return
shall compute adjusted federal taxable income, as defined in R.C. § 718.01, by
substituting “consolidated federal taxable income” for “federal taxable income”
wherever “federal taxable income” appears in that division and by substituting
“an affiliated group of corporation’s” for “a C corporation’s” wherever “a C
corporation’s” appears in that division.
      (2)   No corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax return
shall make any adjustment otherwise required under R.C. § 718.01(E) to the
extent that the item of income or deduction otherwise subject to the adjustment
has been eliminated or consolidated in the computation of consolidated federal
taxable income.
      (3)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having at least
80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly or
indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group’s consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, the
corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax return shall do one of
the following with respect to that pass-through entity’s net profit or loss for
that taxable year:
         A.   Exclude the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in R.C. § 718.02, exclude the
property, payroll and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the
computation of the affiliated group’s net profit sitused to a municipal
corporation. If the entity’s net profit or loss is so excluded, the entity
shall be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the
entity’s net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group; and
         B.   Include the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss in the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in R.C. § 718.02, include the
property, payroll and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the
computation of the affiliated group’s net profit sitused to a municipal
corporation. If the entity’s net profit or loss is so included, the entity
shall not be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the
entity’s net profits that are included in the consolidated federal taxable
income of the affiliated group.
      (4)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having less than
80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly or
indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group’s consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, all
of the following shall apply:
         A.   The corporation filing the consolidated municipal income tax
return shall exclude the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purposes of making the computations required in R.C. § 718.02, exclude the
property, payroll and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the
computation of the affiliated group’s net profit sitused to a municipal
corporation; and
         B.   The pass-through entity shall be subject to municipal income
taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with this chapter on the basis of
the entity’s net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
   (f)   Corporations filing a consolidated municipal income tax return shall
make the computations required under R.C. § 718.02 by substituting
“consolidated federal taxable income attributable to” for “net profit from”
wherever “net profit from” appears in that section and by substituting
“affiliated group of corporations” for “taxpayer” wherever “taxpayer” appears
in that section.
   (g)   Each corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax return is
jointly and severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties, fines, charges
or other amounts imposed by a municipal corporation in accordance with this
chapter on the corporation, an affiliated group of which the corporation is a
member for any portion of the taxable year or any one or more members of such
an affiliated group.
   (h)   Corporations and their affiliates that made an election or entered
into an agreement with a municipal corporation before January 1, 2016, to file
a consolidated or combined tax return with such municipal corporation may
continue to file consolidated or combined tax returns in accordance with such
election or agreement for taxable years beginning on and after January 1, 2016.
(R.C. § 718.06) (Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.18 TAX CREDIT FOR BUSINESSES THAT FOSTER NEW JOBS IN THE STATE.
   A municipal corporation, by ordinance, may grant a refundable or
nonrefundable credit against its tax on income to a taxpayer to foster job
creation in the municipal corporation. If a credit is granted under this
section, it shall be measured as a percentage of the new income tax revenue the
municipal corporation derives from new employees of the taxpayer and shall be
for a term not exceeding 15 years. Before the municipal corporation passes an
ordinance granting a credit, the municipal corporation and the taxpayer shall
enter into an agreement specifying all the conditions of the credit.
(R.C. § 718.15) (Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.19 TAX CREDITS TO FOSTER JOB RETENTION.
   A municipal corporation, by ordinance, may grant a refundable or
nonrefundable credit against its tax on income to a taxpayer for the purpose of
fostering job retention in the municipal corporation. If a credit is granted
under this section, it shall be measured as a percentage of the income tax
revenue the municipal corporation derives from the retained employees of the
taxpayer, and shall be for a term not exceeding 15 years. Before a municipal
corporation passes an ordinance allowing such a credit, the municipal
corporation and the taxpayer shall enter into an agreement specifying all the
conditions of the credit.
(R.C. § 718.151) (Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.20 DECLARATION OF ESTIMATED TAX.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   ESTIMATED TAXES. The amount that the taxpayer reasonably estimates
to be the taxpayer’s tax liability for a municipal corporation’s income tax for
the current taxable year.
      (2)   TAX LIABILITY. The total taxes due to a municipal corporation for
the taxable year, after allowing any credit to which the taxpayer is entitled,
and after applying any estimated tax payment, withholding payment or credit
from another taxable year.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (f) below, every taxpayer shall
make a declaration of estimated taxes for the current taxable year, on the form
prescribed by the Tax Administrator, if the amount payable as estimated taxes
is at least $200. For the purposes of this section.
         A.   Taxes withheld from qualifying wages shall be considered as paid
to the municipal corporation for which the taxes were withheld in equal amounts
on each payment date unless the taxpayer establishes the dates on which all
amounts were actually withheld, in which case the amounts withheld shall be
considered as paid on the dates on which the amounts were actually withheld.
         B.   An overpayment of tax applied as a credit to a subsequent taxable
year is deemed to be paid on the date of the postmark stamped on the cover in
which the payment is mailed or, if the payment is made by electronic funds
transfer, the date the payment is submitted. As used in this division, DATE OF
THE POSTMARK means, in the event there is more than one date on the cover, the
earliest date imprinted on the cover by the postal service.
         C.   Taxes withheld by a casino operator, video lottery sales agent or
type B sports gaming proprietor under R.C. § 718.031 are deemed to be paid to
the municipal corporation for which the taxes were withheld on the date the
taxes are withheld from the taxpayer’s winnings.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (f) below, taxpayers filing joint
returns shall file joint declarations of estimated taxes. A taxpayer may amend
a declaration under rules prescribed by the Tax Administrator. Except as
provided in division (f) below, a taxpayer having a taxable year of less than
12 months shall make a declaration under rules prescribed by the Tax
Administrator.
      (3)   The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or before the
date prescribed for the filing of municipal income tax returns under R.C. §
718.05(G) or on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the
taxpayer becomes subject to tax for the first time.
      (4)   Taxpayers reporting on a fiscal year basis shall file a declaration
on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the beginning of each
fiscal year or period.
      (5)   The original declaration or any subsequent amendment may be
increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment day as
provided in this section.
   (c)   (1)   The required portion of the tax liability for the taxable year
that shall be paid through estimated taxes made payable to the municipal
corporation or Tax Administrator, including the application of tax refunds to
estimated taxes and withholding on or before the applicable payment date, shall
be as follows:
         A.   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 22.5% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         B.   On or before the fifteenth day of the sixth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 45% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         C.   On or before the fifteenth day of the ninth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 67.5% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
and
         D.   For an individual, on or before the fifteenth day of the first
month of the following taxable year, 90% of the tax liability for the taxable
year. For a person other than an individual, on or before the fifteenth day of
the twelfth month of the taxable year, 90% of the tax liability for the taxable
year.
      (2)   When an amended declaration has been filed, the unpaid balance
shown due on the amended declaration shall be paid in equal installments on or
before the remaining payment dates.
      (3)   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month of the year
following that for which the declaration or amended declaration was filed, an
annual return shall be filed and any balance which may be due shall be paid
with the return in accordance with R.C. § 718.05.
   (d)   (1)   In the case of any underpayment of any portion of a tax
liability, penalty and interest may be imposed pursuant to R.C. § 718.27 upon
the amount of underpayment for the period of underpayment, unless the
underpayment is due to reasonable cause as described in division (e) below. The
amount of the underpayment shall be determined as follows:
         A.   For the first payment of estimated taxes each year, 22.5% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         B.   For the second payment of estimated taxes each year, 45% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         C.   For the third payment of estimated taxes each year, 67.5% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment; and
         D.   For the fourth payment of estimated taxes each year, 90% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment.
      (2)   The period of the underpayment shall run from the day the estimated
payment was required to be made to the date on which the payment is made. For
purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes on or before any payment
date shall be considered a payment of any previous underpayment only to the
extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the amount of the payment
presently required to be paid to avoid any penalty.
   (e)   An underpayment of any portion of tax liability determined under
division (d) above shall be due to reasonable cause and the penalty imposed by
this section shall not be added to the taxes for the taxable year if any of the
following apply:
      (1)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 90% of
the tax liability for the current taxable year, determined by annualizing the
income received during the year up to the end of the month immediately
preceding the month in which the payment is due;
      (2)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 100%
of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer for the preceding
taxable year, provided that the immediately preceding taxable year reflected a
period of 12 months and the taxpayer filed a return with the municipal
corporation under R.C. § 718.05 for that year; and
      (3)   The taxpayer is an individual who resides in the municipal
corporation but was not domiciled there on January 1 of the calendar year that
includes the first day of the taxable year.
   (f)   (1)   A Tax Administrator may waive the requirement for filing a
declaration of estimated taxes for any class of taxpayers after finding that
the waiver is reasonable and proper in view of administrative costs and other
factors.
      (2)   A municipal corporation may, by ordinance or rule, waive the
requirement for filing a declaration of estimated taxes for all taxpayers.
(R.C. § 718.08) (Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.21 REFUNDABLE CREDIT FOR QUALIFYING LOSS.
   (a) As used in this section:
      (1)   NONQUALIFIED DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN. A compensation plan
described in I.R.C. § 3121(v)(2)(C).
      (2)   A.   Except as provided in division (a)(2)B. below, QUALIFYING LOSS
means the excess, if any, of the total amount of compensation the payment of
which is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan over
the total amount of income the taxpayer has recognized for federal income tax
purposes for all taxable years on a cumulative basis as compensation with
respect to the taxpayer’s receipt of money and property attributable to
distributions in connection with the nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
         B.   If, for one or more taxable years, the taxpayer has not paid to
one or more municipal corporations income tax imposed on the entire amount of
compensation the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified
deferred compensation plan, then the QUALIFYING LOSS is the product of the
amount resulting from the calculation described in division (a)(2)A. above
computed without regard to this division (a)(2)B. and a fraction the numerator
of which is the portion of such compensation on which the taxpayer has paid
income tax to one or more municipal corporations and the denominator of which
is the total amount of compensation the payment of which is deferred pursuant
to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
         C.   With respect to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan, the
taxpayer sustains a QUALIFYING LOSS only in the taxable year in which the
taxpayer receives the final distribution of money and property pursuant to that
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
      (3)   QUALIFYING TAX RATE. The applicable tax rate for the taxable year
for which the taxpayer paid income tax to a municipal corporation with respect
to any portion of the total amount of compensation the payment of which is
deferred pursuant to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan. If different
tax rates applied for different taxable years, then the QUALIFYING TAX RATE is
a weighted average of those different tax rates. The weighted average shall be
based upon the tax paid to the municipal corporation each year with respect to
the nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (d) below, a refundable credit
shall be allowed against the income tax imposed by a municipal corporation for
each qualifying loss sustained by a taxpayer during the taxable year. The
amount of the credit shall be equal to the product of the qualifying loss and
the qualifying tax rate.
      (2)   A taxpayer shall claim the credit allowed under this section from
each municipal corporation to which the taxpayer paid municipal income tax with
respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan in one or more taxable
years.
      (3)   If a taxpayer has paid tax to more than one municipal corporation
with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan, the amount of the
credit that a taxpayer may claim from each municipal corporation shall be
calculated on the basis of each municipal corporation’s proportionate share of
the total municipal corporation income tax paid by the taxpayer to all
municipal corporations with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation
plan.
      (4)   In no case shall the amount of the credit allowed under this
section exceed the cumulative income tax that a taxpayer has paid to a
municipal corporation for all taxable years with respect to the nonqualified
deferred compensation plan.
   (c)   (1)   For purposes of this section, municipal corporation income tax
that has been withheld with respect to a nonqualified deferred compensation
plan shall be considered to have been paid by the taxpayer with respect to the
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
      (2)   Any municipal income tax that has been refunded or otherwise
credited for the benefit of the taxpayer with respect to a nonqualified
deferred compensation plan shall not be considered to have been paid to the
municipal corporation by the taxpayer.
   (d)   The credit allowed under this section is allowed only to the extent
the taxpayer’s qualifying loss is attributable to:
      (1)   The insolvency or bankruptcy of the employer who had established
the nonqualified deferred compensation plan; or
      (2)   The employee’s failure or inability to satisfy all of the
employer’s terms and conditions necessary to receive the nonqualified deferred
compensation.
(R.C. § 718.021) (Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.22 CREDIT FOR PERSON WORKING IN JOINT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT OR
ZONE.
   A municipal corporation shall grant a credit against its tax on income to a
resident of the municipal corporation who works in a joint economic development
zone created under R.C. § 715.691 or a joint economic development district
created under R.C. §§ 715.70, 715.71 or 715.72 to the same extent that it
grants a credit against its tax on income to its residents who are employed in
another municipal corporation.
(R.C. § 718.16) (Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.23 CREDIT FOR TAX BEYOND STATUTE FOR OBTAINING REFUND.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) below, if tax or withholding is
paid to a municipal corporation on income or wages, and if a second municipal
corporation imposes or assesses a tax on that income or wages after the time
period allowed for a refund of the tax or withholding paid to the first
municipal corporation, the second municipal corporation shall allow a
nonrefundable credit, against the tax or withholding the second municipality
claims is due with respect to such income or wages, equal to the tax or
withholding paid to the first municipal corporation with respect to such income
or wages.
   (b)   If the tax rate in the second municipal corporation is less than the
tax rate in the first municipal corporation, then the credit described in
division (a) above shall be calculated using the tax rate in effect in the
second municipal corporation.
   (c)   If the tax rate in the second municipal corporation is greater than
the tax rate in the first municipal corporation, the tax due in excess of the
credit afforded is to be paid to the second municipal corporation, along with
any penalty and interest accruing thereto during the period of nonpayment.
   (d)   Nothing in this section permits any credit carryforward.
(R.C. § 718.121) (Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.24 RETURN AND PAYMENT OF TAX.
   (a)   An annual return with respect to the income tax levied by a municipal
corporation shall be completed and filed by every taxpayer for any taxable year
for which the taxpayer is liable for the tax. If the total credit allowed
against the tax as described in R.C. § 718.04(D) for the year is equal to or
exceeds the tax imposed by the municipal corporation, no return shall be
required unless the municipal ordinance or resolution levying the tax requires
the filing of a return in such circumstances.
   (b)   If an individual is deceased, any return or notice required of that
individual shall be completed and filed by that decedent’s executor,
administrator or other person charged with the property of that decedent.
   (c)   If an individual is unable to complete and file a return or notice
required by a municipal corporation in accordance with this chapter, the return
or notice required of that individual shall be completed and filed by the
individual’s duly authorized agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary or other
person charged with the care of the person or property of that individual.
   (d)   Returns or notices required of an estate or a trust shall be completed
and filed by the fiduciary of the estate or trust.
   (e)   No municipal corporation shall deny spouses the ability to file a
joint return.
   (f)   (1)   Each return required to be filed under this section shall
contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer’s duly authorized agent
and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer, and shall include
the taxpayer’s Social Security number or taxpayer identification number. Each
return shall be verified by a declaration under penalty of perjury.
      (2)   A Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer who is an individual to
include, with each annual return, amended return or request for refund required
under this section, copies of only the following documents: all of the
taxpayer’s Internal Revenue Service form W-2, “Wage and Tax Statements”,
including all information reported on the taxpayer’s federal W-2, as well as
taxable wages reported or withheld for any municipal corporation; the
taxpayer’s Internal Revenue Service form 1040 or, in the case of a return or
request required by a qualified municipal corporation, state form IT-1040; and,
with respect to an amended tax return or refund request, any other
documentation necessary to support the refund request or the adjustments made
in the amended return. An individual taxpayer who files the annual return
required by this section electronically is not required to provide paper copies
of any of the foregoing to the Tax Administrator unless the Tax Administrator
requests such copies after the return has been filed.
      (3)   A.   A Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer that is not an
individual to include, with each annual net profit return, amended net profit
return or request for refund required under this section, copies of only the
following documents: the taxpayer’s Internal Revenue Service form 1041, form
1065, form 1120, form 1120-REIT, form 1120F or form 1120S, and, with respect to
an amended tax return or refund request, any other documentation necessary to
support the refund request or the adjustments made in the amended return.
         B.   A taxpayer that is not an individual and that files an annual net
profit return electronically through the state business gateway or in some
other manner shall either mail the documents required under this division (f)
(3) to the Tax Administrator at the time of filing or, if electronic submission
is available, submit the documents electronically through the state business
gateway. The Department of Taxation shall publish a method of electronically
submitting the documents required under this division through the state
business gateway on or before January 1, 2016. The Department shall transmit
all documents submitted electronically under this division to the appropriate
Tax Administrator.
      (4)   After a taxpayer files a tax return, the Tax Administrator may
request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information, statements or
documents required by the municipal corporation to determine and verify the
taxpayer’s municipal income tax liability. The requirements imposed under this
division (f) apply regardless of whether the taxpayer files on a generic form
or on a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
   (g)   (1)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each
individual income tax return required to be filed under this section shall be
completed and filed as required by the Tax Administrator on or before the date
prescribed for the filing of state individual income tax returns under R.C. §
5747.08(G). The taxpayer shall complete and file the return or notice on forms
prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on generic forms, together with
remittance made payable to the municipal corporation or Tax Administrator. No
remittance is required if the amount shown to be due is $10 or less. A
municipal corporation shall not require a qualifying employee whose income
consists exclusively of exempt income described in R.C. § 718.01(C)(20)(b) or
(C)(20)(c) to file a return under this section.
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each annual net
profit return required to be filed under this section by a taxpayer that is not
an individual shall be completed and filed as required by the Tax Administrator
on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the end of the
taxpayer’s taxable year. The taxpayer shall complete and file the return or
notice on forms prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on generic forms,
together with remittance made payable to the municipal corporation or Tax
Administrator. No remittance is required if the amount shown to be due is $10
or less.
      (2)   A.   Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax return shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of a municipal income tax
return. The extended due date of the municipal income tax return shall be the
fifteenth day of the tenth month after the last day of the taxable year to
which the return relates.
         B.   A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax return may request that
the Tax Administrator grant the taxpayer a six-month extension of the date for
filing the taxpayer’s municipal income tax return. If the request is received
by the Tax Administrator on or before the date the municipal income tax return
is due, the Tax Administrator shall grant the taxpayer’s requested extension.
         C.   An extension of time to file under this division (g)(2) is not an
extension of the time to pay any tax due unless the Tax Administrator grants an
extension of that date.
      (3)   If the Tax Commissioner extends for all taxpayers the date for
filing state income tax returns under R.C. § 5747.08(G), a taxpayer shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of a municipal income tax
return. The extended due date of the municipal income tax return shall be the
same as the extended due date of the state income tax return.
      (4)   If the Tax Administrator considers it necessary in order to ensure
the payment of the tax imposed by the municipal corporation in accordance with
this chapter, the Tax Administrator may require taxpayers to file returns and
make payments otherwise than as provided in this section, including taxpayers
not otherwise required to file annual returns.
      (5)   To the extent that any provision in this division conflicts with
any provision in R.C. § 718.052, the provision in that section prevails.
   (h)   (1)   For taxable years beginning after 2015, a municipal corporation
shall not require a taxpayer to remit tax with respect to net profits if the
amount due is less than $10.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (h)(3) below, any taxpayer not
required to remit tax to a municipal corporation for a taxable year pursuant to
division (h)(1) above shall file with the municipal corporation an annual net
profit return under division (f)(3) above.
      (3)   A municipal corporation shall not require a person to file a net
profit return under this section if the person’s income consists exclusively of
exempt income described in R.C. § 718.01(C)(20)(a).
   (i)   (1)   If any report, claim, statement or other document required to be
filed, or any payment required to be made, within a prescribed period or on or
before a prescribed date under this chapter is delivered after that period or
that date by United States mail to the Tax Administrator or other municipal
official with which the report, claim, statement or other document is required
to be filed, or to which the payment is required to be made, the date of the
postmark stamped on the cover in which the report, claim, statement or other
document, or payment is mailed shall be deemed to be the date of delivery or
the date of payment. THE DATE OF POSTMARK means, in the event there is more
than one date on the cover, the earliest date imprinted on the cover by the
postal service.
      (2)   If a payment under this chapter is made by electronic funds
transfer, the payment shall be considered to be made on the date of the
timestamp assigned by the first electronic system receiving that payment.
   (j)   The amounts withheld by an employer, the agent of an employer or
another payer as described in R.C. § 718.03 shall be allowed to the recipient
of the compensation as credits against payment of the tax imposed on the
recipient by the municipal corporation, unless the amounts withheld were not
remitted to the municipal corporation and the recipient colluded with the
employer, agent or other payer in connection with the failure to remit the
amounts withheld.
   (k)   Each return required by a municipal corporation to be filed in
accordance with this section shall include a box that the taxpayer may check to
authorize another person, including a tax return preparer who prepared the
return, to communicate with the Tax Administrator about matters pertaining to
the return. The return or instructions accompanying the return shall indicate
that by checking the box the taxpayer authorizes the Tax Administrator to
contact the preparer or other person concerning questions that arise during the
examination or other review of the return and authorizes the preparer or other
person only to provide the Tax Administrator with information that is missing
from the return, to contact the Tax Administrator for information about the
examination or other review of the return or the status of the taxpayer’s
refund or payments and to respond to notices about mathematical errors, offsets
or return preparation that the taxpayer has received from the Tax Administrator
and has shown to the preparer or other person.
   (l)   The Tax Administrator of a municipal corporation shall accept for
filing a generic form of any income tax return, report or document required by
the municipal corporation in accordance with this chapter, provided that the
generic form, once completed and filed, contains all of the information
required by ordinance, resolution or rules adopted by the municipal corporation
or Tax Administrator, and provided that the taxpayer or tax return preparer
filing the generic form otherwise complies with the provisions of this chapter
and of the municipal corporation ordinance or resolution governing the filing
of returns, reports or documents.
   (m)   When income tax returns, reports or other documents require the
signature of a tax return preparer, the Tax Administrator shall accept a
facsimile of such a signature in lieu of a manual signature.
   (n)   (1)   As used in this division, WORKSITE LOCATION has the same meaning
as in R.C. § 718.011.
      (2)   A person may notify a Tax Administrator that the person does not
expect to be a taxpayer with respect to the municipal corporation for a taxable
year if both of the following conditions apply.
         A.   The person was required to file a tax return with the municipal
corporation for the immediately preceding taxable year because the person
performed services at a worksite location within that municipal corporation.
         B.   1.   The person no longer provides services in the municipal
corporation and does not expect to be subject to the municipal corporation’s
income tax for the taxable year.
            2.   The person shall provide the notice in a signed affidavit that
briefly explains the person’s circumstances, including the location of the
previous worksite location and the last date on which the person performed
services or made any sales within the municipal corporation. The affidavit also
shall include the following statement: “The affiant has no plans to perform any
services within the municipal corporation, make any sales in the municipal
corporation or otherwise become subject to the tax levied by the municipal
corporation during the taxable year. If the affiant does become subject to the
tax levied by the municipal corporation for the taxable year, the affiant
agrees to be considered a taxpayer and to properly register as a taxpayer with
the municipal corporation if such a registration is required by the municipal
corporation’s resolutions, ordinances or rules.” The person shall sign the
affidavit under penalty of perjury.
         C.   If a person submits an affidavit described in this division (n)
(2), the Tax Administrator shall not require the person to file any tax return
for the taxable year unless the Tax Administrator possesses information that
conflicts with the affidavit or if the circumstances described in the affidavit
change. Nothing in this division (n) prohibits the Tax Administrator from
performing an audit of the person.
(R.C. § 718.05) (Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.25 RETURN AND PAYMENT OF TAX; INDIVIDUALS SERVING IN COMBAT ZONE.
   (a)   Each member of the National Guard of any state and each member of a
reserve component of the Armed Forces of the United States called to active
duty pursuant to an executive order issued by the president of the United
States or an act of the Congress of the United States, and each civilian
serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in
support of the armed forces, may apply to the Tax Administrator of a municipal
corporation for both an extension of time for filing of the return and an
extension of time for payment of taxes required by the municipal corporation in
accordance with this chapter during the period of the member’s or civilian’s
duty service and for 180 days thereafter. The application shall be filed on or
before the one hundred eightieth day after the member’s or civilian’s duty
terminates. An applicant shall provide such evidence as the Tax Administrator
considers necessary to demonstrate eligibility for the extension.
   (b)   (1)   If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant is
qualified for an extension under this section, the Tax Administrator shall
enter into a contract with the applicant for the payment of the tax in
installments that begin on the one hundred eighty-first day after the
applicant’s active duty or service terminates. Except as provided in division
(b)(3) below, the Tax Administrator may prescribe such contract terms as the
Tax Administrator considers appropriate.
      (2)   If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant is qualified
for an extension under this section, the applicant shall neither be required to
file any return, report or other tax document nor be required to pay any tax
otherwise due to the municipal corporation before the one hundred eighty-first
day after the applicant’s active duty or service terminates.
      (3)   Taxes paid pursuant to a contract entered into under division (b)
(1) above are not delinquent. The Tax Administrator shall not require any
payments of penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for the
extension period.
   (c)   (1)   Nothing in this division denies to any person described in this
division the application of divisions (a) and (b) above.
      (2)   A.   A qualifying taxpayer who is eligible for an extension under
the Internal Revenue Code shall receive both an extension of time in which to
file any return, report or other tax document and an extension of time in which
to make any payment of taxes required by a municipal corporation in accordance
with this chapter. The length of any extension granted under this division (c)
(2)A. shall be equal to the length of the corresponding extension that the
taxpayer receives under the Internal Revenue Code. As used in this section,
QUALIFYING TAXPAYER means a member of the National Guard or a member of a
reserve component of the armed forces of the United States called to active
duty pursuant to either an executive order issued by the President of the
United States or an act of the Congress of the United States, or a civilian
serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in
support of the armed forces.
         B.   Taxes whose payment is extended in accordance with division (c)
(2)A. above are not delinquent during the extension period. Such taxes become
delinquent on the first day after the expiration of the extension period if the
taxes are not paid prior to that date. The Tax Administrator shall not require
any payment of penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for the
extension period. The Tax Administrator shall not include any period of
extension granted under division (c)(2)A. above in calculating the penalty or
interest due on any unpaid tax.
   (d)   For each taxable year to which division (a), (b) or (c) above applies
to a taxpayer, the provisions of divisions (b)(2) and (b)(3) or (c) above, as
applicable, apply to the spouse of that taxpayer if the filing status of the
spouse and the taxpayer is married filing jointly for that year.
(R.C. § 718.052) (Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.26 USE OF STATE BUSINESS GATEWAY; TYPES OF FILINGS AUTHORIZED.
   (a)   Any taxpayer subject to municipal income taxation with respect to the
taxpayer’s net profit from a business or profession may file any municipal
income tax return, estimated municipal income tax return or extension for
filing a municipal income tax return and may make payment of amounts shown to
be due on such returns by using the state business gateway.
   (b)   Any employer, agent of an employer or other payer may report the
amount of municipal income tax withheld from qualifying wages and may make
remittance of such amounts by using the state business gateway.
   (c)   Nothing in this section affects the due dates for filing employer
withholding tax returns.
   (d)   No municipal corporation shall be required to pay any fee or charge
for the operation or maintenance of the state business gateway.
   (e)   The use of the state business gateway by municipal corporations,
taxpayers or other persons pursuant to this section does not affect the legal
rights of municipalities or taxpayers as otherwise permitted by law. The state
shall not be a party to the administration of municipal income taxes or to an
appeal of a municipal income tax matter, except as otherwise specifically
provided by law.
   (f)   (1)   A.   The Tax Commissioner shall adopt rules establishing:
            1.   The format of documents to be used by taxpayers to file
returns and make payments through the state business gateway; and
            2.   The information taxpayers must submit when filing municipal
income tax returns through the state business gateway.
         B.   The Commissioner shall not adopt rules under division (f)(1)
above that conflict with the requirements of R.C. § 718.05.
      (2)   The Commissioner shall consult with the state business gateway
steering committee before adopting the rules described in division (f)(1)
above.
   (g)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting or removing the
authority of any municipal corporation to administer, audit and enforce the
provisions of its municipal income tax.
(R.C. § 718.051) (Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.27 EXTENSION OF TIME TO FILE.
   (a)   Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic six-month extension
for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return shall automatically receive
an extension for the filing of the village’s income tax return. The extended
due date of the village's income tax return shall be the fifteenth day of the
tenth month after the last day of the taxable year to which the return relates.
For tax years ending on or after January 1, 2023, the extended due date of the
village's income tax return for a taxpayer that is not an individual shall be
the fifteenth day of the eleventh month after the last day of the taxable year
to which the return relates. An extension of time to file under this division
is not an extension of the time to pay any tax due unless the Tax Administrator
grants an extension of that date.
      (1)   A copy of the federal extension request shall be included with the
filing of the village's income tax return.
      (2)   A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six-month extension
for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return may request that the Tax
Administrator grant the taxpayer a six-month extension of the date for filing
the taxpayer's village income tax return. If the request is received by the Tax
Administrator on or before the date the village income tax return is due, the
Tax Administrator shall grant the taxpayer's requested extension.
   (b)   If the Tax Commissioner extends for all taxpayers the date for filing
state income tax returns under R.C. § 5747.08(G), a taxpayer shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of village's income tax
return. The extended due date of village's income tax return shall be the same
as the extended due date of the state income tax return.
   (c)   If the Tax Administrator considers it necessary in order to ensure the
payment of the tax imposed by the village, the Tax Administrator may require
taxpayers to file returns and make payments other than as provided in this
division, including taxpayers not otherwise required to file annual returns.
   (d)   (1)   If a taxpayer receives an extension for the filing of a
municipal income tax return under division (a), (b), or (c) of this section,
the Tax Administrator shall not make any inquiry or send any notice to the
taxpayer with regard to the return on or before the date the taxpayer files the
return or on or before the extended due date to file the return, whichever
occurs first.
      (2)   If a Tax Administrator violates division (d)(1) of this section,
the municipal corporation shall reimburse the taxpayer for any reasonable costs
incurred to respond to such inquiry or notice, up to $150.
      (3)   Division (d)(1) of this section does not apply to an extension
received under division (a) of this section if the Tax Administrator has actual
knowledge that the taxpayer failed to file for a federal extension as required
to receive the extension under division (a) of this section or failed to file
for an extension under division (a)(2) of this section.
(Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 2024-002, passed 2-17-2024)
§ 892.28 AMENDED RETURNS.
   (a)   A taxpayer shall file an amended return with the Tax Administrator in
such form as the Tax Administrator requires if any of the facts, figures,
computations or attachments required in the taxpayer’s annual return to
determine the tax due levied by the municipal corporation in accordance with
this chapter must be altered as the result of an adjustment to the taxpayer’s
federal income tax return, whether initiated by the taxpayer or the Internal
Revenue Service, and such alteration affects the taxpayer’s tax liability under
this chapter. If a taxpayer intends to file an amended consolidated municipal
income tax return, or to amend its type of return from a separate return to a
consolidated return, based on the taxpayer’s consolidated federal income tax
return, the taxpayer shall notify the Tax Administrator before filing the
amended return.
   (b)   (1)   In the case of an underpayment, the amended return shall be
accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due together with any
penalty and interest thereon. If the combined tax shown to be due is $10 or
less, such amount need not accompany the amended return. Except as provided
under division (b)(2) below, the amended return shall not reopen those facts,
figures, computations or attachments from a previously filed return that are
not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the
taxpayer’s federal or state income tax return unless the applicable statute of
limitations for civil actions or prosecutions under R.C. § 718.12 has not
expired for a previously filed return.
      (2)   The additional tax to be paid shall not exceed the amount of tax
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations and attachments were
reopened.
   (c)   (1)   In the case of an overpayment, a request for refund may be filed
under this division within the period prescribed by R.C. § 718.12(E) for filing
the amended return even if it is filed beyond the period prescribed in that
division if it otherwise conforms to the requirements of that division. If the
amount of the refund is $10 or less, no refund need be paid by the municipal
corporation to the taxpayer. Except as set forth in division (c)(2) below, a
request filed under this division shall claim refund of overpayments resulting
from alterations to only those facts, figures, computations or attachments
required in the taxpayer’s annual return that are affected, either directly or
indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer’s federal or state income tax
return unless it is also filed within the time prescribed in R.C. § 718.19.
Except as set forth in division (c)(2) below, the request shall not reopen
those facts, figures, computations or attachments that are not affected, either
directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer’s federal or state
income tax return.
      (2)   The amount to be refunded shall not exceed the amount of refund
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations and attachments were
reopened.
(R.C. §§ 718.12 and 718.41) (Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.29 REFUNDS.
   (a)   Upon receipt of a request for a refund, the Tax Administrator of a
municipal corporation, in accordance with this section, shall refund to
employers, agents of employers, other payers or taxpayers, with respect to any
income or withholding tax levied by the municipal corporation:
      (1)   Overpayments of more than $10; and
      (2)   Amounts paid erroneously if the refund requested exceeds $10.
   (b)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, requests for
refund shall be filed with the Tax Administrator, on the form prescribed by the
Tax Administrator within three years after the tax was due or paid, whichever
is later. The Tax Administrator may require the requestor to file with the
request any documentation that substantiates the requestor’s claim for a
refund.
      (2)   On filing of the refund request, the Tax Administrator shall
determine the amount of refund due and certify such amount to the appropriate
municipal corporation official for payment. Except as provided in division (b)
(3) below, the Administrator shall issue an assessment to any taxpayer whose
request for refund is fully or partially denied. The assessment shall state the
amount of the refund that was denied, the reasons for the denial and
instructions for appealing the assessment.
      (3)   If a Tax Administrator denies in whole or in part a refund request
included within the taxpayer’s originally filed annual income tax return, the
Tax Administrator shall notify the taxpayer, in writing, of the amount of the
refund that was denied, the reasons for the denial and instructions for
requesting an assessment that may be appealed under R.C. § 718.11.
   (c)   A request for a refund that is received after the last day for filing
specified in division (b) above shall be considered to have been filed in a
timely manner if any of the following situations exist:
      (1)   The request is delivered by the postal service, and the earliest
postal service postmark on the cover in which the request is enclosed is not
later than the last day for filing the request;
      (2)   The request is delivered by the postal service, the only postmark
on the cover in which the request is enclosed was affixed by a private postal
meter, the date of that postmark is not later than the last day for filing the
request and the request is received within seven days of such last day; or
      (3)   The request is delivered by the postal service, no postmark date
was affixed to the cover in which the request is enclosed or the date of the
postmark so affixed is not legible and the request is received within seven
days of the last day for making the request.
   (d)   As used in this section, WITHHOLDING TAX has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 718.27.
(R.C. § 718.19) (Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
Cross-reference:
   Related provisions, see §
892.28(e)
§ 892.30 PENALTY, INTEREST, FEES AND CHARGES.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   APPLICABLE LAW. This chapter, the resolutions, ordinances, codes,
directives, instructions and rules adopted by a municipal corporation provided
such resolutions, ordinances, codes, directives, instructions and rules impose
or directly or indirectly address the levy, payment, remittance or filing
requirements of a municipal income tax.
      (2)   FEDERAL SHORT-TERM RATE. The rate of the average market yield on
outstanding marketable obligations of the United States with remaining periods
to maturity of three years or less, as determined under I.R.C. § 1274, for July
of the current year.
      (3)   INCOME TAX, ESTIMATED INCOME TAX, and WITHHOLDING TAX. Any income
tax, estimated income tax and withholding tax imposed by a municipal
corporation pursuant to applicable law, including at any time before January 1,
2016.
      (4)   INTEREST RATE AS DESCRIBED IN THIS DIVISION (a). The federal short-
term rate, rounded to the nearest whole number percent, plus 5%. The rate shall
apply for the calendar year next following the July of the year in which the
federal short-term rate is determined in accordance with division (a)(4) above.
      (5)   A RETURN includes any tax return, report, reconciliation, schedule
and other document required to be filed with a Tax Administrator or municipal
corporation by a taxpayer, employer, any agent of the employer or any other
payer pursuant to applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016.
      (6)   UNPAID ESTIMATED INCOME TAX. Estimated income tax due but not paid
by the date the tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (7)   UNPAID INCOME TAX. Income tax due but not paid by the date the
income tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (8)   UNPAID WITHHOLDING TAX. Withholding tax due but not paid by the
date the withholding tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (9)   WITHHOLDING TAX. Includes amounts an employer, any agent of an
employer or any other payer did not withhold in whole or in part from an
employee’s qualifying wages, but that, under applicable law, the employer,
agent or other payer is required to withhold from an employee’s qualifying
wages.
   (b)   (1)   This section applies to the following:
         A.   Any return required to be filed under applicable law for taxable
years beginning on or after January 1, 2016; and
         B.   Income tax, estimated income tax and withholding tax required to
be paid or remitted to the municipal corporation on or after January 1, 2016.
      (2)   This section does not apply to returns required to be filed or
payments required to be made before January 1, 2016, regardless of the filing
or payment date. Returns required to be filed or payments required to be made
before January 1, 2016, but filed or paid after that date shall be subject to
the ordinances or rules, as adopted before January 1, 2016, of the municipal
corporation to which the return is to be filed or the payment is to be made.
   (c)   Each municipal corporation levying a tax on income may impose on a
taxpayer, employer, any agent of the employer and any other payer, and must
attempt to collect, the interest amounts and penalties prescribed under this
division (c) when the taxpayer, employer, any agent of the employer or any
other payer for any reason fails, in whole or in part, to make to the municipal
corporation timely and full payment or remittance of income tax, estimated
income tax or withholding tax or to file timely with the municipal corporation
any return required to be filed.
      (1)   Interest shall be imposed at the rate described in division (a)
above, per annum, on all unpaid income tax, unpaid estimated income tax and
unpaid withholding tax.
      (2)   A.   With respect to unpaid income tax and unpaid estimated income
tax, a municipal corporation may impose a penalty equal to 15% of the amount
not timely paid.
         B.   With respect to any unpaid withholding tax, a municipal
corporation may impose a penalty not exceeding 50% of the amount not timely
paid.
      (3)   A.   For tax years ending on or before December 31, 2022, with
respect to returns other than estimated income tax returns, the village may
impose a penalty of $25 for each failure to timely file each return, regardless
of the liability shown thereon for each month, or any fraction thereof, during
which the return remains unfiled, regardless of the liability shown thereon.
The penalty shall not exceed $150 for each failure.
         B.   For tax years ending on or after January 1, 2023, with respect to
returns other than estimated income tax returns, the village may impose a
penalty not exceeding $25 for each failure to timely file each return,
regardless of the liability shown thereon, except that the village shall abate
or refund the penalty assessed on a taxpayer's first failure to timely file a
return after the taxpayer files that return.
   (d)   (1)   With respect to the income taxes, estimated income taxes,
withholding taxes and returns, no municipal corporation shall impose, seek to
collect or collect any penalty, amount of interest, charges or additional fees
not described in this section.
      (2)   With respect to the income taxes, estimated income taxes,
withholding taxes and returns not described in division (a) above, nothing in
this section requires a municipal corporation to refund or credit any penalty,
amount of interest, charges or additional fees that the municipal corporation
has properly imposed or collected before January 1, 2016.
   (e)   Nothing in this section limits the authority of a municipal
corporation to abate or partially abate penalties or interest imposed under
this section when the Tax Administrator determines, in the Tax Administrator’s
sole discretion, that such abatement is appropriate.
   (f)   By October 31 of each year, the municipal corporation shall publish
the rate described in division (a) above applicable to the next succeeding
calendar year.
   (g)   The municipal corporation may impose on the taxpayer, employer, any
agent of the employer or any other payer the municipal corporation’s post-
judgment collection costs and fees, including attorney’s fees.
(R.C. § 718.27) (Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 2024-002, passed 2-17-2024)
§ 892.31 AUDIT.
   (a)   At or before the commencement of an audit, the Tax Administrator shall
provide to the taxpayer a written description of the roles of the Tax
Administrator and of the taxpayer during an audit and a statement of the
taxpayer’s rights, including any right to obtain a refund of an overpayment of
a tax. At or before the commencement of an audit, the Tax Administrator shall
inform the taxpayer when the audit is considered to have commenced.
   (b)   Except in cases involving suspected criminal activity, the Tax
Administrator shall conduct an audit of a taxpayer during regular business
hours and after providing reasonable notice to the taxpayer. A taxpayer who is
unable to comply with a proposed time for an audit on the grounds that the
proposed time would cause inconvenience or hardship must offer reasonable
alternative dates for the audit.
   (c)   (1)   At all stages of an audit by the Tax Administrator, a taxpayer
is entitled to be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant,
bookkeeper or other tax practitioner. The Tax Administrator shall prescribe a
form by which a taxpayer may designate such a person to assist or represent the
taxpayer in the conduct of any proceedings resulting from actions by the Tax
Administrator. If a taxpayer has not submitted such a form, the Tax
Administrator may accept other evidence, as the Tax Administrator considers
appropriate, that a person is the authorized representative of a taxpayer.
      (2)   A taxpayer may refuse to answer any questions asked by the person
conducting an audit until the taxpayer has an opportunity to consult with the
taxpayer’s attorney, accountant, bookkeeper or other tax practitioner. This
division does not authorize the practice of law by a person who is not an
attorney.
   (d)   A taxpayer may record, electronically or otherwise, the audit
examination.
   (e)   The failure of the Tax Administrator to comply with a provision of
this section shall neither excuse a taxpayer from payment of any taxes owed by
the taxpayer nor cure any procedural defect in a taxpayer’s case.
   (f)   If the Tax Administrator fails to substantially comply with the
provisions of this section, the Tax Administrator, upon application by the
taxpayer, shall excuse the taxpayer from penalties and interest arising from
the audit.
(R.C. § 718.36) (Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.32 ROUNDING.
   A person may round to the nearest whole dollar all amounts the person is
required to enter on any return, report, voucher or other document required
under this chapter. Any fractional part of a dollar that equals or exceeds
$0.50 shall be rounded to the next whole dollar, and any fractional part of a
dollar that is less than $0.50 shall be dropped. If a person chooses to round
amounts entered on a document, the person shall round all amounts entered on
the document.
(R.C. § 718.25) (Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.33 AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; ADMINISTRATIVE POWERS OF THE TAX
ADMINISTRATOR.
   Nothing in this chapter shall limit the authority of a Tax Administrator to
perform any of the following duties or functions, unless the performance of
such duties or functions is expressly limited by a provision of the Revised
Code or the charter or ordinances of the municipal corporation:
   (a)   Exercise all powers whatsoever of an inquisitorial nature as provided
by law, including the right to inspect books, accounts, records, memorandums
and federal and state income tax returns; to examine persons under oath; to
issue orders or subpoenas for the production of books, accounts, papers,
records, documents and testimony; to take depositions; to apply to a court for
attachment proceedings as for contempt; to approve vouchers for the fees of
officers and witnesses; and to administer oaths; provided that the powers
referred to in this division (a) shall be exercised by the Tax Administrator
only in connection with the performance of the duties respectively assigned to
the Tax Administrator under a municipal corporation income tax ordinance or
resolution adopted in accordance with this chapter;
   (b)   Appoint agents and prescribe their powers and duties;
   (c)   Confer and meet with officers of other municipal corporations and
states and officers of the United States on any matters pertaining to their
respective official duties as provided by law;
   (d)   Exercise the authority provided by law, including orders from
bankruptcy courts, relative to remitting or refunding taxes, including
penalties and interest thereon, illegally or erroneously imposed or collected,
or for any other reason overpaid, and, in addition, the Tax Administrator may
investigate any claim of overpayment and make a written statement of the Tax
Administrator’s findings, and, if the Tax Administrator finds that there has
been an overpayment, approve and issue a refund payable to the taxpayer, the
taxpayer’s assigns or legal representative as provided in this chapter;
   (e)    Exercise the authority provided by law relative to consenting to the
compromise and settlement of tax claims;
   (f)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to the use of
alternative apportionment methods by taxpayers in accordance with R.C. §
718.02;
   (g)   Make all tax findings, determinations, computations and orders the Tax
Administrator is by law authorized and required to make and, pursuant to time
limitations provided by law, on the Tax Administrator’s own motion, review,
redetermine or correct any tax findings, determinations, computations or orders
the Tax Administrator has made, but the Tax Administrator shall not review,
redetermine or correct any tax finding, determination, computation or order
which the Tax Administrator has made as to which an appeal has been filed with
the local Board of Tax Review or other appropriate tribunal, unless such appeal
or application is withdrawn by the appellant or applicant, is dismissed or is
otherwise final;
   (h)   Destroy any or all returns or other tax documents in the manner
authorized by law; and
   (i)   Enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to simplify the withholding
obligations described in R.C. § 718.03.
(R.C. § 718.24) (Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.34 AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; COMPROMISE OF CLAIM AND PAYMENT OVER
TIME.
   (a)   As used in this section, CLAIM means a claim for an amount payable to
a municipal corporation that arises pursuant to the municipal income tax
imposed in accordance with this chapter.
   (b)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits a Tax Administrator from doing
either of the following if such action is in the best interests of the
municipal corporation:
      (1)   Compromise a claim; and/or
      (2)   Extend for a reasonable period the time for payment of a claim by
agreeing to accept monthly or other periodic payments.
   (c)   The Tax Administrator may consider the following standards when
ascertaining with respect to a claim whether a compromise or payment-over-time
agreement is in the best interests of the municipal corporation.
      (1)   There exists a doubt as to whether the claim can be collected.
      (2)   There exists a substantial probability that, upon payment of the
claim and submission of a timely request for refund with respect to that
payment, the Tax Administrator would refund an amount that was illegally or
erroneously paid.
      (3)   There exists an economic hardship such that a compromise or
agreement would facilitate effective tax administration.
      (4)   There exists a joint liability among spouses, one of whom is an
innocent spouse, provided that any relief under this standard shall only affect
the claim as to the innocent spouse. A spouse granted relief under I.R.C. §
6015 with regard to any income item is rebuttably presumed to be an innocent
spouse with regard to that income item to the extent that income item is
included in or otherwise affects the computation of a municipal income tax or
any penalty or interest on that tax.
      (5)   Any other reasonable standard that the Tax Administrator
establishes.
   (d)   The Tax Administrator’s rejection of a compromise or payment-over-time
agreement proposed by a person with respect to a claim shall not be appealable.
   (e)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim
shall be binding upon and shall inure to the benefit of only the parties to the
compromise or agreement, and shall not extinguish or otherwise affect the
liability of any other person.
   (f)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim
shall be void if the taxpayer defaults under the compromise or agreement or if
the compromise or agreement was obtained by fraud or by misrepresentation of a
material fact. Any amount that was due before the compromise or agreement and
that is unpaid shall remain due, and any penalties or interest that would have
accrued in the absence of the compromise or agreement shall continue to accrue
and be due.
(R.C. § 718.28) (Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.35 AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; RIGHT TO EXAMINE.
   (a)   A Tax Administrator, or any authorized agent or employee thereof, may
examine the books, papers, records and federal and state income tax returns of
any employer, taxpayer or other person that is subject to, or that the Tax
Administrator believes is subject to, the provisions of this chapter for the
purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made or, if no return was
filed, to ascertain the tax due under this chapter. Upon written request by the
Tax Administrator or a duly authorized agent or employee thereof, every
employer, taxpayer or other person subject to this section is required to
furnish the opportunity for the Tax Administrator, authorized agent or employee
to investigate and examine such books, papers, records and federal and state
income tax returns at a reasonable time and place designated in the request.
   (b)   The records and other documents of any taxpayer, employer or other
person that is subject to, or that a Tax Administrator believes is subject to,
the provisions of this chapter shall be open to the Tax Administrator’s
inspection during business hours and shall be preserved for a period of six
years following the end of the taxable year to which the records or documents
relate, unless the Tax Administrator, in writing, consents to their destruction
within that period, or by order requires that they be kept longer. The Tax
Administrator of a municipal corporation may require any person, by notice
served on that person, to keep such records as the Tax Administrator determines
necessary to show whether or not that person is liable, and the extent of such
liability, for the income tax levied by the municipal corporation or for the
withholding of such tax.
   (c)   The Tax Administrator may examine under oath any person that the Tax
Administrator reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income that was
or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to affect
such income. The Tax Administrator may, for this purpose, compel any such
person to attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books, papers,
records and federal income tax returns in such person’s possession or control.
The person may be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant,
bookkeeper or other tax practitioner at any such hearing or examination. This
division (c) does not authorize the practice of law by a person who is not an
attorney.
   (d)   No person issued written notice by the Tax Administrator compelling
attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books, papers,
records or federal income tax returns under this section shall fail to comply.
(R.C. § 718.23) (Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.36 AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; REQUIRING IDENTIFYING INFORMATION.
   (a)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits a Tax Administrator from requiring
any person filing a tax document with the Tax Administrator to provide
identifying information, which may include the person’s Social Security number,
federal employer identification number or other identification number requested
by the Tax Administrator. A person required by the Tax Administrator to provide
identifying information that has experienced any change with respect to that
information shall notify the Tax Administrator of the change before, or upon,
filing the next tax document requiring the identifying information.
   (b)   When transmitting or otherwise making use of a tax document that
contains a person’s Social Security number, the Tax Administrator shall take
all reasonable measures necessary to ensure that the number is not capable of
being viewed by the general public, including, when necessary, masking the
number so that it is not readily discernible by the general public. The Tax
Administrator shall not put a person’s Social Security number on the outside of
any material mailed to the person.
   (c)   (1)   If the Tax Administrator makes a request for identifying
information and the Tax Administrator does not receive valid identifying
information within 30 days of making the request, nothing in this chapter
prohibits the Tax Administrator from imposing a penalty upon the person to whom
the request was directed pursuant to R.C. § 718.27, in addition to any
applicable penalty described in R.C. § 718.99.
      (2)   If a person required by the Tax Administrator to provide
identifying information does not notify the Tax Administrator of a change with
respect to that information as required under division (a) above within 30 days
after filing the next tax document requiring such identifying information,
nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from imposing a penalty
pursuant to R.C. § 718.27.
      (3)   The penalties provided for under divisions (c)(1) and (c)(2) above
may be billed and imposed in the same manner as the tax or fee with respect to
which the identifying information is sought and are in addition to any
applicable criminal penalties described in R.C. § 718.99 for a violation of
R.C. § 718.35 and any other penalties that may be imposed by the Tax
Administrator by law.
(R.C. § 718.26) (Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.37 CONFIDENTIALITY.
   (a)   Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations,
hearings or verifications required or authorized by this chapter or by a
charter or ordinance of a municipal corporation levying an income tax pursuant
to this chapter is confidential, and no person shall access or disclose such
information except in accordance with a proper judicial order or in connection
with the performance of that person’s official duties or the official business
of the municipal corporation as authorized by this chapter or the charter or
ordinance authorizing the levy. The Tax Administrator of the municipal
corporation or a designee thereof may furnish copies of returns filed or
otherwise received under this chapter and other related tax information to the
Internal Revenue Service, the Tax Commissioner and Tax Administrators of other
municipal corporations.
   (b)   This section does not prohibit a municipal corporation from publishing
or disclosing statistics in a form that does not disclose information with
respect to particular taxpayers.
(R.C. § 718.13) (Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.38 FRAUD.
   No person shall knowingly make, present, aid or assist in the preparation or
presentation of a false or fraudulent report, return, schedule, statement,
claim or document authorized or required by municipal corporation ordinance or
state law to be filed with a Tax Administrator, or knowingly procure, counsel
or advise the preparation or presentation of such report, return, schedule,
statement, claim or document, or knowingly change, alter or amend, or knowingly
procure, counsel or advise such change, alteration or amendment of the records
upon which such report, return, schedule, statement, claim or document is based
with intent to defraud the municipal corporation or a Tax Administrator.
(R.C. § 718.35) (Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.39 OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR.
   (a)   An OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR means an opinion issued under this
section with respect to prospective municipal income tax liability. It does not
include ordinary correspondence of the Tax Administrator.
   (b)   A taxpayer may submit a written request for an opinion of the Tax
Administrator as to whether or how certain income, source of income or a
certain activity or transaction will be taxed. The written response of the Tax
Administrator shall be an “opinion of the Tax Administrator” and shall bind the
Tax Administrator, in accordance with divisions (c), (g) and (h) below,
provided all of the following conditions are satisfied.
      (1)   The taxpayer’s request fully and accurately describes the specific
facts or circumstances relevant to a determination of the taxability of the
income, source of income, activity or transaction, and, if an activity or
transaction, all parties involved in the activity or transaction are clearly
identified by name, location or other pertinent facts.
      (2)   The request relates to a tax imposed by the municipal corporation
in accordance with this chapter.
      (3)   The Tax Administrator’s response is signed by the Tax Administrator
and designated as an “opinion of the Tax Administrator”.
   (c)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator shall remain in effect and shall
protect the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and who reasonably
relies on it from liability for any taxes, penalty or interest otherwise
chargeable on the activity or transaction specifically held by the Tax
Administrator’s opinion to be taxable in a particular manner or not to be
subject to taxation for any taxable years that may be specified in the opinion,
or until the earliest of the following dates:
      (1)   The effective date of a written revocation by the Tax Administrator
sent to the taxpayer by certified mail, return receipt requested. The effective
date of the revocation shall be the taxpayer’s date of receipt or one year
after the issuance of the opinion, whichever is later;
      (2)   The effective date of any amendment or enactment of a relevant
section of the Revised Code, uncodified state law or the municipal
corporation’s income tax ordinance that would substantially change the analysis
and conclusion of the opinion of the Tax Administrator;
      (3)   The date on which a court issues an opinion establishing or
changing relevant case law with respect to the Revised Code, uncodified state
law or the municipal corporation’s income tax ordinance;
      (4)   If the opinion of the Tax Administrator was based on the
interpretation of federal law, the effective date of any change in the relevant
federal statutes or regulations or the date on which a court issues an opinion
establishing or changing relevant case law with respect to federal statutes or
regulations;
      (5)   The effective date of any change in the taxpayer’s material facts
or circumstances; and
      (6)   The effective date of the expiration of the opinion, if specified
in the opinion.
   (d)   A taxpayer is not relieved of tax liability for any activity or
transaction related to a request for an opinion that contained any
misrepresentation or omission of one or more material facts.
   (e)   If a Tax Administrator provides written advice under this section, the
opinion shall include a statement that:
      (1)   The tax consequences stated in the opinion may be subject to change
for any of the reasons stated in division (c) above; and
      (2)   It is the duty of the taxpayer to be aware of such changes.
   (f)   A Tax Administrator may refuse to offer an opinion on any request
received under this section.
   (g)   This section binds a Tax Administrator only with respect to opinions
of the Tax Administrator issued on or after January 1, 2016.
   (h)   An opinion of a Tax Administrator binds that Tax Administrator only
with respect to the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and does not
bind the Tax Administrator of any other municipal corporation.
   (i)   A Tax Administrator shall make available the text of all opinions
issued under this section, except those opinions prepared for a taxpayer who
has requested that the text of the opinion remain confidential. In no event
shall the text of an opinion be made available until the Tax Administrator has
removed all information that identifies the taxpayer and any other parties
involved in the activity or transaction.
   (j)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator issued under this section may not
be appealed.
(R.C. § 718.38) (Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.40 ASSESSMENT; APPEAL BASED ON PRESUMPTION OF DELIVERY.
   (a)   (1)   Subject to division (b) below, a copy of each assessment shall
be served upon the person affected thereby either by personal service, by
certified mail or by a delivery service authorized under R.C. § 5703.056.
      (2)   With the permission of the person affected by an assessment, the
Tax Administrator may deliver the assessment through alternative means as
provided in this section, including, but not limited to, delivery by secure
electronic mail. Delivery by such means satisfies the requirements for delivery
under this section.
   (b)   (1)   A.   If certified mail is returned because of an undeliverable
address, a Tax Administrator shall utilize reasonable means to ascertain a new
last known address, including the use of a change of address service offered by
the postal service or an authorized delivery service under R.C. § 5703.056. If,
after using reasonable means, the Tax Administrator is unable to ascertain a
new last known address, the assessment shall be sent by ordinary mail and
considered served. If the ordinary mail is subsequently returned because of an
undeliverable address, the assessment remains appealable within 60 days after
the assessment’s postmark.
         B.   Once the Tax Administrator or other municipal official, or the
designee of either, serves an assessment on the person to whom the assessment
is directed, the person may protest the ruling of that assessment by filing an
appeal with the local Board of Tax Review within 60 days after the receipt of
service. The delivery of an assessment of the Tax Administrator under division
(b)(1)A. above is prima facie evidence that delivery is complete and that the
assessment is served.
      (2)   A.   If mailing of an assessment by a Tax Administrator by
certified mail is returned for some cause other than an undeliverable address,
the Tax Administrator shall resend the assessment by ordinary mail. The
assessment shall show the date the Tax Administrator sends the assessment and
include the following statement:
      “This assessment is deemed to be served on the addressee under applicable
law ten days from the date this assessment was mailed by the Tax Administrator
as shown on the assessment, and all periods within which an appeal may be filed
apply from and after that date.”
         B.   Unless the mailing is returned because of an undeliverable
address, the mailing of that information is prima facie evidence that delivery
of the assessment was completed ten days after the Tax Administrator sent the
assessment by ordinary mail and that the assessment was served.
         C.   If the ordinary mail is subsequently returned because of an
undeliverable address, the Tax Administrator shall proceed under division (b)
(1)A. above. A person may challenge the presumption of delivery and service
under this division in accordance with division (c) below.
   (c)   (1)   A person disputing the presumption of delivery and service under
division (b) above bears the burden of proving by a preponderance of the
evidence that the address to which the assessment was sent was not an address
with which the person was associated at the time the Tax Administrator
originally mailed the assessment by certified mail. For the purposes of this
section, a person is associated with an address at the time the Tax
Administrator originally mailed the assessment if, at that time, the person was
residing, receiving legal documents or conducting business at the address; or
if, before that time, the person had conducted business at the address and,
when the assessment was mailed, the person’s agent or the person’s affiliate
was conducting business at the address. For the purposes of this section, a
person’s affiliate is any other person that, at the time the assessment was
mailed, owned or controlled at least 20%, as determined by voting rights, of
the addressee’s business.
      (2)   If a person elects to appeal an assessment on the basis described
in division (c)(1) above, and if that assessment is subject to collection and
is not otherwise appealable, the person must do so within 60 days after the
initial contact by the Tax Administrator or other municipal official, or the
designee of either, with the person. Nothing in this division prevents the Tax
Administrator or other official from entering into a compromise with the person
if the person does not actually file such an appeal with the local Board of Tax
Review.
   (d)   Nothing in this section prohibits the Tax Administrator or the Tax
Administrator’s designee from delivering an assessment by a Tax Administrator
by personal service.
   (e)   Collection actions taken upon any assessment being appealed under
division (b)(1)B. above shall be stayed upon the pendency of an appeal under
this section. If an appeal is filed pursuant to this section on a claim that
has been delivered for collection, the collection activities with respect to
the assessment shall be stayed.
   (f)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   LAST KNOWN ADDRESS. The address the Tax Administrator has at the
time a document is originally sent by certified mail, or any address the Tax
Administrator can ascertain using reasonable means such as the use of a change
of address service offered by the postal service or an authorized delivery
service under R.C. § 5703.056.
      (2)   UNDELIVERABLE ADDRESS. An address to which the postal service or an
authorized delivery service under R.C. § 5703.056 is not able to deliver an
assessment of the Tax Administrator, except when the reason for nondelivery is
because the addressee fails to acknowledge or accept the assessment.
(R.C. § 718.18) (Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.41 LOCAL BOARD OF TAX REVIEW; APPEAL TO LOCAL BOARD OF TAX REVIEW.
   (a)   (1)   The legislative authority of each municipal corporation that
imposes a tax on income in accordance with this chapter shall maintain a local
Board of Tax Review to hear appeals as provided in this section. The
legislative authority of any municipal corporation that does not impose a tax
on income on June 26, 2003, but that imposes such a tax after that date, shall
establish such a board by ordinance not later than 180 days after the tax takes
effect.
      (2)   The local Board of Tax Review shall consist of three members. Two
members shall be appointed by the legislative authority of the municipal
corporation, but such appointees may not be employees, elected officials or
contractors with the municipal corporation at any time during their term or in
the five years immediately preceding the date of appointment. One member shall
be appointed by the top administrative official of the municipal corporation.
This member may be an employee of the municipal corporation, but may not be the
Director of Finance or equivalent officer, or the Tax Administrator or other
similar official or an employee directly involved in municipal tax matters, or
any direct subordinate thereof.
      (3)   The term for members of the local Board of Tax Review appointed by
the legislative authority of the municipal corporation shall be two years.
There is no limit on the number of terms that a member may serve if the member
is reappointed by the legislative authority. The board member appointed by the
top administrative official of the municipal corporation shall serve at the
discretion of the administrative official.
      (4)   Members of the Board of Tax Review appointed by the legislative
authority may be removed by the legislative authority by majority vote for
malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office. To remove such a member, the
legislative authority must give the member a copy of the charges against the
member and afford the member an opportunity to be publicly heard in person or
by counsel in the member’s own defense upon not less than ten days’ notice. The
decision by the legislative authority on the charges is final and not
appealable.
      (5)   A member of the board who, for any reason, ceases to meet the
qualifications for the position prescribed by this section shall resign
immediately by operation of law.
      (6)   A vacancy in an unexpired term shall be filled in the same manner
as the original appointment within 60 days of when the vacancy was created. Any
member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the
term for which the member’s predecessor was appointed shall hold office for the
remainder of such term. No vacancy on the board shall impair the power and
authority of the remaining members to exercise all the powers of the board.
      (7)   If a member is temporarily unable to serve on the board due to a
conflict of interest, illness, absence or similar reason, the legislative
authority or top administrative official that appointed the member shall
appoint another individual to temporarily serve on the board in the member’s
place. The appointment of such an individual shall be subject to the same
requirements and limitations as are applicable to the appointment of the member
temporarily unable to serve.
   (b)   Whenever a Tax Administrator issues an assessment regarding an
underpayment of municipal income tax or denies a refund claim, the Tax
Administrator shall notify the taxpayer in writing at the same time of the
taxpayer’s right to appeal the assessment or denial, the manner in which the
taxpayer may appeal the assessment or denial, and the address to which the
appeal should be directed.
   (c)   Any person who has been issued an assessment may appeal the assessment
to the board created pursuant to this section by filing a request with the
board. The request shall be in writing, shall specify the reason or reasons why
the assessment should be deemed incorrect or unlawful and shall be filed within
60 days after the taxpayer receives the assessment.
   (d)   The local Board of Tax Review shall schedule a hearing to be held
within 60 days after receiving an appeal of an assessment under division (c)
above, unless the taxpayer requests additional time to prepare or waives a
hearing. If the taxpayer does not waive the hearing, the taxpayer may appear
before the Board and may be represented by an attorney at law, certified public
accountant or other representative. The Board may allow a hearing to be
continued as jointly agreed to by the parties. In such a case, the hearing must
be completed within 120 days after the first day of the hearing unless the
parties agree otherwise.
   (e)   The Board may affirm, reverse or modify the Tax Administrator’s
assessment or any part of that assessment. The Board shall issue a final
determination on the appeal within 90 days after the Board’s final hearing on
the appeal, and send a copy of its final determination by ordinary mail to all
of the parties to the appeal within 15 days after issuing the final
determination. The taxpayer or the Tax Administrator may appeal the Board’s
final determination as provided in R.C. § 5717.011.
   (f)   The local Board of Tax Review created pursuant to this section shall
adopt rules governing its procedures and shall keep a record of its
transactions. Such records are not public records available for inspection
under R.C. § 149.43. Hearings requested by a taxpayer before a local Board of
Tax Review created pursuant to this section are not meetings of a public body
subject to R.C. § 121.22.
(R.C. § 718.11) (Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.42 ACTIONS TO RECOVER; STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.
   (a)   (1)   A.   Civil actions to recover municipal income taxes and
penalties and interest on municipal income taxes shall be brought within the
later of:
            1.   Three years after the tax was due or the return was filed,
whichever is later; or
            2.   One year after the conclusion of the qualifying deferral
period, if any.
         B.   The time limit described in division (a)(1)A. above may be
extended at any time if both the Tax Administrator and the employer, agent of
the employer, other payer or taxpayer consent in writing to the extension. Any
extension shall also extend for the same period of time the time limit
described in division (c) below.
      (2)   As used in this section, QUALIFYING DEFERRAL PERIOD means a period
of time beginning and ending as follows:
         A.   Beginning on the date a person who is aggrieved by an assessment
files with a local Board of Tax Review the request described in R.C. § 718.11.
That date shall not be affected by any subsequent decision, finding or holding
by any administrative body or court that the local Board of Tax Review with
which the aggrieved person filed the request did not have jurisdiction to
affirm, reverse or modify the assessment or any part of that assessment; and
         B.   Ending the later of the sixtieth day after the date on which the
final determination of the local Board of Tax Review becomes final or, if any
party appeals from the determination of the local Board of Tax Review, the
sixtieth day after the date on which the final determination of the local Board
of Tax Review is either ultimately affirmed in whole or in part or ultimately
reversed and no further appeal of either that affirmation, in whole or in part,
or that reversal is available or taken.
   (b)   Prosecutions for an offense made punishable under a resolution or
ordinance imposing an income tax shall be commenced within three years after
the commission of the offense, provided that in the case of fraud, failure to
file a return or the omission of 25% or more of income required to be reported,
prosecutions may be commenced within six years after the commission of the
offense.
   (c)   A claim for a refund of municipal income taxes shall be brought within
the time limitation provided in R.C. § 718.19.
   (d)   Interest shall be allowed and paid on any overpayment by a taxpayer of
any municipal income tax obligation from the date of the overpayment until the
date of the refund of the overpayment, except that if any overpayment is
refunded within 90 days after the final filing date of the annual return or 90
days after the completed return is filed, whichever is later, no interest shall
be allowed on the refund. For the purpose of computing the payment of interest
on amounts overpaid, no amount of tax for any taxable year shall be considered
to have been paid before the date on which the return on which the tax is
reported is due, without regard to any extension of time for filing that
return. Interest shall be paid at the interest rate described in R.C. § 718.27
(A)(5).
   (e)   Within 60 days after the final determination of any federal or state
tax liability affecting the taxpayer’s municipal tax liability, that taxpayer
shall make and file an amended municipal return showing income subject to the
municipal income tax based upon such final determination of federal or state
tax liability and pay any additional municipal income tax shown due thereon or
make a claim for refund of any overpayment, unless the tax or overpayment is
less than $10.
   (f)   (1)   Notwithstanding the fact that an appeal is pending, the
petitioner may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the subject of
the appeal. The acceptance of a payment by the municipal corporation does not
prejudice any claim for refund upon final determination of the appeal.
      (2)   If, upon final determination of the appeal, an error in the
assessment is corrected by the Tax Administrator, upon an appeal so filed or
pursuant to a final determination of the local Board of Tax Review created,
under R.C. § 718.11, of the State Board of Tax Appeals, or any court to which
the decision of the State Board of Tax Appeals has been appealed, so that the
amount due from the party assessed under the corrected assessment is less than
the amount paid, there shall be issued to the appellant or to the appellant’s
assigns or legal representative a refund in the amount of the overpayment as
provided by R.C. § 718.19, with interest on that amount as provided by division
(d) above.
   (g)   No civil action to recover municipal income tax or related penalties
or interest shall be brought during either of the following time periods:
      (1)   The period during which a taxpayer has a right to appeal the
imposition of that tax or interest or those penalties; and
      (2)   The period during which an appeal related to the imposition of that
tax or interest or those penalties is pending.
(R.C. § 718.12) (Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.43 ADOPTION OF RULES.
   Nothing in this chapter prohibits the legislative authority of a municipal
corporation or a Tax Administrator, pursuant to authority granted to the
Administrator by resolution or ordinance, to adopt rules to administer an
income tax imposed by the municipal corporation in accordance with this
chapter. Such rules shall not conflict with or be inconsistent with any
provision of this chapter. All rules adopted under this section shall be
published and posted on the internet as described in R.C. § 718.07.
(R.C. § 718.30) (Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.44 FILING NET PROFIT TAXES; ELECTION TO BE SUBJECT TO PROVISIONS OF THIS
CHAPTER.
   (a)   A taxpayer may elect to be subject to §§
892.44 to
892.59 in lieu of the provisions set forth in the remainder of this chapter.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, upon the taxpayer’s
election, both of the following shall apply.
      (1)   The State Tax Commissioner shall serve as the sole administrator of
the municipal profit tax for which the taxpayer as defined in §
892.45(c) is liable for the term of the election.
      (2)   The Commissioner shall administer the tax pursuant to §§
892.44 to
892.59 and any applicable provision of R.C. Chapter 5703.
   (b)   (1)   A taxpayer shall make the initial election on or before the
first day of the third month after the beginning of the taxpayer’s taxable year
by notifying the Tax Commissioner and the village, on a form prescribed by the
Tax Commissioner.
      (2)   A.   The election, once made by the taxpayer, applies to the
taxable year in which the election is made and to each subsequent taxable year
until the taxpayer notifies the Tax Commissioner and the village of its
termination of the election.
         B.   A notification of termination shall be made on a form prescribed
by the Tax Commissioner, on or before the first day of the third month of any
taxable year.
         C.   Upon a timely and valid termination of the election, the taxpayer
is no longer subject to §§
892.44 to
892.59, and is instead subject to the provisions set forth in the remainder of
this chapter.
   (c)   The Tax Commissioner shall enforce and administer §§
892.44 to
892.59. In addition to any other powers conferred upon the Tax Commissioner by
law, the Tax Commissioner may:
      (1)   Prescribe all forms necessary to administer those sections;
      (2)   Adopt such rules as the Tax Commissioner finds necessary to carry
out those sections; and
      (3)   Appoint and employ such personnel as are necessary to carry out the
duties imposed upon the Tax Commissioner by those sections.
   (d)   The Tax Commissioner shall not be considered a TAX ADMINISTRATOR, as
that term is defined in R.C. §§ 718.01 and 892.08.
(Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.45 DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   If a term used in §§
892.44 to
892.59 that is not otherwise defined in this chapter is used in a comparable
context in both the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax
and in R.C. Title LVII and the use is not consistent, then the use of the term
in the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax shall have
control over the use of the term in R.C. Title LVII, unless the term is defined
in R.C. Chapter 5703, in which case the definition in that chapter shall
control. Any reference in this chapter to the Internal Revenue Code includes
other laws of the United States related to federal income taxes. If a term is
defined in both this section and §
892.08, the definition in this section shall control for all uses of that term
in §§
892.44 to
892.59.
   (b)   As used in §§
892.44 to
892.59 only:
      (1)   ADJUSTED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME. For a person required to file as a
C corporation, or for a person that has elected to be taxed as a C corporation,
as described in §
892.08, or any other relevant section thereof, means a C corporation’s federal
taxable income before net operating losses and special deductions as determined
under the Internal Revenue Code, adjusted as follows:
         A.   Deduct intangible income to the extent included in federal
taxable income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether the
intangible income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets held
for the production of income;
         B.   Add an amount equal to 5% of intangible income deducted under
this division (b)(1), but excluding that portion of intangible income directly
related to the sale, exchange or other disposition of property described in
I.R.C. § 1221;
         C.   Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the computation of
federal taxable income if the losses directly relate to the sale, exchange or
other disposition of an asset described in I.R.C. §§ 1221 or 1231;
         D.   1.   Except as provided in division (b)(2)D.2. below, deduct
income and gain included in federal taxable income to the extent the income and
gain directly relate to the sale, exchange or other disposition of an asset
described in I.R.C. §§ 1221 or 1231.
            2.   Division (b)(1)D.1. above does not apply to the extent the
income or gain is income or gain described in I.R.C. §§ 1245 or 1250.
         E.   Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a deduction in
the computation of federal taxable income;
         F.   In the case of a real estate investment trust or regulated
investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to, distributions
to or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of investors and allowed
as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income;
         G.   Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded in
computing federal taxable income, any income derived from a transfer agreement
or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement under R.C. § 4313.02;
         H.   Deduct exempt income to the extent not otherwise deducted or
excluded in computing adjusted federal taxable income;
         I.   Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity owned, directly or
indirectly, by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer’s federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that net profit in
the group’s federal taxable income in accordance with §
892.50(e)(3)B.; and
         J.   1.   Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity owned,
directly or indirectly, by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer’s federal
taxable income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that loss in
the group’s federal taxable income in accordance with §
892.50(e)(3)B.
            2.   If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is not a disregarded
entity that has made the election described in §
892.08, and is not a publicly traded partnership that has made the election
described in §
892.08, the taxpayer shall compute adjusted federal taxable income under this
section as if the taxpayer were a C corporation, except guaranteed payments and
other similar amounts paid or accrued to a partner, former partner,
shareholder, former shareholder, member or former member shall not be allowed
as a deductible expense unless such payments are in consideration for the use
of capital and treated as payment of interest under I.R.C. § 469 or United
States Treasury regulations. Amounts paid or accrued to a qualified self-
employed retirement plan with respect to a partner, former partner,
shareholder, former shareholder, member or former member of the taxpayer,
amounts paid or accrued to or for health insurance for a partner, former
partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member or former member, and amounts
paid or accrued to or for life insurance for a partner, former partner,
shareholder, former shareholder, member or former member shall not be allowed
as a deduction.
            3.   Nothing in division (b) above shall be construed as allowing
the taxpayer to add or deduct any amount more than once or shall be construed
as allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or accrued for purposes
of federal self-employment tax.
      (2)   ASSESSMENT. A notice of underpayment or nonpayment of a tax issued
pursuant to §
892.42.
      (3)   MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME. Income apportioned or sitused to the
municipal corporation under §
892.46, as applicable, reduced by any pre-2018 net operating loss carryforward
available to the person for the municipal corporation.
      (4)   TAXPAYER. Has the same meaning as in §
892.08, except that TAXPAYER does not include natural persons or entities
subject to the tax imposed under R.C. Chapter 5745. TAXPAYER may include
receivers, assignees or trustees in bankruptcy when such persons are required
to assume the role of a taxpayer.
      (5)   TAX RETURN or RETURN. The notifications and reports required to be
filed pursuant to §§
892.44 to
892.59 for the purpose of reporting municipal income taxes, and includes
declarations of estimated tax.
      (6)   TAXABLE YEAR. The calendar year or the taxpayer’s fiscal year
ending during the calendar year, or fractional part thereof, upon which the
calculation of the taxpayer’s adjusted federal taxable income is based pursuant
to this chapter. If a taxpayer’s TAXABLE YEAR is changed for federal income tax
purposes, the taxable year for purposes of §§
892.44 to
892.59 is changed accordingly but may consist of an aggregation of more than
one taxable year for federal income tax purposes. The Tax Commissioner may
prescribe by rule an appropriate period as the taxable year for a taxpayer that
has had a change of its taxable year for federal income tax purposes, for a
taxpayer that has two or more short taxable years for federal income tax
purposes as the result of a change of ownership or for a new taxpayer that
would otherwise have no taxable year.
(Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.46 APPLICABILITY; TAXABLE SITUS; APPORTIONMENT.
   This section applies to any taxpayer that is engaged in a business or
profession in a municipal corporation and that has made the election under §
892.44.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b) below, net profit from a
business or profession conducted both within and without the boundaries of the
village shall be considered as having a taxable situs in the village for
purposes of municipal income taxation in the same proportion as the average
ratio of the following:
      (1)   A.   The average original cost of the real property and tangible
personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession
in the village during the taxable period to the average original cost of all of
the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the
business or profession during the same period, wherever situated.
         B.   As used in division (a)(1)A. above, TANGIBLE PERSONAL OR REAL
PROPERTY shall include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the value
of such property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental thereon
by eight.
      (2)   Wages, salaries and other compensation paid during the taxable
period to individuals employed in the business or profession for services
performed in the village to wages, salaries and other compensation paid during
the same period to individuals employed in the business or profession, wherever
the individual’s services are performed, excluding compensation from which
taxes are not required to be withheld under §
892.12; and
      (3)   Total gross receipts of the business or profession from sales and
rentals made and services performed during the taxable period in the village to
total gross receipts of the business or profession during the same period from
sales, rentals and services, wherever made or performed.
   (b)   (1)   If the apportionment factors described in division (a) above do
not fairly represent the extent of a taxpayer’s business activity in the
business, the taxpayer may request, or the Tax Commissioner may require, that
the taxpayer use, with respect to all or any portion of the income of the
taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method involving one or more of the
following:
         A.   Separate accounting;
         B.   The exclusion of one or more of the factors;
         C.   The inclusion of one or more additional factors that would
provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the taxpayer to the
municipal corporation; and/or
         D.   A modification of one or more of the factors.
      (2)   A taxpayer request to use an alternative apportionment method shall
be in writing and shall accompany a tax return, timely filed appeal of an
assessment or timely filed amended tax return. The taxpayer may use the
requested alternative method unless the Tax Commissioner denies the request in
an assessment issued within the period prescribed by §
892.42(a).
      (3)   The Tax Commissioner may require a taxpayer to use an alternative
apportionment method, as described in division (b)(1) above, only by issuing an
assessment to the taxpayer within the period prescribed by §
892.42(a).
   (c)   As used in division (a)(2) above, WAGES, SALARIES AND OTHER
COMPENSATION includes only wages, salaries or other compensation paid to an
employee for services performed at any of the following locations:
      (1)   A location that is owned, controlled or used by, rented to or under
the possession of one of the following:
         A.   The employer;
         B.   A vendor, customer, client or patient of the employer or a
related member of such a vendor, customer, client or patient; or
         C.   A vendor, customer, client or patient of a person described in
division (c)(1)B. above, or a related member of such a vendor, customer, client
or patient.
      (2)   Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing, investigation,
inquiry, review, court-martial or similar administrative, judicial or
legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted, provided that the
compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of, the employer
or that the employee’s presence at the location, directly or indirectly,
benefits the employer;
      (3)   Any other location, if the Tax Commissioner determines that the
employer directed the employee to perform the services at the other location in
lieu of a location described in division (c)(1) or (c)(2) above solely in order
to avoid or reduce the employer’s municipal income tax liability. If the Tax
Commissioner makes such a determination, the employer may dispute the
determination by establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the Tax
Commissioner’s determination was unreasonable.
   (d)   For the purposes of division (a)(3) above, receipts from sales and
rentals made and services performed shall be sitused to the village as follows.
      (1)   Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property shall be
sitused to the village only if, regardless of where title passes, the property
meets either of the following criteria.
         A.   The property is shipped to or delivered within the village from a
stock of goods located within the village.
         B.   The property is delivered within the village from a location
outside the village, provided the taxpayer is regularly engaged through its own
employees in the solicitation or promotion of sales within the village and the
sales result from such solicitation or promotion.
      (2)   Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be sitused to the
village to the extent that such services are performed in the village.
      (3)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from the sale of
real property located in the village shall be sitused to the village.
      (4)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from rents and
royalties from real property located in the village shall be sitused to the
village.
      (5)   Gross receipts from rents and royalties from tangible personal
property shall be sitused to the village based upon the extent to which the
tangible personal property is used in the village.
   (e)   Commissions received by a real estate agent or broker relating to the
sale, purchase or lease of real estate shall be sitused to the village in which
the real estate is located. Net profit reported by the real estate agent or
broker shall be allocated to the village based upon the ratio of the
commissions the agent or broker received from the sale, purchase or lease of
real estate located in the village to the Commissions received from the sale,
purchase or lease of real estate everywhere in the taxable year.
   (f)   (1)   If, in computing a taxpayer’s adjusted federal taxable income,
the taxpayer deducted any amount with respect to a stock option granted to an
employee, and if the employee is not required to include in the employee’s
income any such amount or a portion thereof because it is exempted from
taxation under §
892.08 by the village to which the taxpayer has apportioned a portion of its
net profit, the taxpayer shall add the amount that is exempt from taxation to
the taxpayer’s net profit that was apportioned to the village. In no case shall
a taxpayer be required to add to its net profit that was apportioned to the
village any amount other than the amount upon which the employee would be
required to pay tax were the amount related to the stock option not exempted
from taxation.
      (2)   This division applies solely for the purpose of making an
adjustment to the amount of a taxpayer’s net profit that was apportioned to the
village under this section.
   (g)   When calculating the ratios described in division (a) above for the
purposes of that division or division (b) above, the owner of a disregarded
entity shall include in the owner’s ratios the property, payroll and gross
receipts of such disregarded entity.
(Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.47 INFORMATION PROVIDED TO TAX ADMINISTRATOR; CONFIDENTIALITY.
   (a)   Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations,
hearings or verifications required or authorized by §§
892.44 to
892.59 is confidential, and no person shall disclose such information, except
for official purposes, in accordance with a proper judicial order, or as
provided in R.C. §§ 4123.271 or 5703.21. The Tax Commissioner may furnish the
Internal Revenue Service with copies of returns filed. This section does not
prohibit the publication of statistics in a form which does not disclose
information with respect to particular taxpayers.
   (b)   In May and November of each year, the Tax Commissioner shall provide
the Village Tax Administrator with the following information for every taxpayer
that filed tax returns with the Commissioner under §§
892.44 to
892.59 and that had municipal taxable income apportionable to the village under
this chapter for any prior year:
      (1)   The taxpayer’s name, address and federal employer identification
number;
      (2)   The taxpayer’s apportionment ratio for and amount of municipal
taxable income apportionable to the village, pursuant to §
892.16(b);
      (3)   The amount of any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward utilized
by the taxpayer;
      (4)   Whether the taxpayer requested that any overpayment be carried
forward to a future taxable year; and
      (5)   The amount of any credit claimed under R.C. § 718.94.
   (c)   Not later than 30 days after each distribution made to municipal
corporations under R.C. § 718.83, the Tax Commissioner shall provide to the
village a report stating the name and federal identification number of every
taxpayer that made estimated payments that are attributable to the village and
the amount of each such taxpayer’s estimated payment.
   (d)   The information described under divisions (b) and (c) above shall be
provided to the individual or individuals designated by the Village Tax
Commissioner under R.C. § 718.84(D).
   (e)   The village expects that the Tax Commissioner will, pursuant to R.C. §
718.84(E), provide tax returns and other information it receives in the
performance of its administration of the municipal net profits tax for
taxpayers making the election provided in §
892.44. The Village Tax Commissioner shall review these returns and
information, as well as the information received pursuant to divisions (b) and
(c) above, and has discretion to refer any taxpayer for audit by the Tax
Commissioner. Such referral shall be made on a form prescribed by the Village
Tax Commissioner and shall include any information that forms the basis for the
referral.
(Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.48 FILING OF ANNUAL RETURN; REMITTANCE; DISPOSITION OF FUNDS.
   (a)   (1)   For each taxable year, every taxpayer shall file an annual
return. Such return, along with the amount of tax shown to be due on the return
less the amount paid for the taxable year under §
892.20, shall be submitted to the Tax Commissioner, on a form and in the manner
prescribed by the Commissioner, on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth
month following the end of the taxpayer’s taxable year.
      (2)   If a taxpayer has multiple taxable years ending within one calendar
year, the taxpayer shall aggregate the facts and figures necessary to compute
the tax due under this chapter, in accordance with §§
892.45(e),
892.46 and, if applicable,
892.50 onto its annual return.
      (3)   The remittance shall be made payable to the Treasurer of State and
in the form prescribed by the Tax Commissioner. If the amount payable with the
tax return is $10 or less, no remittance is required.
   (b)   (1)   Each return required to be filed under this section shall
contain the signature of the taxpayer
or the taxpayer’s duly authorized agent and of the person who prepared the
return for the taxpayer, and shall include the taxpayer’s identification
number. Each return shall be verified by a declaration under penalty of
perjury.
      (2)   A.   The Tax Commissioner may require a taxpayer to include, with
each annual tax return,
amended return or request for refund filed with the Commissioner under §§
892.44 to
892.59, copies of any relevant documents or other information.
         B.   A taxpayer that files an annual tax return electronically through
the state business gateway or in another manner as prescribed by the Tax
Commissioner shall either submit the documents required under this division
electronically as prescribed at the time of filing or, if electronic submission
is not available, mail the documents to the Tax Commissioner. The Department of
Taxation shall publish a method of electronically submitting the documents
required under this division on or before January 1, 2019.
      (3)   After a taxpayer files a tax return, the Tax Commissioner may
request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information, statements or
documents required to determine and verify the taxpayer’s municipal income tax.
   (c)   (1)   A.   Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic extension
for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax return shall automatically receive
an extension for the filing of a tax return with the Commissioner under this
section. The extended due date of the return shall be the fifteenth day of the
tenth month after the last day of the taxable year to which the return relates.
         B.   A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax return may request that
the Commissioner grant the taxpayer a six-month extension of the date for
filing the taxpayer’s municipal income tax return. If the Commissioner receives
the request on or before the date the municipal income tax return is due, the
Commissioner shall grant the taxpayer’s extension request.
         C.   1.   An extension of time to file under division (d) below is not
an extension of the time to pay any tax due unless the Tax Commissioner grants
an extension of that date.
            2.   If the Commissioner considers it necessary in order to ensure
payment of a tax imposed in accordance with §
892.04, the Commissioner may require taxpayers to file returns and make
payments otherwise than as provided in this section, including taxpayers not
otherwise required to file annual returns.
   (d)   Each return required to be filed in accordance with this section shall
include a box that the taxpayer may check to authorize another person,
including a tax return preparer who prepared the return, to communicate with
the Tax Commissioner about matters pertaining to the return. The return or
instructions accompanying the return shall indicate that by checking the box
the taxpayer authorizes the Commissioner to contact the preparer or other
person concerning questions that arise during the examination or other review
of the return and authorizes the preparer or other person only to provide the
Commissioner with information that is missing from the return, to contact the
Commissioner for information about the examination or other review of the
return or the status of the taxpayer’s refund or payments and to respond to
notices about mathematical errors, offsets or return preparation that the
taxpayer has received from the Commissioner and has shown to the preparer or
other person.
   (e)   When income tax returns or other documents require the signature of a
tax return preparer, the Tax Commissioner shall accept a facsimile or
electronic version of such a signature in lieu of a manual signature.
(Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.49 ELECTRONIC FILING.
   (a)   All taxpayers that have made the election allowed under §
892.44 shall file any tax return or extension for filing a tax return, and
shall make payment of amounts shown to be due on such returns, electronically,
either through the state business gateway or in another manner as prescribed by
the Tax Commissioner.
   (b)   A taxpayer may apply to the Commissioner, on a form prescribed by the
Commissioner, to be excused from the requirement to file returns and make
payments electronically. For good cause shown, the Commissioner may excuse the
applicant from the requirement and permit the applicant to file the returns or
make the payments by nonelectronic means.
   (c)   The Tax Commissioner may adopt rules establishing the following:
      (1)   The format of documents to be used by taxpayers to file returns and
make payments by electronic means; and
      (2)   The information taxpayers must submit when filing tax returns by
electronic means.
(Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.50 CONSOLIDATED RETURNS.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   AFFILIATED GROUP OF CORPORATIONS. An affiliated group, as defined
in I.R.C. § 1504, except that, if such a group includes at least one incumbent
local exchange carrier that is primarily engaged in the business of providing
local exchange telephone service in this state, the affiliated group shall not
include any incumbent local exchange carrier that would otherwise be included
in the group.
      (2)   CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL INCOME TAX RETURN. A consolidated return filed
for federal income tax purposes pursuant to I.R.C. § 1501.
      (3)   CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME. The consolidated taxable
income of an affiliated group of corporations, as computed for the purposes of
filing a consolidated federal income tax return, before consideration of net
operating losses or special deductions. CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME
does not include income or loss of an incumbent local exchange carrier that is
excluded from the affiliated group under division (a)(1) above.
      (4)   INCUMBENT LOCAL EXCHANGE CARRIER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4927.01.
      (5)   LOCAL EXCHANGE TELEPHONE SERVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5727.01.
   (b)   (1)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of
corporations may elect to file a consolidated tax return for a taxable year if
at least one member of the affiliated group of corporations is subject to a tax
imposed in accordance with R.C. § 718.04 in that taxable year and if the
affiliated group of corporations filed a consolidated federal income tax return
with respect to that taxable year. The election is binding for a five-year
period beginning with the first taxable year of the initial election unless a
change in the reporting method is required under federal law. The election
continues to be binding for each subsequent five-year period unless the
taxpayer elects to discontinue filing consolidated tax returns under division
(b)(2) below or a taxpayer receives permission from the Tax Commissioner. The
Tax Commissioner shall approve such a request for good cause shown.
      (2)   An election to discontinue filing consolidated tax returns under
this section must be made on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month of
the year following the last year of a five-year consolidated tax return
election period in effect under division (b)(1) above. The election to
discontinue filing a consolidated tax return is binding for a five-year period
beginning with the first taxable year of the election.
      (3)   An election made under division (b)(1) or (b)(2) above is binding
on all members of the affiliated group of corporations subject to a municipal
income tax.
      (4)   When a taxpayer makes the election allowed under §
892.44, a valid election made by the taxpayer under §
892.44(b)(1) or (b)(2) is binding upon the Tax Commissioner for the remainder
of the five-year period.
      (5)   When an election made under §
892.44 is terminated, a valid election made under this section is binding upon
the Tax Administrator for the remainder of the five-year period.
   (c)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations
that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a taxable year shall
file a consolidated tax return for that taxable year if the Tax Commissioner
determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that intercompany transactions
have not been conducted at arm’s length and that there has been a distortive
shifting of income or expenses with regard to allocation of net profits to a
municipal corporation. A taxpayer that is required to file a consolidated tax
return for a taxable year shall file a consolidated tax return for all
subsequent taxable years unless the taxpayer requests and receives written
permission from the Commissioner to file a separate return or a taxpayer has
experienced a change in circumstances.
   (d)   A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated tax return in the same manner
as is required under the United States Department of Treasury regulations that
prescribe procedures for the preparation of the consolidated federal income tax
return required to be filed by the common parent of the affiliated group of
which the taxpayer is a member.
   (e)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (e)(2), (e)(3) and (e)
(4) below, corporations that file a consolidated tax return shall compute
adjusted federal taxable income, as defined in §
892.45, by substituting “consolidated federal taxable income” for “federal
taxable income” wherever “federal taxable income” appears in that division and
by substituting “an affiliated group of corporation’s” for “a C corporation’s”
wherever “a C corporation’s” appears in that division.
      (2)   No corporation filing a consolidated tax return shall make any
adjustment otherwise required under R.C. § 718.81(B) to the extent that the
item of income or deduction otherwise subject to the adjustment has been
eliminated or consolidated in the computation of consolidated federal taxable
income.
      (3)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having at least
80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly or
indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group’s consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, the
corporation filing a consolidated tax return shall do one of the following with
respect to that pass-through entity’s net profit or loss for that taxable year:
         A.   Exclude the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in §
892.46, exclude the property, payroll and gross receipts of the pass-through
entity in the computation of the affiliated group’s net profit sitused to a
municipal corporation. If the entity’s net profit or loss is so excluded, the
entity shall be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the
entity’s net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group; and
         B.   Include the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss in the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in §
892.46, include the property, payroll and gross receipts of the pass-through
entity in the computation of the affiliated group’s net profit sitused to a
municipal corporation. If the entity’s net profit or loss is so included, the
entity shall not be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of
the entity’s net profits that are included in the consolidated federal taxable
income of the affiliated group.
      (4)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having less than
80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly or
indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group’s consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, all
of the following shall apply.
         A.   The corporation filing the consolidated tax return shall exclude
the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss from the consolidated federal
taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the purposes of making the
computations required in §
892.46, exclude the property, payroll and gross receipts of the pass-through
entity in the computation of the affiliated group’s net profit sitused to a
municipal corporation.
         B.   The pass-through entity shall be subject to municipal income
taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with §§
892.44 to
892.59 on the basis of the entity’s net profits that would otherwise be
included in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
   (f)   Corporations filing a consolidated tax return shall make the
computations required under §
892.46 by substituting “consolidated federal taxable income attributable to”
for “net profit from” wherever “net profit from” appears in that section and by
substituting “affiliated group of corporations” for “taxpayer” wherever
“taxpayer” appears in that section.
   (g)   Each corporation filing a consolidated tax return is jointly and
severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties, fines, charges or other
amounts applicable under §§
892.44 to
892.59 or R.C. Chapter 5703 to the corporation, an affiliated group of which
the corporation is a member for any portion of the taxable year, or any one or
more members of such an affiliated group.
(R.C. § 718.06) (Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.51 FAILURE TO PAY TAX.
   If a taxpayer that has made the election allowed under §§
892.44 to
892.59 fails to pay any tax as required under §§
892.44 to
892.59, or any portion of that tax, on or before the date prescribed for its
payment, interest shall be assessed, collected and paid, in the same manner as
the tax, upon such unpaid amount at the rate per annum prescribed by R.C. §
5703.47 from the date prescribed for its payment until it is paid or until the
date an assessment is issued under §
892.42, whichever occurs first.
(Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.52 DECLARATION OF ESTIMATED TAXES.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   COMBINED TAX LIABILITY. The total amount of a taxpayer’s income tax
liabilities to all municipal corporations in this state for a taxable year.
      (2)   ESTIMATED TAXES. The amount that the taxpayer reasonably estimates
to be the taxpayer’s combined tax liability for the current taxable year.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(4) below, every taxpayer
shall make a declaration of estimated taxes for the current taxable year, on
the form prescribed by the Tax Commissioner, if the amount payable as estimated
taxes is at least $200.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (b)(4) below, a taxpayer having a
taxable year of less than 12 months shall make a declaration under rules
prescribed by the Commissioner.
      (3)   The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or before the
fifteenth day of the fourth month after the beginning of the taxable year or on
or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the taxpayer becomes
subject to tax for the first time.
      (4)   The Tax Commissioner may waive the requirement for filing a
declaration of estimated taxes for any class of taxpayers after finding that
the waiver is reasonable and proper in view of administrative costs and other
factors.
   (c)   Each taxpayer shall file the declaration of estimated taxes with, and
remit estimated taxes to, the Tax Commissioner at the times and in the amounts
prescribed in division (c)(1) below. Remitted taxes shall be made payable to
the Treasurer of State.
      (1)   The required portion of the combined tax liability for the taxable
year that shall be paid through estimated taxes shall be as follows:
         A.   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 22.5% of the combined tax liability for the
taxable year;
         B.   On or before the fifteenth day of the sixth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 45% of the combined tax liability for the
taxable year;
         C.   On or before the fifteenth day of the ninth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 67.5% of the combined tax liability for the
taxable year; and
         D.   On or before the fifteenth day of the twelfth month of the
taxable year, 90% of the combined tax liability for the taxable year.
      (2)   If the taxpayer determines that its declaration of estimated taxes
will not accurately reflect the taxpayer’s tax liability for the taxable year,
the taxpayer shall increase or decrease, as appropriate, its subsequent
payments in equal installments to result in a more accurate payment of
estimated taxes.
      (3)   A.   Each taxpayer shall report on the declaration of estimated
taxes the portion of the remittance that the taxpayer estimates that it owes to
each municipal corporation for the taxable year.
         B.   Upon receiving a payment of estimated taxes under this section,
the Commissioner shall
immediately forward the payment to the Treasurer of State. The Treasurer shall
credit the payment in the same manner as in R.C. § 718.85(B).
   (d)   (1)   In the case of any underpayment of estimated taxes, there shall
be added to the taxes an amount determined at the rate per annum prescribed by
R.C. § 5703.47 upon the amount of underpayment for the period of underpayment,
unless the underpayment is due to reasonable cause as described in division (e)
below. The amount of the underpayment shall be determined as follows:
         A.   For the first payment of estimated taxes each year, 22.5% of the
combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed
for that payment;
         B.   For the second payment of estimated taxes each year, 45% of the
combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed
for that payment;
         C.   For the third payment of estimated taxes each year, 67.5% of the
combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed
for that payment; and
         D.   For the fourth payment of estimated taxes each year, 90% of the
combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed
for that payment.
      (2)   The period of the underpayment shall run from the day the estimated
payment was required to be made to the date on which the payment is made. For
purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes on or before any payment
date shall be considered a payment of any previous underpayment only to the
extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the amount of the payment
presently due.
      (3)   All amounts collected under this section shall be considered as
taxes collected under §§
892.44 to
892.59 and shall be credited and distributed to municipal corporations in
accordance with R.C. § 718.83.
   (e)   An underpayment of any portion of a combined tax liability shall be
due to reasonable cause and the penalty imposed by this section shall not be
added to the taxes for the taxable year if any of the following apply:
      (1)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 90% of
the combined tax liability for the current taxable year, determined by
annualizing the income received during the year up to the end of the month
immediately preceding the month in which the payment is due; and
      (2)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 100%
of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer for the preceding
taxable year, provided that the immediately preceding taxable year reflected a
period of 12 months and the taxpayer filed a municipal income tax return for
that year.
(Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.53 ADDITIONAL PENALTIES.
   (a)   In addition to any other penalty imposed by §§
892.44 to
892.59 or R.C. Chapter 5703, the following penalties shall apply.
      (1)   If a taxpayer required to file a tax return under §§
892.44 to
892.59 fails to make and file the return within the time prescribed, including
any extensions of time granted by the Tax Commissioner, the Commissioner may
impose a penalty not exceeding $25 per month or fraction of a month, for each
month or fraction of a month elapsing between the due date, including
extensions of the due date, and the date on which the return is filed. The
aggregate penalty, per instance, under this division (a)(1) shall not exceed
$150.
      (2)   If a person required to file a tax return electronically under §§
892.44 to
892.59 fails to do so, the Commissioner may impose a penalty not to exceed the
following:
         A.   For each of the first two failures, 5% of the amount required to
be reported on the return; and
         B.   For the third and any subsequent failure, 10% of the amount
required to be reported on the return.
      (3)   If a taxpayer that has made the election allowed under §
892.44 fails to timely pay an amount of tax required to be paid under this
chapter, the Commissioner may impose a penalty equal to 15% of the amount not
timely paid.
      (4)   If a taxpayer files what purports to be a tax return required by §§
892.44 to
892.59 that does not contain information upon which the substantial correctness
of the return may be judged or contains information that on its face indicates
that the return is substantially incorrect, and the filing of the return in
that manner is due to a position that is frivolous or a desire that is apparent
from the return to delay or impede the administration of §§
892.44 to
892.59, a penalty of up to $500 may be imposed.
      (5)   If a taxpayer makes a fraudulent attempt to evade the reporting or
payment of the tax required to be shown on any return required under §§
892.44 to
892.59, a penalty may be imposed not exceeding the greater of $1,000 or 100% of
the tax required to be shown on the return.
      (6)   If any person makes a false or fraudulent claim for a refund under
§
892.38, a penalty may be imposed not exceeding the greater of $1,000 or 100% of
the claim. Any penalty imposed under this division, any refund issued on the
claim, and interest on any refund from the date of the refund, may be assessed
under §
892.42 without regard to any time limitation for the assessment imposed by §
892.42(a).
   (b)   For purposes of this section, the tax required to be shown on a tax
return shall be reduced by the amount of any part of the tax paid on or before
the date, including any extensions of the date, prescribed for filing the
return.
   (c)   Each penalty imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed under this section. All or part of any penalty imposed
under this section may be abated by the Tax Commissioner. The Commissioner may
adopt rules governing the imposition and abatement of such penalties.
   (d)   All amounts collected under this section shall be considered as taxes
collected under §§
892.44 to
892.59 and shall be credited and distributed to municipal corporations in the
same proportion as the underlying tax liability is required to be distributed
to such municipal corporations under R.C. § 718.83.
(Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.54 ASSESSMENTS AGAINST TAXPAYER.
   (a)   If any taxpayer required to file a return under §§
892.44 to
892.59 fails to file the return within the time prescribed, files an incorrect
return or fails to remit the full amount of the tax due for the period covered
by the return, the Tax Commissioner may make an assessment against the taxpayer
for any deficiency for the period for which the return or tax is due, based
upon any information in the Commissioner’s possession. The Tax Commissioner
shall not make or issue an assessment against a taxpayer more than three years
after the later of the date the return subject to assessment was required to be
filed or the date the return was filed. Such time limit may be extended if both
the taxpayer and the Commissioner consent, in writing, to the extension. Any
such extension shall extend the three-year time limit in §
892.42 for the same period of time. There shall be no bar or limit to an
assessment against a taxpayer that fails to file a return subject to assessment
as required by §§
892.44 to
892.59, or that files a fraudulent return. The Commissioner shall give the
taxpayer assessed written notice of the assessment as provided in R.C. §
5703.37. With the notice, the Commissioner shall provide instructions on how to
petition for reassessment and request a hearing on the petition.
   (b)   Unless the taxpayer assessed files with the Tax Commissioner within 60
days after service of the notice of assessment, either personally or by
certified mail, a written petition for reassessment signed by the authorized
agent of the taxpayer assessed having knowledge of the facts, the assessment
becomes final and the amount of the assessment is due and payable from the
taxpayer to the Treasurer of State. The petition shall indicate the taxpayer’s
objections, but additional objections may be raised in writing if received by
the Commissioner prior to the date shown on the final determination. If the
petition has been properly filed, the Commissioner shall proceed under R.C. §
5703.60.
   (c)   (1)   After an assessment becomes final, if any portion of the
assessment remains unpaid, including accrued interest, a certified copy of the
Tax Commissioner’s entry making the assessment final may be filed in the office
of the Clerk of the Court of Common Pleas in the county in which the taxpayer
has an office or place of business in this state, the county in which the
taxpayer’s statutory agent is located or Franklin County.
      (2)   Immediately upon the filing of the entry, the Clerk shall enter a
judgment against the taxpayer assessed in the amount shown on the entry. The
judgment may be filed by the Clerk in a loose leaf book entitled “Special
Judgments for Municipal Income Taxes”, and shall have the same effect as other
judgments. Execution shall issue upon the judgment upon the request of the Tax
Commissioner, and all laws applicable to sales on execution shall apply to
sales made under the judgment.
      (3)   If the assessment is not paid in its entirety within 60 days after
the day the assessment was issued, the portion of the assessment consisting of
tax due shall bear interest at the rate per annum prescribed by R.C. § 5703.47
from the day the Commissioner issues the assessment until the assessment is
paid or until it is certified to the attorney general for collection under R.C.
§ 131.02, whichever comes first. If the unpaid portion of the assessment is
certified to the attorney general for collection, the entire unpaid portion of
the assessment shall bear interest at the rate per annum prescribed by R.C. §
5703.47 from the date of certification until the date it is paid in its
entirety. Interest shall be paid in the same manner as the tax and may be
collected by issuing an assessment under this section.
   (d)   All money collected under this section shall be credited to the
municipal income tax fund and distributed to the municipal corporation to which
the money is owed based on the assessment issued under this section.
   (e)   (1)   If the Tax Commissioner believes that collection of the tax will
be jeopardized unless proceedings to collect or secure collection of the tax
are instituted without delay, the Commissioner may issue a jeopardy assessment
against the taxpayer liable for the tax.
      (2)   Immediately upon the issuance of the jeopardy assessment, the
Commissioner shall file an entry with the Clerk of the Court of Common Pleas in
the manner prescribed by division (c) above. Notice of the jeopardy assessment
shall be served on the taxpayer assessed or the taxpayer’s legal representative
in the manner provided in R.C. § 5703.37 within five days of the filing of the
entry with the Clerk. The total amount assessed is immediately due and payable,
unless the taxpayer assessed files a petition for reassessment in accordance
with division (b) above and provides security in a form satisfactory to the
Commissioner and in an amount sufficient to satisfy the unpaid balance of the
assessment. Full or partial payment of the assessment does not prejudice the
Commissioner’s consideration of the petition for reassessment.
   (f)   (1)   Notwithstanding the fact that a petition for reassessment is
pending, the taxpayer may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the
subject of the petition. The acceptance of a payment by the Treasurer of State
does not prejudice any claim for refund upon final determination of the
petition.
      (2)   If, upon final determination of the petition, an error in the
assessment is corrected by the Tax Commissioner, upon petition so filed or
pursuant to a decision of the Board of Tax Appeals or any court to which the
determination or decision has been appealed, so that the amount due from the
taxpayer under the corrected assessment is less than the portion paid, there
shall be issued to the taxpayer, its assigns or legal representative a refund
in the amount of the overpayment as provided by R.C. § 718.91, with interest on
that amount as provided by that section.
(Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.55 REFUND APPLICATIONS.
   (a)   An application to refund to a taxpayer the amount of taxes paid on any
illegal, erroneous or excessive payment of tax under §§
892.44 to
892.59, including assessments, shall be filed with the Tax Commissioner within
three years after the date of the illegal, erroneous or excessive payment of
the tax, or within any additional period allowed by § 892.42(a). The
application shall be filed in the form prescribed by the Tax Commissioner.
   (b)   (1)   On the filing of a refund application, the Tax Commissioner
shall determine the amount of refund to which the applicant is entitled. The
amount determined shall be based on the amount overpaid per return or
assessment. If the amount is greater than $10 and not less than that claimed,
the Commissioner shall certify that amount to the Director of Budget and
Management and the Treasurer of State for payment from the tax refund fund
created in R.C. § 5703.052. If the amount is greater than $10 but less than
that claimed, the Commissioner shall proceed in accordance with R.C. § 5703.70.
      (2)   Upon issuance of a refund under this section, the Commissioner
shall notify each municipal
corporation of the amount refunded to the taxpayer attributable to that
municipal corporation, which shall be deducted from the municipal corporation’s
next distribution under R.C. § 718.83.
   (c)   Any portion of a refund determined under division (b) above that is
not issued within 90 days after such determination shall bear interest at the
rate per annum prescribed by R.C. § 5703.47 from the ninety-first day after
such determination until the day the refund is paid or credited. On an illegal
or erroneous assessment, interest shall be paid at that rate from the date of
payment on the illegal or erroneous assessment until the day the refund is paid
or credited.
(Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.56 AMENDED RETURNS.
   (a)   If any of the facts, figures, computations or attachments required in
an annual return filed by a taxpayer that has made the election allowed under §
892.44 and used to determine the tax due under §§
892.44 to
892.59 must be altered as the result of an adjustment to the taxpayer’s federal
income tax return, whether initiated by the taxpayer or the Internal Revenue
Service, and such alteration affects the taxpayer’s tax liability under those
sections, the taxpayer shall file an amended return with the Tax Commissioner
in such form as the Commissioner requires. The amended return shall be filed
not later than 60 days after the adjustment is agreed upon or finally
determined for federal income tax purposes or after any federal income tax
deficiency or refund, or the abatement or credit resulting therefrom, has been
assessed or paid, whichever occurs first. If a taxpayer intends to file an
amended consolidated municipal income tax return, or to amend its type of
return from a separate return to a consolidated return, based on the taxpayer’s
consolidated federal income tax return, the taxpayer shall notify the
Commissioner before filing the amended return.
   (b)   In the case of an underpayment, the amended return shall be
accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due together with any
penalty and interest thereon. An amended return required by this section is a
return subject to assessment under §
892.42 for the purpose of assessing any additional tax due under this section,
together with any applicable penalty and interest. The amended return shall not
reopen those facts, figures, computations or attachments from a previously
filed return no longer subject to assessment that are not affected, either
directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer’s federal tax return.
   (c)   In the case of an overpayment, an application for refund may be filed
under this division within the 60-day period prescribed for filing the amended
return, even if that period extends beyond the period prescribed in §
892.42, if the application otherwise conforms to the requirements of that
section. An application filed under this division shall claim refund of
overpayments resulting from alterations to only those facts, figures,
computations or attachments required in the taxpayer’s annual return that are
affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer’s
federal income tax return unless it is also filed within the time prescribed in
§
892.42. The application shall not reopen those facts, figures, computations or
attachments that are not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the
adjustment to the taxpayer’s federal income tax return.
(Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.57 EXAMINATION OF RECORDS AND OTHER DOCUMENTS AND PERSONS.
   (a)   The Tax Commissioner, or any authorized agent or employee thereof, may
examine the books, papers, records and federal and state income tax returns of
any taxpayer or other person that is subject to §§
892.44 to
892.59 for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made or, if no
return was filed, to ascertain the tax due as required under those sections.
Upon written request by the Commissioner or a duly authorized agent or employee
thereof, every taxpayer or other person subject to this section is required to
furnish the opportunity for the Commissioner, authorized agent or employee to
investigate and examine such books, papers, records and federal and state
income tax returns at a reasonable time and place designated in the request.
   (b)   The records and other documents of any taxpayer or other person that
is subject to §§
892.44 to
892.59 shall be open to the Tax Commissioner’s inspection during business hours
and shall be preserved for a period of six years following the end of the
taxable year to which the records or documents relate, unless the Commissioner,
in writing, consents to their destruction within that period, or by order
requires that they be kept longer. The Commissioner may require any person, by
notice served on that person, to keep such records as the Commissioner
determines necessary to show whether or not that person is liable, and the
extent of such liability, for the income tax levied by a municipal corporation.
   (c)   The Tax Commissioner may examine, under oath, any person that the
Commissioner reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income that was
or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to affect
such income. The Commissioner may, for this purpose, compel any such person to
attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books, papers, records and
federal income tax returns in such person’s possession or control. The person
may be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant, bookkeeper or other
tax practitioner at any such hearing or examination. This division does not
authorize the practice of law by a person who is not an attorney.
   (d)   No person issued written notice by the Tax Commissioner compelling
attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books, papers,
records or federal income tax returns under this section shall fail to comply.
(Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.58 CREDITS.
   (a)   A credit, granted by resolution or ordinance of the village pursuant
to the Codified Ordinances, shall be available to a taxpayer that has made the
election allowed under §§
892.44 against the municipal corporation’s tax on income. A municipal
corporation shall submit the following information to the Tax Commissioner on
or before the later of January 31, 2018, or the thirty-first day of January of
the first year in which the taxpayer is eligible to receive the credit:
      (1)   A copy of the agreement entered into by the village and taxpayer
under §§
892.18 or
892.19; and
      (2)   A copy of the municipal ordinance or resolution authorizing the
agreement entered into between the municipal corporation and the taxpayer.
   (b)   (1)   Each taxpayer that claims a credit shall submit, with the
taxpayer’s tax return, documentation issued by the village granting the credit
that confirms the eligibility of the taxpayer for the credit, the amount of the
credit for which the taxpayer is eligible and the tax year to which the credit
is to be applied.
      (2)   Such documentation shall be provided in the form prescribed by the
Tax Commissioner.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the Tax
Commissioner to enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to grant a credit, to
determine if a taxpayer meets the conditions of a tax credit agreement entered
into by the village and taxpayer under §§
892.44 to
892.59 or to modify the terms or conditions of any such existing agreement.
(Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.59 RECKLESS VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) below, whoever recklessly violates
§ 892.61(a) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a term of up to
six months, or both.
   (b)   Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of § 892.61(a)
constitutes a separate offense.
   (c)   These specific penalties shall not be construed to prevent the village
from prosecuting any and all other offenses that may apply.
(Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.60 COLLECTION AFTER TERMINATION OF CHAPTERS.
   (a)   This chapter shall continue in full force and effect insofar as the
levy of taxes is concerned until repealed, and insofar as the collection of
taxes levied hereunder and actions and proceedings for collecting any tax so
levied or enforcing any provisions of this chapter are concerned, it shall
continue in full force and effect until all of the taxes levied in the
aforesaid period are fully paid and any and all suits and prosecutions for the
collection of taxes or for the punishment of violations of this chapter have
been fully terminated, subject to the limitations contained in §
892.42.
   (b)   Annual returns due for all or any part of the last effective year of
this chapter shall be due on the date provided in §
892.24 as though the same were continuing.
(Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 892.61 ELECTION TO BE SUBJECT TO R.C. §§ 718.80 TO 718.95.
   (a)   The village hereby adopts and incorporates herein by reference R.C. §§
718.80 to 718.95 for tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2018.
   (b)   A taxpayer, as defined in division (c) of this section, may elect to
be subject to R.C. §§ 718.80 to 718.95 in lieu of the provisions of this
chapter.
   (c)   TAXPAYER has the same meaning as in R.C. § 718.01, except that
TAXPAYER does not include natural persons or entities subject to the tax
imposed under R.C. Chapter 5745. TAXPAYER may include receivers, assignees, or
trustees in bankruptcy when such persons are required to assume the role of a
taxpayer.
(Ord. 2024-002, passed 2-17-2024)
§ 892.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) below, whoever violates R.C. §§
718.35, 718.13(A) or 718.03 by failing to remit municipal income taxes deducted
and withheld from an employee, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment
for a term of up to six months, or both, unless the violation is punishable by
a municipal ordinance or resolution imposing a greater penalty or requiring
dismissal from office or discharge from employment, or both, in which case the
municipal ordinance or resolution shall govern.
   (b)   Any person who discloses information received from the Internal
Revenue Service in violation of R.C. § 718.13(A) shall be guilty of a felony of
the fifth degree and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $5,000 plus
the costs of prosecution, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years,
or both, unless the violation is punishable by a municipal ordinance imposing a
greater penalty or requiring dismissal from office or discharge from
employment, or both, in which case the municipal ordinance shall govern.
   (c)   Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of R.C. § 718.13(A)
constitutes a separate offense.
   (d)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits a municipal corporation from
prosecuting offenses which are made punishable under a municipal ordinance or
resolution levying an income tax and for which no other penalty is provided
under this section.
(R.C. § 718.99) (Ord. 873, passed 12-17-2019)
PART TEN - STREETS, UTILITIES AND PUBLIC SERVICE CODE
   
TITLE TWO - Street and Sidewalk Areas
      
Chap. 1020.   Sidewalk Construction or Repair
      
Chap. 1022.   Street Opening, Road Cut, and Boring
   
TITLE FOUR - Utilities
      
Chap. 1040.   Storm Sewers
   
TITLE SIX - Other Public Services
      
Chap. 1060.   Incident Command System
TITLE TWO - STREET AND SIDEWALK AREAS
      
Chap. 1020.   Sidewalk Construction or Repair
CHAPTER 1020: SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR
Section
   
1020.01   Construction or repair
   
1020.02   Notice of construction or repair
   
1020.03   Publication of notice
   
1020.04   Failure to construct or repair
§ 1020.01 CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR.
   All sidewalks hereafter constructed or ordered repaired by the Village
Council shall be constructed or repaired with concrete, according to prevailing
specifications prepared by the Street and Sidewalk Committee of the Village
Council and on file with the Fiscal Officer; all work is to be done in a
workpersonlike manner and subject to final inspection and approval of the
Street and Sidewalk Committee.
(Ord. 429, passed 4-3-1961)
§ 1020.02 NOTICE OF CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR.
   When the Village Council shall declare, by resolution, that a specific
sidewalk shall be constructed or repaired, the Fiscal Officer shall cause a
written notice of the passage of the ordinance incorporated herein, the details
of the repair or construction to be undertaken and serve the same upon the
owner or agent of the owner of each parcel of land shutting upon such sidewalk
who may be a resident of the corporation or county, in the manner prescribed by
law for the serving of a summons in civil action, and shall return a copy of
the summons with the time and manner of service endorsed thereon, to the
Village Council, where it shall be filed and preserved.
(Ord. 429, passed 4-3-1961)
§ 1020.03 PUBLICATION OF NOTICE.
   Should the owner be a non-resident of the corporation or county, and that
the owner or agent cannot be found, publication of such notice in a local
newspaper of general circulation shall be deemed sufficient notice to the
owner, but no such publication of notice shall be necessary when service is
made as provided in §
1020.02.
(Ord. 429, passed 4-3-1961)
§ 1020.04 FAILURE TO CONSTRUCT OR REPAIR.
   If such sidewalk is not constructed as provided in §§
1020.01 through
1020.03 within a period of 15 days after the service of notice, or repaired
within five days after service of notice, the Village Council may order such
work done at the expense of the owner and reports the costs thereof to the
owner, and such costs shall constitute a lien on the property abutting on said
sidewalk from the day it is reported to the owner, and shall be paid to the
Treasury of the village. If not paid within ten days of the date of said
report, the Fiscal Officer shall certify the costs to the County Auditor, with
a penalty of 5% added and the County Auditor shall place the same on the tax
duplicate and collect such costs and penalties in the same manner that other
taxes are collected.
(Ord. 429, passed 4-3-1961)
CHAPTER 1022: STREET OPENING, ROAD CUT, AND BORING
Section
1022.01   Applicability
1022.02   Definitions
1022.03   Permit required
1022.04   Standards established
1022.05   Costs/fees
1022.06   Indemnification
1022.07   Appeals
1022.08   Adoption of ODOT policy
1022.99   Penalty
§ 1022.01 APPLICABILITY.
   (a)   The terms, conditions, rules, requirements, and procedures set forth
hereinbelow shall apply to all applications over, under, through, and adjacent
to all streets, highways, alleys, and rights-of-way located within the village
or within any such area of the village's jurisdiction.
   (b)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, any such state highway shall be
concurrently governed by the laws and rules of the State of Ohio.
(Ord. 2024-009, passed 8-27-2024)
§ 1022.02 DEFINITIONS.
   The terms used herein shall be construed to comport with the typical use of
such term, unless the context specifically indicates otherwise; then the
meaning of such terms used in this chapter shall be as specified herein.
(Ord. 2024-009, passed 8-27-2024)
§ 1022.03 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person, company, or other entity shall make any opening or
excavation in or under a street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way or ground
without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Village Zoning Inspector and
making such deposit of money as may be required by the street opening
regulations of the village. Permits shall be issued only to contractors or
corporations covered by adequate public liability insurance.
   (b)   Permits required by division (a) of this section shall be issued only
on applications made in writing to the Zoning Inspector. Each application shall
contain all information required by the Zoning Inspector. A permit shall be
issued only after payment of the required permit fee(s) as established by
Village Council. Such fee(s) shall be commensurate with the costs of
administering permits, performing inspections, and other related services.
      (1)   The state, the county, or any public utility corporation holding a
franchise from the village may obtain necessary street opening permits without
prepayment, but shall be charged for necessary street restoration work and
inspections.
      (2)   A public utility corporation may be licensed by the Zoning
Inspector on an annual basis to do its own restoration work in connection with
the opening of streets for maintenance and construction work, but shall be
charged a sufficient sum to cover inspection costs.
   (c)   Exemptions from permit.
      (1)   Any person performing work under this section and within any right-
of-way shall be required to obtain all necessary permits, except that work
performed by the village shall not require permits.
      (2)   Emergency work.
         A.   There are times when emergency situations cause damage to utility
facilities located in the highway right-of-way and work needs to be performed
immediately to repair the damage. The type of work being performed is normally
handled under the village's permitting process and could not be started until
the permit is approved. However, because the affected utility facilities need
immediate fix, the utility can perform the work and a permit does not have to
be in hand at the time.
         B.   A permit is not required for work considered emergency
maintenance of utility facilities when damaged by a vehicle, weather related
causes or other uncontrolled incident. For all emergency work performed on all
highway rights-of-way, by or for the utility, the utility is responsible for
installing and maintaining traffic control devices in accordance with the
provisions of the Ohio Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and
immediately notifying the village. In all cases, the emergency work needs to be
performed in a prudent manner and a permit must be issued afterwards to address
the situation which occurred.
      (3)   Utility maintenance.
         A.   All utility companies perform day-to day maintenance activity to
ensure their systems provide good and efficient service to their customers. In
accordance with this intent, all such utilities are hereby granted a non-
perpetual license to perform such maintenance work consisting of the following:
Any work done to repair, replace, or maintain existing utility facilities
within the village right-of-way that does NOT involve pavement work. The work
must be done within the same footprint as the original installation.
         B.   Utility work that is not covered by the license is as follows:
            1.   Maintenance work done that requires boring under pavement,
open cuts in the pavement, and pavement milling will require individual right-
of-way use permits and cannot be done under the license.
            2.   Maintenance work done outside of the footprint of the original
installation, but still within road right-of-way, will require individual
right-of-way use permits and cannot be done under the license.
            3.   a.   Any work associated with the installation of additional
utility facilities within the village right-of-way will require individual
right-of-way use permits and cannot be done under the license.
               b.   The license covers all maintenance activity and individual
permits are not required. However, the utility must notify the village on all
maintenance work that will be perfonned and all of the work activity must meet
the requirements that are generally outlined in a permit. The license remains
in effect until the village or the utility company make the decision to cancel
or revoke the license.
         C.   Tree and brush removal, and the like. The utility shall apply for
and receive an annual permit that will cover all future spraying, cutting,
trimming, or removal of brush or trees on village highway rights-of-way. After
the permit is issued, the utility shall notify the village in advance of each
time these activities are scheduled to be performed. The work shall be
performed in accordance with the provisions incorporated into the permit.
         D.   Conditions that would cause revoking of the permit.
            1.   If the party to whom the permit is issued does anything
contrary to the orders of the Village Zoning Inspector and, after due notice,
fails to correct the work as ordered, the village may, with or without notice,
correct such work or remove such structure or material, and the party whom the
permit is issued to shall reimburse the village for any expenses incurred in
correcting the work or removing the structure or materials.
            2.   At any time, a permit may be revoked or annulled by the
Village Zoning Inspector for noncompliance with any of the conditions,
restrictions, or regulations herein.
            3.   The granting of a permit does not, in any way, abridge the
jurisdiction of the village over the streets located therein. If, during any
future work benefitting the traveling public, it becomes necessary for the
village to order removal, reconstruction, relocation or repair of utility
facilities or work performed under the permit, the removal, reconstruction,
relocation or repair shall be wholly at the expense of the utility and be made
as determined by the village.
         E.   Permit application information permit requests. Regardless of
whether the permit application for a crossing or longitudinal utility
installation is being submitted by the permittee during a highway construction
project or for an installation in the existing right-of-way, all of the
information needed from the permittee for review and approval is the same. The
permittee shall furnish the following:
            1.   General information.
               a.   One copy of the permit plan and permit application;
               b.   Specific highway location; and
               c.   Right-of-way plan or plan/profile sheet of the highway
covering the permittee request.
            2.   Permit plan information.
               a.   Centerline stationing of any highway crossing;
               b.   A profile view and/or elevation points covering areas of
possible conflict for both aerial and/or underground utility installations;
               c.   The type of materials that will be used for the
installation must be specified. For underground installations, this will
include the type and size of pipe, conduit, cable, and the like;
               d.   Provide plans for the proposed installation, including
profiles and representative cross-sections, relating the installation to the
highway stationing. Depending on the proposal, cross-sections may not be
required for an aerial installation; and
               e.   For underground installations, a profile shall be provided
to address points of possible conflict with other subsurface features.
            3.   Construction.
               a.   Method of installation to be used;
               b.   State the length of time necessary to install the
facilities;
               c.   If applicable, construction details for both excavation and
backfilling of trenches shall be provided for all underground installations;
               d.   If the installation affects any portion of the highway
slopes, an explanation will be required as to the method and materials to be
used for protecting the slope from erosion. When sheeting is used, the material
details and construction method must be provided;
               e.   All highway rights-of-way which are disturbed by the
proposed construction must be restored to the original or better condition.
               f.   In some instances, the utility installation may affect
trees or other types of mature growth. Where this occurs, selective tree
removal or necessary tree trimming will be permitted. In these situations,
plans must be provided showing the selective removal and/or trimming required
along with schematic plan depicting the necessary replacement plants to be
installed. However, it must be clearly documented in their plan that neither
the facility nor the construction of the facility will be detrimental to the
natural growth in the area of the proposed utility installation;
               g.   The permittee shall place permanent markers (i.e.
fluorescent markers, fluorescent pedestals) identifying the location of the
underground utilities to avoid damage to the facility during village seasonal
maintenance activity. Non-metallic underground lines shall be accompanied by a
trace wire, metallic tape or other method to locate and mark the underground
facility; and
               h.   A review of necessary highway restoration processes must be
made. This review shall include the restoration of drainage, fence, guardrail,
right-of-way and the pavement/shoulder areas. In conjunction, consideration
must also be given to the possible use of specific restoration materials such
as permanent sheeting/shoring or control density backfill. Furthermore, an
evaluation shall be made as to the use of full time inspection and/or the
bonding of the applicant or the applicant's contractor.
            4.   Maintenance of traffic. A maintenance of traffic plan must be
provided, including points of access for both the utility construction phase
and future maintenance of the facility.
            5.   Bond protection.
               a.   If the permit applicant is not a utility that submits a
significant number of requests for use of the highway right-of-way or there is
installation concerns regardless of what utility is requesting the permit, the
village can request the applicant provide a bond to cover any damage that may
occur as a result of the installation.
               b.   The bond amount will be established based on the physical
characteristics of the roadway or bridge structure that has the potential for
damage.
               c.   The bond is to be in place for five years from the
completion date of the installation and, if the permit holder does not make any
needed repairs, the funds will be used to cover any costs the village uses to
make those repairs.
(Ord. 2024-009, passed 8-27-2024)
§ 1022.04 STANDARDS ESTABLISHED.
   (a)   Boring required.
      (1)   The installation of underground facilities by open cutting or
trenching pavement will not be considered unless it is demonstrated that there
is no reasonable alternative method available. Casing, pipe, or conduit
crossings of the highway shall be installed by auguring, driving, boring,
jacking, or tunneling without disturbing the pavement or paved shoulder.
      (2)   Unless, upon the opinion of the Zoning Inspector, boring under the
road and/or right-of-way is not practicable based upon geological conditions,
all such excavations under any roadway within the village shall be made by
boring.
   (b)   Open trenching. If, upon the determination of the Zoning Inspector, an
exception exists pursuant to division (a)(1), above, any such open trenching of
the roadway must adhere to the standards described herein.
   (c)   Standards generally.
      (1)   Location. All underground installations are permitted subject to
the conditions outlined herein. Longitudinal lines may be permitted as long as
the installation is located as close to the right-of-way line as possible. In
cases of narrow rights-of-way and severe terrain features, consideration may be
given to locating the utility between the ditch and pavement. In this regard,
the utility facility shall be located so that the distance between the edge of
the pavement (or paved or stabilized shoulder) and the inside edge of the
trench is greater than the depth of the trench. Buried cable shall not be
installed within the shoulder area where lines for highway lighting,
illuminated signs or other installations are typically located.
      (2)   Pipeline design. Pipeline installations in a village right-of-way
cover a variety of products and the physical characteristics of the pipe, the
product being moved by the pipeline and the pressure contained in the pipe
varies significantly. The village's permitting process for approving both
crossings and longitudinal underground installations of these pipelines must
meet the following design guidance.
         A.   Material strength of crossing installation. Utilities crossing
under a highway shall be of durable materials designed to meet conditions found
at the site and shall be installed to preclude disturbing the roadway when
perfomling maintenance or expansion operations.
         B.   Crossing extensions. Conduits or casings shall extend beyond
either the outer edge of the ditch or the embankment slope if a ditch is not
present. When the highway is constructed in deep cut, conduit or casing may be
terminated beyond the shoulders. Generally, open cutting of the median is
prohibited. However, where there is extremely wide medians, traffic lanes at
different elevations or other physical conditions that make a continuous bore
impractical, opening of the median may be permitted. Since the open cutting of
the median is primarily a safety issue, any request must be clearly justified
by addressing construction, traffic control, and restoration issues.
         C.   Installation protection. The grade of the crown of the pipeline,
conduit, casing, or unprotected facility shall be established based on what
product is been transferred. Additional depth of cover may be required to meet
existing field conditions. In those instances where less than minimum cover is
authorized, additional protection of the utility facility may be required.
         D.   Public utility requirements. A pipeline owned by a gas company
that is defined as a PUBLIC UTILITY and provides natural gas that is fully
regulated by the PUCO and sold to the general public must meet these following
guidelines: a gas pipeline of any size or pressure and made of any material
(steel, iron, plastic, and the like), generally, will not need to be cased but
the company must certify it meets all rules, regulations and pipeline
inspection criteria contained in 49 CPR 192 and/or 49 CFR 195. If the pipeline
installation is a crossing under an interstate or an interstate look-alike and
is less than 12 feet in depth, the company must provide certification that the
pipe design meets the "Class 4" requirements of 49 CFR 192 which establishes
the thickness of the pipe. If the installation depth is 12 feet or more, the
company must meet the "Class 3" design requirements. All other "Class
Thickness" requirements associated with longitudinal and crossing installations
will be based on the location description outlined in the federal code. If the
district has some concerns about the physical location of a crossing
installation, the "Class Thickness" can be established which meets the
district's concerns. In addition, if the pipeline installation will be located
within any fill material around Mechanically Stabilized Earth (MSE) walls or
within two feet of any structure foundation (i.e. bridges, culverts, and the
like), the pipeline must be cased. All other installation requirements must be
met.
         E.   Oil and gas company and interstate/intrastate pipeline company
requirements. A pipeline owned by an oil and gas company or an interstate/
intrastate pipeline company must meet these following guidelines:
            1.   A gas and/or petroleum pipeline of any size or pressure and
made of any material (steel, iron, plastic, and the like), generally, will not
need to be cased but must meet all rules, regulations and pipeline inspection
criteria contained in 49 CFR 192 and/or 49 CFR 195. If the pipeline
installation is a crossing under an interstate or interstate look-alike and is
less than 12 feet in depth, the company must provide certification that the
pipe design meets the "Class 4" requirements of 49 CFR 192 which establishes
the thickness of the pipe. If the installation depth is 12 feet or more, the
company must meet the "Class 3" design requirements. All other "Class
Thickness" requirements associated with longitudinal and crossing installations
will be based on the location description outlined in the federal code. If the
district has some concerns about the physical location of a crossing
installation, the "Class Thickness" can be established which meets the
district's concerns.
            2.   The company's design plans of the pipeline installation must
be certified as meeting 49 CFR 192 and/or 49 CFR 195 regulations with an Ohio
registered engineer's review stamp and signature. In addition, if the pipeline
installation will be located within any fill material around Mechanically
Stabilized Earth (MSE) walls or within two feet of any structure foundation
(i.e. bridges, culverts, and the like), the pipeline must be cased. All other
installation requirements, as outlined in § 8106 of the Department's Utility
Manual, must be met.
            3.   If the pipeline company decides, on its own, to provide casing
for the installation, the installation plan does not require two design
engineering signatures but, as outlined, does require one signature that
certifies the pipeline design meets all federal regulations.
         F.   Federal criteria. The federal criteria which establishes the
pipeline design is part of the gas and petroleum industries' licensing process
and is applied to all pipeline size and material types. All of their
installations are required to meet these standards and casing will not be
needed unless the installation is close to an MSE wall or any structure.
      (3)   Casing of pipelines. Casing of an underground installation of a
utility facility is a requirement that will be established by the village based
on what product the pipeline is carrying and the physical characteristics of
where the installation is being made.
         A.   Oil, gas, and petroleum pipelines. The thickness of pipelines
that carry these products is controlled by the federal regulations. Because of
the work this industry has done with FHWA and ASSHTO to protect the life
expectancy of their pipelines, casing, for the most part, will not be required.
However, the village does require casing if the pipeline is within two feet of
MSE walls or structures and, depending on other physical characteristics of
where the pipeline is being installed, the village can require casing if it is
felt that such an installation has to be made in order to prevent damage to the
roadway.
         B.   Water and sanitary sewer pipelines. Pipelines of these types,
particularly those that carry product under pressure, have to be cased.
However, there are situations where the utility can provide pipelines of
increased thickness and the village can approve such an installation without
casing.
      (4)   Additional guidance for underground utility installations. These
following items address design and location requirements for all types of
pipeline and conduit installations:
         A.   Gallery installation. For pipelines of the extreme importance to
public convenience, safety, or business operations, galleries may be installed
for the purpose of performing repair or replacement of pipelines and conduits.
Galleries shall be designed so that most repairs or replacement of these
utility facilities can be made without resorting to pulling the entire facility
from the gallery. The gallery design shall include one or more entrance shafts
of a size suitable for removal of one pipe or conduit section from the gallery.
Shafts shall be sealed with a removal cap. Each cap shall have a manhole
opening suitable for inspection access.
         B.   Casing and gallery material. Casings and galleries may be
constructed of any materials permitted by the village for use in roadway
culverts, and shall be designed to meet all conditions found at the site.
         C.   Tunnels. Tunnels, if needed, shall be constructed of steel liner
plates left in place or other materials acceptable to the village. Voids
remaining outside of the tunnel lining shall be filled with Portland cement
grout. After installing the utility, the tunnel lining shall be filled with
approved gravel aggregate or concrete rammed in place. Tunnel ends shall be
sealed and provisions may be made for tunnel drainage if an outlet is
available.
         D.   Pressure and gravity flow pipeline installation requirements.
Pipelines of any type carrying gas or liquid under pressure shall be equipped
with valves which, when closed, will isolate the section of the line which
includes the portion within the highway right-of-way. Gravity flow pipelines,
such as sanitary sewers, shall be a type suitable for roadway culverts. Joints
shall be compression-type or an approved equivalent. Manholes should be located
on gravity flow lines in a position that the facility can be inspected and
cleaned without trespass on the right-of-way.
         E.   Underground installation determination. When a utility has an
original position beneath a new highway improvement, a determination needs to
be made regarding the need to strengthen or replace that existing facility. The
determination shall be based on depth, strength and condition of the existing
utility, the type of surrounding soil and the foundation soils. If a fill or
surcharge is to be placed above an existing utility, a thorough investigation
needs to be made and consideration given to installation of such treatments as
a concrete cap, partial encasement, full encasement or replacement of the
facility. If the determination indicates that it is feasible to leave an
existing utility parallel under the pavement, extension for future service
connections shall be made prior to the new pavement being placed.
      (5)   Installations. The following situations related to the status of
the right-of-way and physical characteristics of the installation location
establish how underground installations need to be made:
         A.   Embankment or shallow cut installation. When the highway is
currently located, or is to be constructed, on embankment or in a shallow cut,
casing or galleries shall extend across the full width of the right-of-way. If
significant savings would result, access is not limited, safety is not
compromised, and the village approves, the casing or gallery may be terminated
beyond the outer edge of the ditch flow lines, or the embankment slope if a
ditch is not provided.
         B.   Deep cut installation. When the highway is currently located, or
is to be constructed in a deep cut, casing or galleries shall extend across the
roadway to include the effective width of the outside shoulders. Effective
width is considered to be the offset distance between the edge of the pavement
and the face of the guardrail as provided on the highway project. Overhead
strnctures, either utility or highway, may be considered for the purpose of
supporting utilities to span deep cuts when other locations prove difficult and
costly.
      (6)   Depth of installations. The grade of the crown of conduit, casing
or uncased pipeline facilities shall be established so that minimum depth of
cover will be as follows:
 
                        Water Lines Other Facilities
Under pavement surfaces 4 feet      3 feet
Under sod ditches       3 feet      3 feet
Under paved ditch       2 feet      2 feet
Under other surfaces    3 feet      3 feet
Additional depth of cover may be required to meet existing field conditions.
In those instances, where less than minimum cover is authorized, additional
protection of the utility facility may be required.
 
   (d)   Restoration of pavement.
      (1)   Where openings have been or are to be made in a street, the permit
shall direct the restoration of the street pavement in one of the following
ways:
         A.   The entire work of restoration, including both paving surface and
paving base, may be performed directly by the Village Street Department after
the permittee has completed the backfill;
         B.   The paving surface may be installed by the Village Street
Department after the permittee has made the backfill and installed the pavement
base;
         C.   The work may be done either completely as in division (d)(1)A. of
this section or as to paving surface only as in division (d)(1)B. of this
section by a village contractor duly authorized by a contract with the village.
         D.   The entire work of restoration may be done by the permittee with
the consent of the village.
      (2)   In all cases, the entire work shall be carried out under the
direction and to the satisfaction of the village and in accordance with the
rules, regulations, and specifications approved by the Zoning Inspector. The
permittee shall be responsible for the condition of all restorations made by
him or her for a period of five years and upon notice shall repair any
subsidence or defect therein. On failure to repair, the village may make
necessary repairs and charge the cost to the permittee.
   (e)   Openings in newly paved surfaces.
      (1)   Prior to the new paving or reconstruction or resurfacing of any
street, the village shall cause notices to be sent to all public utility
corporations to install all necessary mains, conduits, service branches, and
structures. Public utility corporations shall be allowed a reasonable time for
completing the aforesaid installations before the new pavement or resurfacing
is laid. The Zoning Inspector may require that similar notices be sent to
abutting owners, in the same manner.
      (2)   Thereafter, during the period of four years from the final
completion and acceptance of the new pavement, no permit for making an opening
in such pavement shall be issued to any person or department so notified if the
need for making such opening could reasonably have been anticipated, except on
payment of an additional charge in excess of the amount otherwise chargeable in
the amount of 2% of the restoration cost for each month of the unelapsed part
of the four-year period, and in no event less than 10%. Before a permit is
issued for making an opening in such pavement, notice shall be given to the
Zoning Inspector for his or her review. Such additional charges shall be
payable whether restoration work is to be done by the village or by the
permittee. Such charges shall not be considered as penalties, but as
compensation for loss of useful life caused by avoidable openings in new
surfaces. The determination of the Zoning Inspector as to such charges shall be
final.
   (f)   Restoration of brick paving. Where excavation within a street right-
of-way involves the removal of brick paving or decoration, the permittee shall
replace the same with brick in accordance with specifications provided by the
Zoning Inspector.
   (g)   General provisions applicable to all permits. The following list of
information is in place to provide guidance on how the permit applicant is to
perform the work associated with the utility installation and how, if needed,
the permit would be revoked.
      (1)   Maintenance of traffic plan. The permittee is responsible for the
development and design of a maintenance of traffic plan any time work is
proposed on the highway right-of-way. The permittee shall also be responsible
for the implementation of the plan and the use of necessary traffic control
devices or personnel in accordance with the approved plan. Furthermore, the
traffic control plan and the use of traffic control devices must be in
compliance with the Ohio Manual on Uniform Traffic Devices.
      (2)   Traffic control responsibility.
         A.   Under the maintenance of traffic plan, the permit request must
address factors which can also have an impact on the flow of traffic and safety
within the permit work zone. Consideration must be given to the applicability
of lane closures, maintaining two-way traffic at all times and the use of
uniformed patrol or other personnel to assist with the control of traffic.
         B.   All open trenches must be plated, temporarily backfilled or
protected during hours of no construction in a manner that will not impede the
plowing of snow or the safe flow of traffic.
         C.   Finally, work schedules must be addressed. It may be prudent or
necessary to restrict work to off-peak hours or take into consideration, such
concerns as rush hour traffic, local festivals, shift changes for companies,
school schedules or holidays.
      (3)   Conditions of the permit.
         A.   Except as authorized under the permit, no excavation shall be
made or obstacles placed within the limits of the highway in such a manner as
to interfere with travel over the road.
         B.   If any grading or other work done under the permit interferes
with the drainage of the highway in any manner, catch basins and outlets shall
be constructed to properly handle the highway drainage.
         C.   All the work contemplated under the permit shall be done under
the supervision and to satisfaction of the village and the entire expense shall
be borne by the party to whom the permit is issued.
         D.   Upon completion of the work under the permit, the highway is to
be left clear of all rubbish, excess materials, temporary structures or
equipment. In addition, all parts of the highway right-of-way is to be restored
to a condition which is equal to, or better than, that which originally
existed.
         E.   The permit applicant will abide by current state and/or local
laws pertaining to storm water pollution prevention and/or erosion control.
         F.   The right is reserved by the village to appoint an inspector who
shall represent the interests of the village during the installation of the
facility. Any compensation arranged for such inspection service shall be paid
wholly by the permit holder.
         G.   Prior to any excavation in the highway right-of-way, the permit
holder must contact the Ohio Utilities Protection Service (OUPS) and the Oil
and Gas Producers Underground Protection Service (OGPUPS) and request all
existing underground utility facilities be marked.
         H.   The acceptance of a permit, or the performance of any work under
the permit, constitutes an agreement between the village and the party to whom
the permit is granted. Compliance with all conditions and restrictions included
with the permit is mandatory.
      (4)   Ancillary conditions under the permit.
         A.   At the discretion of the Zoning Inspector, a performance bond may
be a prerequisite to the issuance of a permit.
         B.   The issuance of a permit is not a substitute for satisfying the
rights of any other party who may have any interest in the underlying fee.
         C.   The party to whom the permit is issued shall be responsible for
all damages to persons or property due to, or resulting from, any work
performed under the permit.
         D.   When highway improvement contracts are awarded by the village at
or near the area covered by the permit, the party to whom the permit is issued
shall cooperate with the highway contractor.
(Ord. 2024-009, passed 8-27-2024)
§ 1022.05 COSTS/FEES.
   (a)   In addition to any other fees imposed, the permit fee for a permit
issued hereunder for auguring, driving, boring, jacking, or tunneling without
disturbing the pavement or paved shoulder shall be $500.
   (b)   In addition to any other fees imposed, the permit fee for a permit
issued hereunder which includes the trenching or cutting of the roadway shall
be $1,000.
   (c)   Any permit issued hereunder shall be valid only for activity within a
singular and specific right-of-way and shall not be valid for more than 90
days.
   (d)   For purposes of this section, a right-of-way shall be defined and
bounded as follows:
      (1)   Width: The area within the village right-of-way abutting one or
both sides of the street.
      (2)   Length: The area that extends no further than between the street or
alley intersections immediately adjacent to the proposed work area.
(Ord. 2024-009, passed 8-27-2024; Am. Res. 2025-012, passed 9-23-2025)
§ 1022.06 INDEMNIFICATION.
   Any person obtaining a permit pursuant to this chapter agrees as a condition
of the permit to indemnify the village and hold the village harmless from any
expenses, including but not limited to attorney's fees, litigation costs, and
judgments, incurred as a result of claims made for damages arising out of the
permitted activity.
(Ord. 2024-009, passed 8-27-2024)
§ 1022.07 APPEALS.
   Appeals concerning the interpretation or application of administration of
this chapter may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer or bureau
of the legislative authority of the village affected by any decision hereunder
of the Zoning Inspector. Such appeals shall be taken within 20 days after the
decision, by filing with the Zoning Inspector and with the Village Council, a
notice of appeal specifying the grounds upon which appeal is being taken. The
Zoning Inspector shall transmit to the Village Council all of the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
(Ord. 2024-009, passed 8-27-2024)
§ 1022.08 ADOPTION OF ODOT POLICY.
   For any type of work contemplated hereunder that involves a state highway,
the village hereby adopts the Ohio Department of Transportation's Policy for
Accommodation of Utilities (the version effective as of the enaction date
hereof) and appoints the Village Zoning Inspector as its representative for all
matters concerning the same.
(Ord. 2024-009, passed 8-27-2024)
§ 1022.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to locate, erect, construct, reconstruct,
enlarge, change, maintain, make any opening or excavation in or under a street,
alley, sidewalk, or other public way or ground without first obtaining a permit
therefor in violation of any regulation in or any provisions of this chapter or
any amendment or supplement thereto adopted by the Council. Any person, firm,
or corporation violating any regulation in or any provision of this chapter or
any amendment or supplement thereto, shall be deemed guilty of a fourth degree
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to fines and or
jail. Each and every day during which such illegal location, erection,
construction, reconstruction, enlargement, change, maintenance or use is
continued may be deemed a separate offense.
   (b)   The Zoning Inspector, the legal representative of the municipality, or
any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be especially damaged by
such violation, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may institute
injunction, mandamus, abatement, or any other appropriate action, actions,
proceedings or proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate, or remove such unlawful
location, erection, construction, reconstruction, enlargement, change,
maintenance, or use.
(Ord. 2024-009, passed 8-27-2024)
TITLE FOUR – UTILITIES
      
Chap. 1040.   Storm Sewers.
CHAPTER 1040: STORM SEWERS
Section
   
1040.01   Permission required
   
1040.02   Sewer or drain requirements
   
1040.03   Inspection required
   
1040.04   Duties of officials
   
1040.99   Penalty
§ 1040.01 PERMISSION REQUIRED.
   No sewer or drain shall be constructed to connect with a public storm sewer
nor shall any connection be made to a public storm sewer within the village
until the written permission of the Mayor has been obtained by the person, firm
or corporation proposed to perform the work. An application for a permit shall
be signed by the owner, lessee or agent of the property for which the
connection is desired and must describe the property and state the purpose for
which the connection is desired and shall be accompanied by a fee of $5.
(Ord. 379, passed 5-20-1946)
§ 1040.02 SEWER OR DRAIN REQUIREMENTS.
   The written permission to construct a sewer or drain connecting with a storm
sewer shall specify the permissible use of such sewer or drain and such
specifications shall be governed by the following requirements: such sewer or
drain may be used for the removal of surface water, rain water from roofs,
subsoil drainage, building foundation drainage, cistern overflow, clear water
from condensers, waste water from water motors and elevators, waste meter from
septic tank or cesspool overflow, clear water from floor drainage and any other
clean unobjectionable waste water. Such sewer or drain shall not receive
sewage, floor drainage containing solids, industrial wastes, septic tank or
cesspool overflow containing solids, privy vault drainage, kitchen wastes,
water containing grease, soap or garbage or any other liquid wastes of
objectionable character tending to obstruct the storm sewer.
(Ord. 379, passed 5-20-1946)
§ 1040.03 INSPECTION REQUIRED.
   After a sewer or drain to connect with a public storm sewer is laid and
before it is covered or used, it shall be inspected and approved by the Mayor
and Street Committee, or his or her authorized agent.
(Ord. 379, passed 5-20-1946)
§ 1040.04 DUTIES OF OFFICIALS.
   The Street Committee is authorized and directed to adopt and enforce
specifications and regulations in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter for the purpose of providing control of the installation of sewer
connections and the inspection thereof. The Fiscal Officer shall maintain
accurate and completed records of all permits issued and inspections made. The
Mayor is hereby empowered to require the abandonment and removal of connections
to the public storm sewer which violate the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 379, passed 5-20-1946)
§ 1040.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $10 nor more than $50
for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed
each period of 24 hours such violation shall continue after a period of 30 days
following the original conviction.
(Ord. 379, passed 5-20-1946)
TITLE SIX – OTHER PUBLIC SERVICES
      
Chap. 1060.   Incident Command System.
CHAPTER 1060: INCIDENT COMMAND SYSTEM
Section
   
1060.01   Adopting the incident command system
§ 1060.01 ADOPTING THE INCIDENT COMMAND SYSTEM.
   The village adopts the most recent version of the “Wood County Standard
Operating Guidelines for Incident Command System” prepared by the Wood County
Emergency Management Agency.
(Ord. 775, passed 11-25-2008)
PART TWELVE - PLANNING AND ZONING CODE
   
TITLE TWO - Zoning Code
      
Chap. 1202.   Zoning Regulations
TITLE TWO – ZONING CODE
      
Chap. 1202.   Zoning Regulations.
CHAPTER 1202: ZONING REGULATIONS
Section
   
1202.01   Scope of regulation
   
1202.02   Definitions
   
1202.03   General regulations
   
1202.04   Use districts
   
1202.05   Nonconformities
   
1202.06   Lot coverage and setback lines
   
1202.07   Supplemental regulations
   
1202.08   Administration
   
1202.09   Procedure and requirements for appeals and variances
   
1202.10   Procedure for obtaining permits
   
1202.11   Temporary permits
   
1202.12   Procedure for ordinance amendment or district change
   
1202.13   Fees
   
1202.14   Interpretation, purposes and conflict
   
1202.99   Penalty
§ 1202.01 SCOPE OF REGULATION.
   Except as provided by this chapter, and except after obtaining a written
permit from the enforcement, it shall hereafter be prohibited within the
village:
   (a)   To erect any new building or structure or to relocate, enlarge or
substantially alter any existing building or structure;
   (b)   To establish, expand, change or re-establish any nonconforming use of
a building, structure or land;
   (c)   To reduce the open structure or plot area required for a building,
structure, cabins, trailers, tents or parking space, or to include any part of
such open space or plot area as that required for an adjoining building or
structure; and
   (d)   To provide or connect into a water supply or sewage disposal facility.
(Ord. 618, passed 4-18-1988)
§ 1202.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The word
“building” includes the word “structure” and the word “lot” includes the word
“plot.”
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A subordinate building or portion of main buildings, the
use of which is incidental to that of the main building.
   ALLEY. A public thoroughfare not over 20 feet wide.
   APARTMENT HOUSE. See MULTIPLE DWELLING.
   BASEMENT. A story all or partly underground but having at least one-half of
its height below the average level of the adjoining ground.
   BOARDING HOUSE. A building other than a hotel, where lodging and meals for
five or more persons are served for compensation.
   BUILDING. A structure having a roof supported by walls, and when separated
by a party wall without opening, it shall be deemed a separate building.
   BUILDING; HEIGHT OF. The vertical distance from the established sidewalk
grade at the center of the front of the building, to the highest point of the
roof surface of a flat roof, to the deck line of mansard roofs and to the mean
height level between eaves and ridge for gabled, hip end gambrel roofs; for
building setback from the street line, HEIGHT OF BUILDING may be measured from
the average elevation of the finished grade along the front of the building.
   CONDITIONAL USE. A use permitted within a district other than a principally
permitted use, requiring a CONDITIONAL USE permit and approval of the Planning
Commission. CONDITIONAL USES permitted in each district are listed.
   CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. A permit issued by the Zoning Inspector upon
approval by the Planning Commission to allow a use other than a principally
permitted use to be established within the district.
   COURT. An open, unoccupied, unobstructed space, other then a yard on the
same lot as the building. An inner court is a COURT surrounded on all sides by
walls or by walls and a lot line. An outer court is a COURT extending to a
COURT or way, or to a front or rear yard.
   DWELLING. Any house or building or portion thereof which is occupied in
whole or in part as the home, residence or sleeping place of one or more
persons, either permanently or transiently, but not to include house trailers
or mobile homes.
   DWELLING; MULTIPLE. A building or portion thereof designed for or occupied
as the home of three or more families or households, living independently of
each other, including tenement houses, apartment houses or apartment hotels.
   FAMILY. One or more persons occupying a premise and living as a single
household unit; as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house, a
lodging house, club, fraternity or hotel.
   FENCE. All structures used as barriers or to demarcate a boundary, but shall
not include ornamental structures of less than one foot in height.
   GARAGE. A building or any portion thereof in which one or more motor
vehicles are housed, kept or repaired, not including exhibition or show rooms.
   GARAGE COMMUNITY. A series of private garages, one story in height, located
jointly on a parcel of land under a single ownership.
   HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation conducted in a dwelling unit.
   HOTEL/MOTEL. A building occupied as the more-or-less temporary abiding place
of individuals who are lodged with or without meals and in which there are more
than five rooms usually occupied singly and no provisions made for cooking in
any individual apartment (room).
   HOUSE TRAILER. Any non-self-propelled vehicle so designed, constructed,
reconstructed or added to by means of accessories in such manner as will permit
the use and occupancy thereof for human habitation, when connected to
utilities, constructed so as not to permit it being used as a conveyance upon
the public streets and highways and exceeding a gross weight of 4,500 pounds
and an overall length of 30 feet. TRAILER must have hitch mechanism and wheels
removed, located on a standard lot and have a minimum of 400 square feet of
foundation space. Being placed upon a permanent cement base or pad, and thus
being considered a single-family dwelling.
   LODGING HOUSE. A building other than a hotel, where lodging for five or more
persons is provided for compensation.
   LOT. A piece or parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by one building
and its accessory building including the open space required under this
chapter.
      (1)   CORNER LOT. A lot abutting on two or more streets at their
intersection, provided the angle at which the streets intersect does not exceed
135 degrees. A portion of a CORNER LOT distance more than 100 feet from the
corner shall be treated as an interior lot.
      (2)   INTERIOR LOT. A lot the side lines of which do not abut on any
street.
      (3)   LOT LINES. The lines bounding a lot so defined herein.
      (4)   LOT, FRONT, REAR AND DEPTH OF. The front line of a lot is that
boundary line which borders on the right-of-way. In the case of a corner lot,
the owner may elect by statement on his or her plans either right-of-way
boundary line as the FRONT. In the case of a triangulary or gore lot, the REAR
is the boundary line not bordering on the right-of-way. The DEPTH of a lot is
the dimension measured from the front of the lot to the entrance rear line of
the lot. In case of irregular shaped lots, the mean DEPTH shall be taken.
   MOTEL. See HOTEL.
   NONCONFORMING USE. A use of a building or land that does not agree with the
regulations of the use district in which it is located.
   PARKING SPACE; OFF-STREET. Consists of an area adequate for parking an
automobile with room for opening doors on both sides, together with properly
related access to a public street or alley and maneuvering room, but shall be
located totally outside of any street or alley right-of-way.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land taken or dedicated for use as a public way. In
addition to the roadway, it normally incorporates the curbs, lawn strips,
sidewalks, lighting and drainage facilities, and may include special features,
required by the topography or treatment, such as grade separation, landscape
areas, viaducts and bridges.
   RV MOBILE HOME. Any licensed self-propelled and nonself-propelled vehicle as
designed, constructed, reconstructed or added to by means of accessories in
such manner as will permit the use and occupancy thereof for human habitation,
when connected to indicated utilities, whether resting on wheels, jacks or
other temporary foundation and used or so constructed as to permit it being
used as a conveyance upon the public streets or highways.
   SETBACK LINE. The minimum horizontal difference between the lot line and the
front line or any building or projection thereof, excluding steps and
unenclosed porches which do not extend more than ten feet beyond the front wall
of a building.
   STABLE.  Any building or portion thereof which is used in whole or in part
for the care and shelter of horses, cattle or other similar animals either
permanently or transiently.
   STORY. The portion of a building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the f1oor next above it, or if there is no floor above it,
then the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it.
   STORY; HALF. A story which is situated under a sloping roof, the floor area
which does not exceed one-half of the floor area of the floor immediately below
it and which does not contain an independent apartment. A HALF STORY shall not
be counted as a story for the purpose of determining yard dimensions.
   STREETS; PUBLIC. A public thoroughfare which has been dedicated or deeded to
the public for public use and which affords principal means of access to
abutting property.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change in supporting members of a building, such
as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, and structural additions and
improvements not restricted to normal maintenance or repair. This includes
changes in roofing or siding materials such as slate to metal, wood, vinyl,
asphalt and the like.
   STRUCTURE. Anything, constructed or erected, the use of which requires a
more or less permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having
a firm location on the ground. STRUCTURE includes buildings, commercial radio
or TV towers, sheds and permanent signs but excludes fences.
   TRAILER HOME PARK. Any site or tract of land upon which three or more house
trailers used for habitation are parked, either free of charge or for revenue
purposes; including any roadway, building, structure, vehicle or enclosure used
or intended for use as a part of the facilities of such park.
   USE. The specific purposes for which land or a building is designated,
arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
   VARIANCE. A modification of the strict terms of the relevant regulations
where such modification will not be contrary to the public interest and where
owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the action
of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the regulations would result in
unnecessary and undue hardship.
   YARD. An open area unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or portion
of a structure, lying between a structure and adjoining lot lines.
(Ord. 618, passed 4-18-1988)
§ 1202.03 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Use districts.
      (1)   In order to regulate and district the location of the trades and
industries and the location of buildings erected or altered for specified use,
the village is hereby divided into “use districts”, of which there shall be
seven, known as:
         A.   Agricultural District;
         B.   Residential District A;
         C.   Residential District B;
         D.   Mobile Home Park District;
         E.   Commercial District;
         F.   Central Business District; and
         G.   Industrial District.
      (2)   The boundaries of such districts are shown upon the map attached
hereto and made part of the chapter, being designated and the “Use District
Map”, and said map and all notations, references and other things shown thereon
shall be as much a part of this chapter as if the matters and things set forth
by said map were fully described herein.
      (3)   Except as hereinbefore provided, no building shall be erected or
structurally altered, nor shall any building or premises be used for any other
purpose other than is permitted in the use district in which such building or
premises is located.
      (4)   Any territory embraced with any future enlargement of the corporate
limits of the village shall be deemed in the Agricultural District thereof
until otherwise classified by the Village Council.
   (b)   New subdivisions. Whenever any owner or owners of land classified by
the zoning ordinance as agricultural shall have plotted the same into lots and
blocks not of record at the time of passage of this chapter, or shall
thereafter replot the same, any part of which is, for the purpose of other than
that permitted in the Agricultural District, said owner or owners shall
immediately apply to the zoning board to have said land rezoned according to
the procedure outlined in §
1202.11.
   (c)   Boundaries of districts. When uncertainty exists with respect to
boundaries of the various districts as described herein or as indicated on the
zoning maps, the following rules shall apply.
      (1)   District boundary lines are either the center lines of railroads,
bridges, highways, streets, alleys or easements or boundary lines of sections,
quarter sections, tracts, subdivisions, lots or such lines extended, unless
otherwise indicated.
      (2)   In areas not subdivided into lots and blocks, wherever a district
is indicated as a strip adjacent to and paralleling a street or highway, the
depth of such strip shall be 200 feet measured at right angles from the street
or highway line and the length of frontage shall be the entire tract of land
along such highway, unless otherwise indicated.
(Ord. 618, passed 4-18-1988)
§ 1202.04 USE DISTRICTS.
   (a)   Agricultural District. In the Agricultural District, all buildings and
premises, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, may be used for any of
the following uses:
      (1)   Raising of crops;
      (2)   Grazing of farm animals; and
      (3)   Horticulture and truck gardening.
   (b)   Residence District A.
      (1)   In the A Residence District, no building or premises except as
otherwise provided in this chapter shall be erected altered or used except for
one or more of the listed uses.
         A.   Uses permitted.
            1.   One-family dwellings;
            2.   Two-family dwellings;
            3.   Churches;
            4.   Schools;
            5.   Libraries;
            6.   Municipal community buildings, parks and playgrounds;
            7.   Accessory buildings, including a private garage, a private
swimming pool or tennis court. A private garage may exceed a three-vehicle
capacity provided the area of the lot whereon such private garage is to be
located shall contain not less than 3,000 square feet for each vehicle stored;
            8.   Professional and semi-professional occupations where a part of
the property is occupied as a residence by such professional or semi-
professional provided:
               a.   There is no selling of a commodity;
               b.   There is no audible sound at the outside of the building;
               c.   There is no name plate exceeding one square foot in area;
and
               d.   There is no outside employee except the resident plus one
additional full- or part-time employee.
         B.   Conditional uses. Conditional uses are subject to procedure of
approval as provided in §
1202.10.
            1.   Home occupation provided:
               a.   Such occupation is conducted wholly within the dwelling or
an accessory building;
               b.   Floor area devoted to such use does not exceed 25% of the
total ground area occupied by buildings on the lot.
               c.   Such use is not objectionable due to noise, lighting, hours
of operation, traffic generated or hazardous or noxious process to adjoining
properties.
               d.   There is no name plate exceeding one square foot in area.
         C.   Signs. No sign exceeding eight square feet in area pertaining to
the lease, hire or sale of a building or premises shall be permitted in the A
Residence District.
   (c)   Residence District B. In the B Residence District, no building or
premises except as otherwise provided in this chapter shall be erected, altered
or used except for one or more of the listed uses.
      (1)   Uses permitted.
         A.   One-family dwellings;
         B.   Two-family dwellings, apartment buildings - multiple dwellings;
         C.   Churches;
         D.   Schools;
         E.   Libraries;
         F.   Municipal community buildings, parks and playgrounds;
         G.   Accessory buildings - including a private garage, a private
swimming pool and/or tennis court. A private garage may exceed a three-vehicle
capacity provided the area of the lot whereon such private garage is to be
located shall contain not less than 3,000 square feet for each vehicle stored;
and
         H.   Professional and semi-professional occupations where a part of
the property is occupied as a residence by such professional or semi-
professional provided:
            1.   There is no selling of a commodity;
            2.   There is no audible sound at the outside of the building;
            3.   There is no name plate exceeding one square foot in area; and
            4.   There is no outside employee, except the resident plus one
additional full- or part-time employee.
      (2)   Conditional uses. Conditional uses are subject to procedure of
approval as provided in §
1202.10. Home occupation provided:
         A.   Such occupation is conducted wholly within the dwelling or an
accessory building;
         B.   Floor area devoted to such use does not exceed 25% of the total
ground area occupied by buildings on the lot;
         C.   Such use is not objectionable due to noise, lighting, hours of
operation, traffic generated or hazardous or noxious process to adjoining
properties; and
         D.   There is no name plate exceeding one square foot in area.
      (3)   Signs. No sign exceeding eight square feet in area pertaining to
the lease, hire or sale of a building or premises shall be permitted in the B
Residence District.
   (d)   Mobile Home Park District.
      (1)   Generally. Mobile home parks shall be located only in the Mobile
Home Park District. Mobile home parks shall meet the requirements of Chapter
HE-27 of the Ohio Sanitary Code adopted by the Public Utilities Council in the
authority of R.C. § 3733,07.
      (2)   Uses permitted. 
         A.   Mobile homes; and
         B.   House trailers.
   (e)   Commercial District. In the Commercial District, all buildings and
premises except as otherwise provided in this chapter, may be used for any
permitted uses in the B Residence District, or for the following listed uses:
      (1)   A.   Uses permitted.
            1.   Food sales, including supermarkets;
             2.   Barber and beauty shops;
            3.   Dry cleaning and laundry establishments;
            4.   Drug sales;
            5.   Hardware sales;
            6.   Variety stores;
            7.   Clothing and apparel stores;
            8.   Shoe repair shops;
            9.   Florist shops;
            10.   Eating and drinking establishments;
            11.   Appliance stores;
            12.   Furniture stores;
            13.   Jewelry and gift stores;
            14.   Shoe sales;
            15.   Banks, savings or loan businesses;
            16.   Sales and distribution offices;
            17.   Newspaper, printing and reproduction services;
            18.   Offices - business, dental and medical;
            19.   Bowling alleys;
            20.   Skating rinks, indoor;
            21.   Theaters;
            22.   Drive-in banks;
            23.   Motels;
            24.   Funeral homes;
            25.   Automobile, automobile parts, farm implement sales and
services;
            26.   Commercial parking lots;
            27.   Bakeries;
            28.   Ice plants;
            29.   Millwright;
            30.   Gas stations;
            31.   Veterinary hospitals; and
            32.   Any other business, service or public utility not involving
manufacturing on the premises, except of products the major portion of which
are to be sold at retail at that location by the manufacturer to the consumer,
and provided that not more than five operators should be employed in such
manufacture.
         B.   Safety standards. All business within the Commercial District
must meet the standards for safety, air and water pollution as established by
the state.
      (2)   Conditional uses. Any commercial building that is determined not to
be injurious, noxious or offensive to a surrounding neighborhood by reason of
the emission of odors, fumes, dust, smoke, vibration, noise or lighting as
approved by the Zoning Board.
   (f)   Central Business District.
      (1)   All principal uses permitted in the Central Business District are:
         A.   Offices;
         B.   Hotels;
         C.   Establishments selling goods and services at retail and conducted
entirely within an enclosed building;
         D.   Restaurants;
         E.   Theaters and other places of amusement conducted entirely within
an enclosed building and that are not detrimental to the neighborhood;
         F.   Banks and other financial institutions;
         G.   Residences above the ground level; and
         H.   Gas stations.
      (2)   Access to parking facilities shall be only from the rear and side
alleys.
   (g)   Industrial District.
      (1)   This district is established to accommodate industrial uses in the
fields of manufacturing, processing, wholesaling and distributing. Due to
continuing advancement in industrial plant design and technology, it is not
practical to say which industries shall be compatible with our community,
except by performance standards.
      (2)   All industries must meet the standards for safety, air and water
pollution as established by the state.
      (3)   A.   Uses permitted.
            1.   All uses permitted in the Commercial District;
            2.   Railroad facilities;
            3.   Utility substations;
            4.   Storage of petroleum products, chemicals and gas under
pressure; and
            5.   Manufacturing.
         B.   Conditional use. Any industrial building that is determined not
to be injurious , noxious or offensive to the surrounding neighborhood by
reason of the emission of odors, fumes, dust , smoke, vibrations, noise or
lighting as approved by the Zoning Board.
(Ord. 618, passed 4-18-1988)
§ 1202.05 NONCONFORMITIES.
   Where, at the time of adoption of this chapter, lawful uses of land or
building exist which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this
chapter, the uses may be continued so long as they remain otherwise lawful,
provided:
   (a)   No such nonconforming uses of buildings shall be enlarged or
increased, nor extended, to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at
the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter;
   (b)   Any building or structure devoted to a nonconforming use which may be
destroyed or damaged by fire or otherwise to the extent of 50% or more of its
value shall not be repaired or rebuilt, nor shall another building or structure
be erected on the premises except in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter;
   (c)   If any nonconforming uses of land are discontinued or abandoned for
more than two years (except when government actions impedes access to the
premises), any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations
specified by this chapter for the district in which such land is located;
   (d)   Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a use of higher
classification or to a conforming use, such a use cannot thereafter be changed
to one of a lower classification or back to a conforming use;
   (e)   Any use which is permitted as a conditional use in a district under
the terms of this chapter shall not be deemed a conforming use in such district
but shall be considered a conforming one; and
   (f)   A complete record of the location, nature and extent of a
nonconforming use shall be made and kept by the enforcing officer.
(Ord. 618, passed 4-18-1988)
§ 1202.06 LOT COVERAGE AND SETBACK LINES.
   (a)   In A Residence Districts, the total area of buildings shall not exceed
25% of the lot area. No building shall be nearer than five feet from adjoining
lot line. In B, no building shall be nearer than three feet from adjoining lot
line. No buildings shall be nearer than ten feet from the right-of-way of a
side street, front of the building shall conform to established setback line,
provided that in plats for future development, set back lines shall be 40 feet
from the right-of-way.
   (b)   In the Agriculture District, setback and side lines shall conform with
those in A Residential.
   (c)   In Commercial Districts, buildings shall set back from the street to
conform to the present building lines as established by the existing buildings
now erected thereon, provided that where no setback lines have been established
the same shall be a minimum of 25 feet from the right-of-way. In no case shall
the setback line be less than 25 feet.
   (d)   In the Central Business District, there shall be no front, side or
rear yard requirements.
   (e)   Industrial District coverage shall conform to the State Building Code,
but in no event to be less than 50 feet from the right-of-way.
   (f)   Nonresidential buildings or uses shall not be located or constructed
closer than 40 feet to any lot line of a Residential District. If screening is
provided as approved by the Zoning Inspector, the minimum yard requirements may
be reduced to 50% of the requirements.
   (g)   In Industrial Districts, allowance shall be made for parking of all
the employees’s automobiles off the street or highway.
(Ord. 618, passed 4-18-1988)
§ 1202.07 SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Swimming pools.
      (1)   Private - no private pool, exclusive of portable swimming pools
with a diameter less than 12 feet or with an area less than 100 square feet,
shall be allowed in any Commercial or Residential District, except as an
accessory use and unless it complies with the following conditions and
requirements.
         A.   The pool is intended and is to be used solely for the enjoyment
of the occupants or the principal use of the property on which it is located.
         B.   The swimming pool, or the entire property on which it is located,
shall be walled or fenced to prevent uncontrolled access by children from the
street or from adjacent properties. Said fence or wall shall be no less than 42
inches in height and maintained in good condition with a gate and lock.
         C.   The pool is not to be located in the front yard of the property.
      (2)   Public - permitted in Commercial or Residential Districts. Pool and
accessory structures shall not be closer than 50 feet to any property line.
   (b)   Fences. In any front yard, no fence or wall shall be permitted which
materially impedes vision across such yard above the height of 42 inches.
(Ord. 618, passed 4-18-1988)
§ 1202.08 ADMINISTRATION.
   (a)   In order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, there shall be a
Zoning Board appointed by the Mayor upon the approval of the Council. This
Board shall consist of five members, none of whom shall be members of the
Council. Initial appointment shall be made as follows: one for a period of one
year, one for a period of two years, one for a period of three years, one for a
period of four years and one for a period of five years. Thereafter,
appointments shall be for a term of five years.
   (b)   The Zoning Board shall interpret the provisions of this chapter in
such a manner as to carry out the intent and purpose thereof.
   (c)   The Zoning Board shall rule on all proper applications for permits in
such a manner as to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter.
   (d)   The Zoning Board shall appoint a Clerk of the Board, who may be a
member of the Board and who shall serve at the discretion of the Board. It
shall be the duty of the Clerk to keep a complete record of all proceedings of
the Board and all applications for permits and variances. The Clerk of the
Board shall receive such compensations as established by the Village Council.
(Ord. 618, passed 4-18-1988)
§ 1202.09 PROCEDURE AND REQUIREMENTS FOR APPEALS AND VARIANCES.
   (a)   Appeals.
      (1)   Appeals to the Zoning Board concerning interpretation of
administration of this chapter may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any
officer or bureau of the Legislative Authority of the village affected by any
decision made by the administrative official charged with the enforcement of
this chapter. Such appeal shall be taken within such time as shall be
prescribed by the Zoning Board by general rule by filing with the officer from
whom the appeal is taken and with the Zoning Board a notice of appeal,
specifying the ground thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall
forthwith transmit to the Zoning Board all the papers constituting the record
from which the action the appeal from was taken.
      (2)   An appeal stays all proceedings which would further the action
appealed from, i.e. that which is the cause of the appeal, unless the officers
from whom the appeal is taken have certified to the Zoning Board, and presented
facts to the effect that a stay of action would present imminent peril to life
or property. In which case, proceedings will not be stayed by means other than
a restraining order by a court.
   (b)   Variances. 
      (1)   The Zoning Board may authorize upon appeal in specific cases such
variances from the terms of this chapter in which it is alleged that practical
difficulties or particular hardship, not intended
or not common to other owners of property in the vicinity will be imposed in
carrying out the strict letter of any such regulations, if it is determined
that such variance will not be contrary to the public interest.
      (2)   The following standards shall prevail when considering approval of
variances:
         A.   The applicant’s supposed hardship cannot be one of economics
alone. For instance, a variance shall not be granted to allow construction of a
service station in order that the property owner can sell the land for a higher
price than he or she could get with the existing residential zoning;
         B.   The hardship may result from circumstances affecting a particular
and unique piece of property, and not from a general condition throughout the
neighborhood;
         C.   A variance must not alter the essential character of the
neighborhood;
         D.   A hardship must result from the requirements in the zoning
ordinance and not from the applicant’s own actions; and
         E.   A variance must not be contrary to the public interest even if a
hardship can be established.
      (3)   Applications and standards for variances.
         A.   A variance from the terms of this chapter shall not be granted by
the Zoning Board unless and until a written application for a variance is
submitted to the Zoning Inspector and the Zoning Board containing:
            1.   Name, address and phone number of applicants;
            2.   Legal description of property;
            3.   Description of nature of variance requested; and
            4.   A narrative statement demonstrating that the requested
variance conforms to the following standards:
               a.   That special conditions and circumstances exist which are
peculiar to the land, structure or building involved, and which are not
applicable to other lands, structures or buildings in the same district;
               b.   That a literal interpretation of the provisions of this
chapter would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other
properties in the same district under the terms of this chapter; and
               c.   That special conditions and circumstances do not result
from the actions of the applicant.
         B.   A variance shall not be granted unless the Zoning Board makes
specific findings of fact based directly on the particular evidence presented
to it, which support conclusions that the standards and conditions imposed have
been met by the applicant.
      (4)   Public hearing and notice by the Zoning Board.
         A.   The Zoning Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of
the variance or appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties and decide
the same within a reasonable time.
         B.   The Enforcing Officer shall give at least 15 days’ notice of the
time and place of such hearing published in a newspaper of general circulation
in the village describing the particular location and the proposed purposes of
the variance or appeal. Such notice shall also be given to all property owners
within a distance of 200 feet, streets and alleys included, of the lot which
the variance is proposed.
      (5)   Action by Zoning Board. The concurring vote of a majority of the
Zoning Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or
determination of any such administrative official or to decide in favor of the
applicant any matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter.
(Ord. 618, passed 4-18-1988)
§ 1202.10 PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING PERMITS.
   (a)   Applications for regular building permits shall be submitted to the
Clerk of the Zoning Board. Each application shall be accompanied by the permit
fee hereafter provided for, together with a plot in duplicate showing the
actual dimensions of the lot to be built on, the size, use and location of
existing buildings and buildings to be erected, plans of the new construction
showing material to be used, and such other information as the Zoning Board
shall require. The Clerk shall submit the applications and plot plans to the
Zoning Board for its consideration. The Clerk shall issue or reject the
application according to the ruling of the Zoning Board and shall inform the
applicant. The record of all applications, plots and permits shall be kept in
the village hall.
   (b)   Applications for variance permits heretofore provided for in this
chapter shall also be submitted to the Clerk. Such applications shall be
accompanied by the variance permit fee hereafter provided for, together with
information required for a regular building permit and such additional
information as the Zoning Board shall require.
   (c)   Applications for temporary permits shall be submitted to the Clerk
together with the temporary permit fee and such information as the Zoning Board
shall require.
   (d)   The permit fee shall be the sum of $2 plus the sum of $0.50 per $1,000
or fraction thereof of the estimated cost of the construction. Variance permits
shall cost an additional $10. Temporary permits for trailer use or construction
shed use shall cost $1. Circus and fair permits shall cost $1.
   (e)   All permit fees shall go into the General Fund of the village and
shall be used for the administration of this chapter.
   (f)   The granting of a permit under this chapter allows the construction or
alteration of buildings or structures and the modification of use as applied
for in the permit and according to the plans, plots and specifications
submitted with the application.
   (g)   Such permits shall be valid for a period of six months. An additional
six months extension is permitted upon reapplication at no additional cost.
Reapplication must be submitted no later than seven days before expiration date
of previous permit.
(Ord. 618, passed 4-18-1988)
§ 1202.11 TEMPORARY PERMITS.
   (a)   The Zoning Board shall have the power to grant temporary permits for
the following purposes and subject to the following conditions.
      (1)   A temporary permit may be granted for the use of a house trailer as
a residence in connection with the granting of a building permit for the
construction of a dwelling. The permit shall allow such use on the premises on
which the dwelling is to be constructed and shall expire on completion of
occupancy of the dwelling, and in any event, within one year of the date
granted. Such trailer must be equipped with adequate sanitary facilities which
shall include connection to a septic tank and leach bed.
      (2)   A temporary permit may be granted for the use of a house trailer as
a residence on a lot or tract of land which has a dwelling thereon. Such
trailer shall not be required to have the sanitary facilities in division (a)
(1) above if used in connection with a dwelling having an indoor bathroom. Such
permit shall expire in 30 days.
      (3)   A temporary permit may be granted for the erection and use of
construction buildings in connection with the granting of any building permit.
Such permit must expire within 30 days of completion of the construction.
      (4)   A temporary permit may be granted for the use of lands in a “B” or
lower district as a fair or circus grounds. Such permit shall expire within two
weeks of issue.
   (b)   In granting of such permits, the Zoning Board shall determine that the
site for which the permit is requested is of sufficient size and so located
that adequate parking facilities are available.
(Ord. 618, passed 4-18-1988)
§ 1202.12 PROCEDURE FOR ORDINANCE AMENDMENT OR DISTRICT CHANGE.
   Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning
practices require, Village Council may consider change by ordinance after
receipt of recommendation thereon from the Zoning Board, and subject to
procedure provided by law, amend, supplement, change or repeal the regulations,
restrictions and boundaries or classification of property.
   (a)   Initiation of zoning amendments. Amendments to this chapter may be
initiated in one of the following ways:
      (1)   By adoption of a motion by the Zoning Board;
      (2)   By adoption of a resolution by Village Council; and
      (3)   By the filing of an application by at least one owner or lessee of
property within the area proposed to be changed or affected by said amendment.
   (b)   Contents of application. Applications for amendments to the official
zoning map adopted as part of this chapter shall contain at least the following
information:
      (1)   Name, address and phone number of applicant;
      (2)   Proposed amending ordinance, approved as to from by the Village
Solicitor;
      (3)   Present use;
      (4)   Present zoning district;
      (5)   Proposed use;
      (6)   Proposed zoning district;
      (7)   A vicinity map at a scale approved by the Zoning Inspector showing
property lines, thoroughfares, existing and proposed zoning and such other
items as the Zoning Inspector may require; and
      (8)   A list of all property owners and their mailing addresses who are
within, contiguous to or directly across the street from the parcel (A)
proposed to be rezoned and others that may have substantial interest in the
case except that addresses need not be included where more than ten parcels are
to be rezoned.
   (c)   Transmittal to Zoning Board. Immediately after the adoption of a
resolution by the Village Council or the filing of an application by at least
one owner or lessee of property, said resolution of application shall be
transmitted to the Zoning Board.
   (d)   Recommendation by the Zoning Board.
      (1)   The Zoning Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the
proposed amendment and give due notice to the parties and decide within a
reasonable time and give their report and recommendation to Council within 30
days of their consideration.
      (2)   Written notice of the hearing by the Zoning Board shall be given to
all property owners within a distance of 200 feet, streets and alleys included,
or the land proposed to be rezoned or reclassified.
      (3)   The concurring vote of a majority of the Zoning Board shall be
necessary to recommend that the amendment be granted as presented, to recommend
modification of the amendment requested or to recommend that the amendment be
denied.
   (e)   Public hearing and notice requirements by Village Council.
      (1)   Upon receipt of the recommendation from the Zoning Board, Council
shall schedule a public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be given by
Village Council by at least one publication in one or more newspapers of
general circulation in the village affected. Said motion notice shall be
published at least 30 days before the date of the required hearing. The
published notice shall set forth the time and place of the public hearing and a
summary of the proposed amendment.
      (2)   If the proposed amendment intends to rezone or redistrict ten or
less parcels of land as listed on the tax duplicate, written notice of the
hearing shall be mailed by the Clerk of Council , by first-class mail, at least
20 days before the day of the public hearing to all owners of property within
and contiguous to and directly across the street from such area proposed to be
rezoned or reclassified. These property owners shall be taken from the County
Auditor’s current tax list or the County Treasurer’s mailing list, and other
list or lists that may be specified by Village Council. The failure to deliver
the notification, as provided in this section, shall not invalidate any such
amendment. The notice shall contain the same information as required of notices
published in newspapers as specified above.
   (f)   Action by Village Council.
      (1)   Within 30 days after the public hearing, Village Council shall
either adopt or deny the recommendation of the Zoning Board or adopt some
modification thereof. In the event the Village Council denies or modifies the
recommendation of the Zoning Board, it must do so by not less than three-
fourths of the full membership of Village Council. No such ordinance shall be
passed without at least a concurrence (majority) of the elected officials of
the Legislative Authority.
      (2)   In the event the proposed amendment is denied by Village Council,
the same proposed amendment cannot be resubmitted for one year from ate of
denial.
(Ord. 618, passed 4-18-1988)
§ 1202.13 FEE.
   (a)   To partially defray the expenses of advertising, investigation and
considering an appeal, variance, conditional use or amendment or use charge, a
fee of $10 shall be charged by the enforcing officer, who shall account for the
same to the village.
   (b)   No fee will be charged if the amendment originates within the Village
Council or Zoning Board.
(Ord. 618, passed 4-18-1988)
§ 1202.14 INTERPRETATION, PURPOSES AND CONFLICT.
   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, morals, comfort and general welfare. It is not intended by this chapter
to interfere with or abrogate or annul any ordinances, resolutions, rules,
regulations or permits previously adopted or issued, and not in conflict with
any of the provisions of this chapter relative to the use of buildings,
structures or land, nor is it intended by this chapter to interfere with,
abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties;
provided, however, that whenever this chapter imposes a greater restriction
upon the use of buildings, structures or land, or requires greater building
lines, then the provisions of this chapter shall control.
(Ord. 618, passed 4-18-1988)
§ 1202.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of
this chapter or amendments thereto, or submits false plans, evidence or
testimony with the intent thereby of obtaining any permit or privilege by
subterfuge or misrepresentation shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be fined not more than $100.
(Ord. 618, passed 4-18-1988)
PART FOURTEEN - BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE
   
TITLE TWO - Property Maintenance
      
Chap. 1402.   Property Maintenance Standards
   
TITLE FOUR - Miscellaneous Building Regulations
      
Chap. 1420   Erection or Alteration of Buildings
      
Chap. 1426.   Building Numbers
      
Chap. 1430.   Fences
      
Chap. 1436.   Outdoor Heating Units
TITLE TWO - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
      
Chap. 1402.   Property Maintenance Standards
CHAPTER 1402: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS
Section
   
1402.01   Purpose
   
1402.02   Definitions
   
1402.03   Conflicts
   
1402.04   Responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants
   
1402.05   Duties and responsibilities of owners or operators
   
1402.06   Emergencies
   
1402.07   Notice of violation
   
1402.99   Penalty
§ 1402.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of these standards is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the maintenance, appearance
and condition of all residential and nonresidential premises; to authorize and
establish procedures for the inspection of said premises; and to fix penalties
for violations of the standards set forth herein. These standards are hereby
declared to be remedial and essential for the public interest, and it is
intended that this chapter can be liberally construed to effectuate the
purposes as stated herein.
(Ord. 707, passed 5-22-2001)
§ 1402.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BLIGHTED AREA. The same as defined in R.C. § 1728.01(E), as amended,
incorporated herein.
   BUILDING. A structure that is permanently affixed to the land, having one or
more floors and a roof, being bounded by either open spaces of lot lines and
which is used for residential and/or nonresidential purposes.
   DETERIORATE. To fall below the condition of good repair.
   DISABLE VEHICLE. A vehicle that is inoperable, immobile, lacks self motive
power and/or is without current license plates for a period of more than 14
days, unless stored in an enclosed building.
   EXCESSIVE VEGETATION. All vegetation, dead or alive, other than the
following: ground cover, shrubbery, flowers and trees that are planted and
maintained in accordance with good landscape practices and the community
standard in the village.
   EXTERIOR. Those portions of a building or structure or grounds that are
exposed to public view from the outside.
   GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
   GOOD REPAIR. A condition of sound maintenance of residential, retail,
commercial and industrial property and building in accordance with the
standards of the community as a whole.
   GRAFFITI. Unauthorized drawings or markings of an exterior surface without
regard to the content of the drawing of marking.
   GROUNDS. The portion of residential, retail, commercial and industrial
property that does not support a building or structure.
   INFESTATION. The presence within or contiguous to a structure or premises of
insects, rats, rodents, vermin or other pests on the premises that constitute a
health hazard.
   NUISANCE.
      (1)   Any public nuisance known in law or as provided by the statutes of
the state or the ordinances of the village;
      (2)   Conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to the health of
persons on or near the premises where the conditions exist and where the
condition is perilous by active and negligent operation thereof;
      (3)   Unsanitary conditions or anything offensive to the senses or
dangerous to health, in violation of these standards; or
      (4)   Fire hazards.
   OBSOLETE. No longer serving any current purpose, either aesthetic or
functional.
   OCCUPANT. Any person who has actual or constructive possession of
residential, retail, commercial and industrial property and buildings,
including, but not limited to, a lessee, sublessee, assignee, licensee or
permittee, whether with or without the consent of the owner or occupant.
   OPERATOR. Any person who has the charge, care or control of residential,
retail, commercial and industrial property and buildings, whether with or
without the consent of the owner or occupant.
   OWNER. Any person who, alone or jointly with others, has legal or equitable
title to residential, retail, commercial and industrial property and buildings,
with or without actual constructive possession thereof.
   PERSON. Any entity, either natural or created by law, including, but not
limited to, a natural person, corporation, partnership, association, executor,
administrator, trustee, receiver, guardian or other fiduciary.
   PREMISES. A lot, plat or parcel of land, including the building or
structures thereon.
   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE OFFICER. The Zoning Inspector or the official appointed
by the Village Administrator who is charged with the administration and
enforcement of these standards, or any duly authorized representative.
   REFUSE. All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste (except body waste),
including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleans, dead
animals and solid market and industrial waste.
   RESIDENTIAL, RETAIL, COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY AND BUILDINGS. A lot
or tract of land or building or other structure or grounds which are used or
intended to be used or which property’s last active use was primarily for
residential, retail, commercial and industrial purposes.
   RUBBISH. Nonputrescible solid waste consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible waste, such as paper, wrappings, tin cans, yard clippings,
leaves, wood, glass, crockery and similar materials.
   STRUCTURE. Anything built or constructed to serve any purpose, occupied or
unoccupied, on a permanent foundation or portable.
   WEATHERING. Deterioration, decay or damage caused by exposure to the
elements.
(Ord. 707, passed 5-22-2001; Ord. 715, passed 3-26-2002)
§ 1402.03 CONFLICTS.
   (a)   Application to buildings. Owners or operators of every residential and
nonresidential building and the premises on which they are situated in the
village, used or intended to be used for any use permitted by the zoning
regulations, shall comply with the provisions of this chapter whether or not
such building has been constructed, altered or repaired before or after the
enactment of this chapter and irrespective of any permit or license which has
been issued for the use or occupancy of the building or for the installation or
repair of equipment or facilities prior to the effective date of this chapter.
This chapter establishes minimum requirements for the initial and continued
occupancy and use of all such buildings and does not replace or modify
standards otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration or use
of such buildings. Where there is mixed occupancy, the residential or
nonresidential uses therein shall nevertheless be regulated by and subject to
the provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   Conflict of laws. Where the provisions of this chapter impose a higher
standard than that set forth in any other ordinance of the village or law of
the state, then the standards set forth herein shall prevail, but if the
provisions of this chapter impose a lower standard than the standard set forth
in any other ordinance of the village of law or the state, then the ordinances
or law shall prevail.
   (c)   Enforcement of and compliance with other ordinances. No license or
permit or other certification of compliance with this chapter shall constitute
a defense against any violation of any other ordinance of the village
applicable to any structure or premises, nor shall any provision herein relieve
any owner, operator or occupant from complying with any such other provision,
nor any official of the village from enforcing any such other provision.
(Ord. 707, passed 5-22-2001)
§ 1402.04 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS, OPERATORS AND OCCUPANTS.
   (A)   Owners and operators shall have all the duties and responsibilities
prescribed in this chapter, and the regulations published pursuant thereto, and
no owner or operator shall be relieved from any such duty and responsibility,
not be entitled to defend against any charge of violation thereof by reason of
the fact that the occupant is also responsible therefor and in violation
thereof.
   (B)   Unless expressly provided to the contrary in this chapter, the
respective obligations and responsibilities of the owner and operator on one
hand, as the occupant on the other, shall not be altered or affected by an
agreement or contract by and between any of the aforesaid or between them and
other parties.
(Ord. 707, passed 5-22-2001)
§ 1402.05 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS OR OPERATORS.
   (a)   Maintenance of exterior of premises; hazards and unsanitary
conditions. The exterior of the premises and the exterior of all structures
thereon shall be kept free of all nuisances, unsanitary conditions and any
hazard to the safety of occupants, pedestrians and other persons utilizing the
premises, and any of the foregoing shall be promptly removed and abated by the
owner or operator. It shall be the duty of the owner or operator to keep the
premises free of hazards which include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Refuse. An accumulation of brush, broken glass, stumps and roots
that presents a safety hazard; also, garbage, trash and debris that present an
unsanitary and/or a safety hazard. Compost piles enclosed in a fenced-in area
not exceeding 30 feet from adjacent property lines are exempt from this
division (a)(1);
      (2)   Natural growth. Dead trees and limbs or other natural growth which,
by reason of rotting or deteriorating conditions or storm damage, constitute a
hazard to persons in the vicinity thereof;
      (3)   Overhangs and awnings. Loose and overhanging objects which, by
reason of location above ground level, constitute a danger of falling on
persons in the vicinity thereof;
      (4)   Sources of infestation. Permitting premises to become infested with
vermin or rodents is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. No
owner, operator or person in charge or control of any premises shall cause, or
knowingly permit, such premises to become or to remain infested with vermin or
rodents;
      (5)   Foundation walls. Exterior foundation walls shall be kept
structurally sound, free from defects and damage and capable of bearing imposed
loads safely;
      (6)   Chimneys and all flue and vent attachments thereto. Chimneys and
all flue vent attachments thereto shall be maintained structurally sound, free
from defects and so maintained as to capably perform at all times the functions
for which they were designed, and the same shall be capable of withstanding the
action of flue gases;
      (7)   Gutters and downspouts. All gutters and downspouts shall be kept in
good repair and maintained to collect surface water from roofs. Rusted, broken
or damaged gutters and downspouts shall be promptly repaired or replaced;
      (8)   Sidewalks and tree lawns. All sidewalks and tree lawns shall be
maintained in good repair. Sidewalks and tree lawns shall be free of excessive
vegetation, trash and debris and sidewalks shall be kept broom-clean.
Freestanding objects, including, but not limited to, trash receptacles, vending
machines and benches, shall be maintained in good repair and free of trash,
debris and excessive vegetation. Any grade separation greater than one inch on
the surface of a sidewalk caused by cracks or settling shall be promptly
replaced or repaired. Sidewalks, where surfaces are eroded or pitted to such an
extent as to cause a safety hazard to pedestrians, shall be replaced or
repaired in a timely matter, not to exceed 90 days from date of notification;
and
      (9)   Paved and unpaved grounds. Paved right-of-ways of all premises,
including driveway approaches and curbing, shall be maintained in good repair,
free of debris, chuck holes, loose asphalt, loose gravel, loose concrete and
vegetation. Non-paved right-of-ways shall also be maintained with the existing
medium or material or may be upgraded at the owner’s discretion and expense.
   (b)   Appearance of exterior of residential and nonresidential premises and
structures. The exterior of premises and the condition of accessory structures
shall be maintained so that the appearance of the premises and all buildings
thereon reflects a level of maintenance in keeping with the standards of the
immediate neighborhood so that such appearance does not constitute a blighting
factor for adjoining property owners nor an element leading to the progressive
deterioration and downgrading of the immediate neighborhood with the
accompanying reduction of property values, including the following.
      (1)   Landscaping. Premises shall be maintained. Lawns, hedges and bushes
shall be trimmed and kept from becoming overgrown and unsightly where exposed
to public view and where the same constitute a blighting factor depreciating
adjoining property. Grass in lawns permitted to grow in excess of eight inches
in height shall be presumed to be a nuisance. No landscaping shall impede
vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
      (2)   Signs and billboards. All permanent signs and billboards exposed to
public view permitted by reason of other regulations or as a lawful
nonconforming use shall be maintained in good repair. Any signs that have
weathered or faded or those upon which the paint has peeled shall, with their
supporting members, be removed forthwith or put into a good state of repair.
All broken electrical signs shall be repaired or shall, with their supporting
members, be removed forthwith.
      (3)   Store fronts. All store fronts shall be kept in good repair,
painted where required and shall not constitute a safety hazard or nuisance. In
the event that repairs to a store front become necessary, such repairs shall be
made with the same or similar materials used in the construction of the store
front in such a manner as to permanently repair the damaged area or areas. Any
cornice visible above a store front shall be kept painted, where required, and
in good repair.
      (4)   Awnings and marquees. Any awning or marquee and its accompanying
structural member which extend over any street, sidewalk or other portion of
premises shall be maintained in good repair and shall not constitute a nuisance
or a safety hazard. In the event that such awnings or marquees are not properly
maintained in accordance with the foregoing, they shall, together with their
supporting members, be removed forthwith. In the event that such awnings or
marquees are made of cloth, plastic, or similar material, such cloth, plastic
or similar material, where exposed to public view, shall be maintained in good
condition and shall not show evidence of weathering, discoloration, ripping,
tearing or other holes. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize any
encroachment on streets, sidewalks or other parts of the public domain.
      (5)   Storage of industrial and commercial materials or waste and motor
vehicle equipment. There shall not be stored or used at a location visible from
the sidewalks, street or other public areas, equipment, materials, waste or
motor vehicle equipment relating to commercial, industrial or residential uses,
unless exclusively permitted by the zoning regulations for such premises. The
parking or storage of boats, motor homes, recreational vehicles, travel
trailers or truck trailers used for sales or storage between the property line
at the street right-of-way and the front of every commercial, industrial or
residential building is prohibited. All such boats, motor homes, recreational
vehicles, travel trailers and truck trailers used for sales or storage shall be
stored in the rear yard and screened from view. In the event that the
commercial, industrial or residential building is located on a corner lot,
boats, motor homes, recreational vehicles, travel trailers and truck trailers
used for sales or storage shall not be stored or parked between the property
line at the street right-of-way and the side of the building facing the street.
      (6)   Outside storage and dumpsters. Equipment; materials, baled or
bound; containers; and merchandise stored on grounds shall be in good repair,
stored in a neat manner, free of all nuisances, at the rear of the premises or
in an area approved by the Property Maintenance Officer. Dumpsters shall be
maintained in good repair and free from rust and damaged components. Grounds
surrounding dumpsters shall be free from trash, debris and excessive
vegetation. Dumpsters shall be adequate to hold all garbage and trash with a
closed cover. Covers shall remain closed, at all times, except when filling and
emptying. Dumpsters shall be located in an appropriate place so as to not
impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic, preferably at the rear of the premises
or in an area approved by the Property Maintenance Officer.
   (c)   Structural soundness and   general maintenance. The exterior of every
structure or accessory structure, including fences, signs and store fronts,
shall be maintained in good repair and all surfaces thereof shall be kept
painted where necessary for purposes of preservation and appearance, or surface
coated with a protective coating or treated to prevent rot and decay. All
surfaces shall be maintained free of broken windows, crumbling stone or brick,
peeling paint or other condition reflective of deterioration or inadequate
maintenance to the end that the property itself may be preserved, safety and
fire hazards eliminated and adjoining properties and the immediate neighborhood
protected from blighting influence.
   (d)   Reconstruction of walls and sidings. All reconstruction of walls and
sidings shall be of standard quality, and their appearance commensurate with
the character of the properties in the same block and on both sides of the
street on which the premises front, such that the materials used will not be of
a kind that, by their appearance, under prevailing appraisal practices and
standards, will depreciate the value of neighboring and adjoining premises as
aforesaid.
   (e)   Freedom from infestation. All exterior parts of premises shall be
maintained so as to prevent infestation of insects and rodents.
(Ord. 707, passed 5-22-2001)
§ 1402.06 EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   Whenever, in the judgment of the Property Maintenance Officer, an
emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health,
safety or general welfare, an order may be issued, without a hearing or appeal,
directing the owner, occupant, operator or agent to take such action as is
appropriate to correct or abate the emergency. If circumstances warrant, the
Property Maintenance Officer may act to correct or abate the emergency. If the
Property Maintenance Officer acts to correct an emergency situation, the work
completed shall be chargeable to the property owner or the party violating the
notice.
   (B)   The owner, occupant, operator or agent shall be granted a hearing
before the Board of Zoning Appeals on the matter upon his or her request, as
soon as practical, but such appeal shall in no case stay the abatement or
correction of such emergency.
(Ord. 707, passed 5-22-2001)
§ 1402.07 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   Whenever the Property Maintenance Officer finds any dwelling,
structure or premises, or any part thereof, to be in non-emergency violation of
the provisions of this chapter, the Property Maintenance Officer, with the
permission of the Village Administrator, shall give, or cause to be given, or
mailed written notice stating the violations therein to the owners of record of
such property and the holders of legal or equitable liens of record upon the
realty property on which such building is located. Such notice shall not give
less than 30 days to complete the repair, improvement or demolition of the
structure or premises. Such delivery or mailing shall be deemed legal service
of notice.
   (B)   If the person to whom a notice of violation is addressed cannot be
found after reasonable and diligent search, notice may then be sent to the last
known address of such person, and a copy of such notice may be posted in a
conspicuous place on the structure or premises to which it relates. The notice
shall also be published in a newspaper of general circulation. Such mailing,
posting and advertising shall be deemed legal service of such notice.
   (C)   Whenever the Property Maintenance Officer finds any premises in
violation of §
1402.02 in the definition for RUBBISH, owner operators have five days to
correct said violation after notice.
   (D)   Whenever the Property Maintenance Officer finds owner or operator in
violation of §
1402.02 in the definition for DISABLE VEHICLE, owner or operator has seven days
to correct said violation after receiving notice.
(Ord. 707, passed 5-22-2001; Ord. 715, passed 3-26-2002)
§ 1402.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor for each offense. Each violation of a section or part of a section
of this chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct violation independent
of any other section or part of a section or any order issued pursuant to this
chapter. Each day of failure by any person after notice and final order to
comply with any section or part of a section shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. 707, passed 5-22-2001)
TITLE FOUR - MISCELLANEOUS BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
Chap. 1420.   Sidewalk Construction or Repair
      
Chap. 1426.   Building Numbers
      
Chap. 1430.   Fences
      
Chap. 1436.   Outdoor Heating Units
CHAPTER 1420: ERECTION OR ALTERATION OF BUILDINGS
Section
   
1420.01   Changes in use
   
1420.02   Permit fee
   
1420.99   Penalty
§ 1420.01 CHANGES IN USE.
   If, in the opinion of the Fiscal Officer, an application for a building
permit calls for a change in the use of a building, structure or premises
different from that use in existence on the said premises on the effective date
of this chapter, the Fiscal Officer shall refer the application to the Plan
Committee and the Village Council and shall not issue said permit unless and
until said application has been approved by the Plan Commission and the Village
Council.
(Ord. 426, passed 6-20-1960; Ord. 430, passed 4-17-1961)
§ 1420.02 PERMIT FEE.
   The permit shall be the sum of $2.50 per $1,000 or fraction thereof of the
estimated cost of the construction.
(Ord. 426, passed 6-20-1960; Ord. 430, passed 4-17-1961)
§ 1420.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions
of this chapter or submits false plans, evidence or testimony with the intent
thereby of obtaining any permit or privilege by trick or subterfuge shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined in any sum not more than
$100.
(Ord. 426, passed 6-20-1960; Ord. 430, passed 4-17-1961)
CHAPTER 1426: BUILDING NUMBERS
Section
   
1426.01   Installation of residence and business numbers required
   
1426.02   Numbering to be in accordance with plans and specifications
   
1426.03   Placing numbers after assigned
   
1426.99   Penalty
§ 1426.01 INSTALLATION OF RESIDENCE AND BUSINESS NUMBERS REQUIRED.
   The owners of all residence and business buildings shall provide, place and
install numbers on all residence and business buildings in the village.
(Ord. 420, passed 4-21-1958)
§ 1426.02 NUMBERING TO BE IN ACCORDANCE WITH PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   The numbering of all residence and business buildings shall be in accordance
with the plans and specifications now on file with Fiscal Officer providing for
the numbering of said residence and business buildings.
(Ord. 420, passed 4-21-1958)
§ 1426.03 PLACING NUMBERS AFTER ASSIGNED.
   No owner shall give to or place a number upon a residence or business
building until the Fiscal Officer has assigned said number.
(Ord. 420, passed 4-21-1958)
§ 1426.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $50.
(Ord. 420, passed 4-21-1958)
CHAPTER 1430: FENCES
Section
   
1430.01   Fence heights
   
1430.02   Fence regulations near streets
   
1430.03   Property lines
   
1430.04   Swimming pools
   
1430.05   Construction
   
1430.06   Materials
§ 1430.01 FENCE HEIGHTS.
   A fence up to six feet in height may be erected on the rear lot line, the
side lot lines and up to the nearest front corner of the property’s principal
building and shall not exceed three feet in height on the side lot lines
forward from the front corner of the principal building. Fences in excess of 36
inches in height extending across front yards are not permitted in residential
platted areas.
(Ord. 761, passed 12-18-2007)
§ 1430.02 FENCE REGULATIONS NEAR STREETS.
   No fence shall be constructed in a manner that would block the view of
vehicular traffic or restrict snow plowing of streets. Fences must be kept five
feet from the edge of the street and to the inside of all sidewalks. The side
of the fence considered to be the face (or finished side) shall face adjoining
property, and all fences shall be properly maintained with respect to
appearance and safety. The fence must be two feet off the property line.
(Ord. 761, passed 12-18-2007; Ord. 774, passed 8-26-2008)
§ 1430.03 PROPERTY LINES.
   Fences must be placed two feet off the property lines, but it is the
property owner’s responsibility to verify the location of his or her property
line. It is suggested having a surveyor locate property/lot lines before
installing fences. The village does not have surveyors to perform this service.
(Ord. 761, passed 12-18-2007; Ord. 774, passed 8-26-2008)
§ 1430.04 SWIMMING POOLS.
   In-ground swimming pools must be protected by a fence at least four feet
high with a self-closing, self-latching lockable gate, constructed such that a
four-inch sphere cannot pass through.
(Ord. 761, passed 12-18-2007)
§ 1430.05 CONSTRUCTION.
   The fence shall not be propped up or free floating, but must be securely
fastened to posts imbedded in the ground at least two and one-half feet. Any
fence constructed pursuant to this chapter shall be constructed of material
commonly intended by use in a residential or commercial fence such as wood,
vinyl, chain link or other materials deemed to be commonly accepted fencing
materials by the building official. Barbed wire fences are not permitted in
platted areas.
(Ord. 761, passed 12-18-2007)
§ 1430.06 MATERIALS.
   All materials must be new. No used materials shall be used for fencing. No
materials (such as sheet metal and tin) that may be hazardous during adverse
weather conditions such as strong winds shall be used as fencing materials.
(Ord. 761, passed 12-18-2007)
CHAPTER 1436: OUTDOOR HEATING UNITS
Section
   
1436.01   Definition
   
1436.02   Permit to install
   
1436.03   Fuel/wood
   
1436.99   Penalty
§ 1436.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OUTSIDE HEATING UNITS (BOILER). A wood or coal burning hot water furnace
that is a freestanding unit situated outside the envelope of the structure to
be heated.
(Ord. 760, passed 9-25-2007)
§ 1436.02 PERMIT TO INSTALL.
   (a)   No person(s) shall install, or cause to be installed, any outside
heating unit without first obtaining a required permit(s).
   (b)   The applicant shall provide a site plan depicting the location of the
proposed installation on the property, including distances from existing,
adjacent structures. The site plan must also show distances from the closest
structures of adjacent structures to the proposed installation lot. The height
of the proposed chimneystack will be noted on the drawing, as well as on the
proposed screening plan.
   (c)   Outdoor heating units shall only be located in the rear yard.
      (1)   Units located 75 feet or closer from any other structure must have
stack height of at least two feet higher than the eave height of the nearest
residential structure.
      (2)   If located more than 75 feet, but less than 100 feet from the
nearest structure, the stack height shall be not less than 75% of the eave
height of the nearest residential structure, plus two feet.
      (3)   If located more than 100 feet, but less than 150 feet from the
nearest structure, the stack height shall be not less than 50% of the eave
height of the nearest residential structure, plus two feet.
      (4)   If located more than 150 feet, but less than 200 feet from the
nearest structure, the stack shall be not less than 25% of the eave height of
the nearest residential structure, plus two feet.
      (5)   No part of any outdoor heating unit structure, required screening
or fuel supply should be permitted to be located closer than ten feet from any
property line.
      (6)   Every outdoor heating unit must have a spark arrestor securely
attached to the chimneystack to prevent the passage of sparks and ashes to the
outside atmosphere.
(Ord. 760, passed 9-25-2007)
§ 1436.03 FUEL/WOOD.
   (a)   No person shall burn fuel in any outdoor heating units other than the
fuel recommended by the manufacturer.
   (b)   Exception: regardless of any manufacturer recommendation, the burning
of trash, plastics, gasoline, naphtha, household garbage, material treated with
petroleum products, particle board, railroad ties, telephone poles, pressure
treated wood, leaves, paper products and cardboard or any other material that
may cause offensive or noxious odors, smoke, airborne ash or debris is
prohibited.
   (c)   Maintenance of unit/screening of unit and fuel.
      (1)   The exterior of any outdoor heating unit shall be maintained and
kept in good working condition in accordance with the manufacturer’s
maintenance recommendations.
      (2)   The outdoor heating unit and fuel storage shall be screened by
approved fencing, landscaping, earth berm or other suitable enclosure. The
average height of the enclosure shall be equal to the height of the outdoor
heating unit or stored fuel, but shall not be required to exceed six feet in
height.
(Ord. 760, passed 9-25-2007)
§ 1436.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 760, passed 9-25-2007)
PART SIXTEEN - FIRE PREVENTION CODE
[Reserved]
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Editor’s note:
   The Codified Ordinances of Risingsun comprises all ordinances and
resolutions of a general and permanent nature. The provisions of such general
and permanent ordinances and resolutions are set forth in full in the Codified
Ordinances.
   References must be made frequently to many special ordinances and
resolutions, particularly those relating to property, such as easements,
vacations, dedications, plat approvals, purchases, sales, leases and the like.
In the following Tables A through I, all such ordinances and resolutions are
listed. These tables list ordinances and resolutions chronologically by subject
and include both a citation to and a brief description of each ordinance and
resolution.
Table
   
TABLE A.   FRANCHISES
   
TABLE B.   EASEMENTS
   
TABLE C.   VACATING OF STREETS AND ALLEYS
   
TABLE D.   DEDICATION AND PLAT APPROVAL
   
TABLE E.   ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL OF REAL PROPERTY
   
TABLE F.   LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY
   
TABLE G.   STREET GRADE LEVELS AND CHANGE OF STREET NAME
   
TABLE H.   ANNEXATION AND DETACHMENT OF TERRITORY
   
TABLE I.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
TABLE A: FRANCHISES
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
                          Authorizing the sale of the electric distribution
396           7-2-1951    system in the village not needed for any municipal
                          purpose.
                          Granting the right and franchise to the Toledo Edison
                          Company to erect, construct, maintain and operate
                          poles, wire, lines and appurtenances thereto for the
397           8-20-1951   conducting of electricity and telephone and telegraph
                          circuits in, under, over, along, across and upon the
                          streets, alleys, lanes, lands, squares and public
                          places in the village.
                          Regulating the prices which the Toledo Edison Company
398           8-20-1951   shall charge for furnishing electric energy within
                          the village for a period of ten years.
                          Prescribing rates at which the Toledo Edison Company
399           10-15-1951  shall furnish lighting for the streets, alleys,
                          lands, lanes, squares, avenues and other public
                          places in the village for a period of ten years.
                          Fixing and regulating the price which may be charged
415           2-4-1957    by the Ohio Fuel Gas Co. for natural gas to the
                          village, and to its inhabitants, for the period of
                          five years.
                          Regulating the price which the Toledo Edison Company
432           9-5-1961    shall charge for electric service furnished for
                          certain uses within the village for a period of ten
                          years.
                          Providing for the placing of the cost of lighting of
434           1-9-1962    the streets and the furnishing of electric energy to
                          the village under special assessment.
                          Fixing and regulating the price that may be charged
438           7-2-1962    by the Ohio Fuel Gas Company for natural gas to the
                          village, and to its inhabitants, for the period of
                          four years.
                          Prescribing rates at which the Toledo Edison Company
439           7-2-1962    shall furnish lighting for the streets, alleys,
                          lands, lanes, squares, avenues and other public
                          places in the village for a period of ten years.
                          Fixing and regulating the price that may be charged
454           8-15-1966   by Columbia Gas of Ohio, Inc. for natural gas to the
                          village and to its inhabitants for a period of three
                          years; repealing Ord. 438.
                          Amending Ord. 455; prescribing the rates at which the
467           5-6-1968    Toledo Edison Company shall furnish additional
                          mercury vapor lighting for the remainder of the term
                          of Ord. 455 in the village.
                          Fixing and regulating the price that may be charged
473           12-15-1969  by Columbia Gas of Ohio, Inc. for natural gas to the
                          village, and to its inhabitants, for the period of
                          three years; repealing Ord. 454.
                          Authorizing the Mayor to cooperate with the City of
                          Mansfield, other political sub-divisions of the state
                          and Attorney Robert J. White in the matter of the
477           7-6-1970    application of the United Telephone Company of Ohio
                          to increase its rates and charges for telephone
                          service before the Public Utilities Commission of
                          Ohio, appropriating monies therefor.
                          Fixing and regulating the price that may be charged
488           3-19-1973   by Columbia Gas of Ohio, Inc. for gas to the village
                          and to its inhabitants for the period of four years;
                          repealing Ord. 473.
                          Providing for the placing of the cost of lighting of
499           7-15-1974   the streets and the furnishing of electrical energy
                          to the village under special assessment.
                          Repealing Ord. 480; regulating the price which the
501           9-23-1974   Toledo Edison Company shall charge for electric
                          service furnished for certain uses within the
                          village.
503           9-23-1974   Contract for garbage and refuse pick up.
                          Providing for the placing of the cost of lighting of
523           7-19-1976   the streets and the furnishing of electrical energy
                          to the village under special assessment.
                          Prescribing rates at which the Toledo Edison Company
                          shall furnish lighting for the streets, alleys,
525           8-2-1976    lands, lanes, squares, avenues and other public
                          places in the village for a period of five years;
                          repealing Ords. 455 and 467.
                          Repealing Ord. 501; regulating the price which the
526           8-18-1976   Toledo Edison Company shall charge for electric
                          service furnished for certain uses within the
                          village.
528           10-4-1976   Contract for garbage and refuse pick up.
                          Granting the right and franchise to the Toledo Edison
                          Company to erect, construct, maintain and operate
                          poles, towers, wires, lines and appurtenances thereto
524           2-7-1977    for the conducting of electricity and telephone and
                          telegraph circuits, in, under, over, along, across
                          and upon the streets, alleys, lanes, lands, squares
                          and public places in the village for a period of 25
                          years.
                          Fixing and regulating the price that may be charged
532           8-15-1977   by Columbia Gas of Ohio, Inc. for gas to the village,
                          and to its inhabitants, for the period of four years.
539           8-21-1978   Contract for garbage and refuse pick up.
                          Amending Ord. 532 which fixed and regulated the price
548           5-21-1979   that may be charged by Columbia Gas of Ohio, Inc. for
                          gas to the village and to its inhabitants, for a
                          period of four years.
                          Establishing a fund to pay for improvements by
709           6-26-2001   Northwestern Water and Sewer District for long-term
                          wastewater treatment and leverage these monies
                          against future funding sources.
                          Granting a cable television franchise to TW Fanch to
                          construct, operate and maintain a cable television
719           11-26-2002  system in the village setting forth conditions
                          accompanying the grant of franchise; providing for
                          regulation and use of system.
 
TABLE B: EASEMENTS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
                          Authorizing the use of the public right-of-way and
                          public lands of the village for the use of the
758           4-24-2007   Northwestern Water and Sewer District for the
                          installation of a water resource project within the
                          territory of the district.
 
TABLE C: VACATING OF STREETS AND ALLEYS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
                          Vacating part of the alley running east from Vine
388           3-21-1949   Street 386 feet and being the first alley north of
                          Salem Street in the village.
418           12-16-1957  Vacating Strong Street between Union Street and Salem
                          Street.
                          Vacating the north half of Walnut Street and all of
                          the east-west alley which lies between Walnut Street
422           8-17-1959   and Main Street, from the Chesapeake and Ohio
                          Railroad east to the first north-south alley east of
                          said railroad.
                          Vacating Salem Street from the west boundary of lot
495           4-1-1974    332, west to the Chesapeake and Ohio Railroad and
                          Mervin Avenue from Salem Street north to the
                          corporation line.
510           6-2-1975    Vacating a portion of Walnut Street.
513           7-7-1975    Vacating street right-of-way described as the east 60
                          feet of inlot 335 in Strong’s Addition.
                          Vacating the unused 13-foot wide alley running from
549           9-17-1979   Vine Street, east approximately 180 feet to an
                          unnamed street on the east.
                          Vacating an alley of 15 feet wide running from Oak
                          Street - 222 feet long to Myrtle Street, which said
712           9-25-2001   alley runs east and west. Said alley bounded on the
                          north by lots 249 and 252 and on the south by lots
                          248 and 253.
                          Vacating an alley of 60 feet wide and 92 feet long,
                          the west end of Wayne Street, running west from
723           4-22-2003   Luther Street. Said alley bounded on the north by lot
                          233 and on the south by inlot 12, south of Wayne
                          Street.
 
TABLE D: DEDICATION AND PLAT APPROVAL
[Reserved]
TABLE E: ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL OF REAL PROPERTY
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
727           5-25-2004   Advertising for bids on a 3,000 gallon capacity
                          pumper/tanker apparatus over $25,000.
 
TABLE F: LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
                          Authorizing the leasing of real estate owned by the
433           9-18-1961   village not needed for municipal purposes; the north
                          46 feet of inlots 77 and 78.
                          Authorizing the leasing of certain real estate owned
453           8-15-1966   by the village and not needed for municipal purposes;
                          the north 46 feet of inlots 77 and 78.
                          Authorizing the leasing of certain real estate and
479           9-7-1971    not needed for municipal purposes; north 46 feet of
                          inlot 77 and 78.
512           6-2-1975    Leasing the second floor of the Village Town Hall.
                          Authorizing the leasing of certain real estate owned
527           9-7-1976    by the village and not needed for municipal purposes;
                          the north 46 feet of inlot 77 and 78.
705           2-27-2001   Purchase/lease agreement with Reineke Ford for a
                          village town truck.
816           12-17-2012  Authorizing the sale of village owned real property
                          designated as parcel lot L46-412-130000013000.
 
TABLE G: STREET GRADE LEVELS AND CHANGE OF STREET NAME
[Reserved]
TABLE H: ANNEXATION AND DETACHMENT OF TERRITORY
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
                          Providing for the acceptance by the legislative
544           11-20-1978  authority of the application for annexation of
                          certain territory in Montgomery Township to the
                          village.
 
TABLE I: ZONING MAP CHANGES
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
                          Changing the zoning classification of a portion of
                          the east end of lot 12, parcel L48-36208001000
751           7-25-2006   bordering U.S. Route 23, a section measuring 427 feet
                          from north to south by 205 feet from east to west and
                          containing two acres more or less, from agricultural
                          to commercial.
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
Historical References to Ohio Revised Code
References to Ordinances
References to Resolutions
HISTORICAL REFERENCES TO OHIO REVISED CODE
R.C. Section Code Section
R.C. Section                    Code Section
1.02                            202.02
1.05                            202.02
1.14                            202.03
1.15                            202.03
1.23                            202.05
1.42                            202.03
1.43                            202.03
1.44                            202.02
1.45                            202.03
1.50                            202.07
1.55                            202.05
1.57                            202.04
1.58                            202.04
1.59                            202.02
9.312                           226.05
9.481                           248.14
9.60                            246.11
128.01(A)                       654.19
128.96(F)—(H)                 654.19
128.99(A), (B)                  654.19
146.01                          278.01
146.02                          278.02
146.03                          278.03
146.04                          278.04
146.05                          278.05
146.06                          278.06
149.39                          272.01
701.01                          202.02
713.01                          274.01
713.02                          274.02
713.03                          274.03
713.04                          274.04
713.05                          274.05
713.06                          274.06
713.11                          276.01
718.01                          892.08
718.011                         892.13
718.012                         892.10
718.02                          892.17
718.021                         892.22
718.03                          892.12
718.031                         892.14
718.04                          892.04
718.05                          892.25
718.051                         892.27
718.052                         892.26
718.06                          892.18; 893.50
718.08                          892.21
718.11                          892.42
718.12                          892.29;
                                892.43
718.121                         892.24
718.13                          892.38
718.15                          892.18
718.151                         892.20
718.16                          892.23
718.18                          892.41
718.19                          892.30
718.23                          892.36
718.24                          892.34
718.25                          892.33
718.26                          892.37
718.27                          892.31
718.28                          892.35
718.30                          892.44
718.35                          892.39
718.36                          892.32
718.38                          892.40
718.41                          892.29
718.50                          892.11
718.99                          892.99
723.011                         660.05
731.09                          220.01
731.091                         220.01
731.10                          220.02
731.11                          220.03
731.12                          220.04
731.13                          220.05
731.14                          226.02
731.141                         226.03
731.15                          226.04
731.16                          226.06
731.17                          222.01
731.18                          222.02
731.19                          222.03
731.20                          222.04
731.21                          222.05
731.211                         222.06
731.22                          222.07
731.23                          222.08
731.231                         222.09
731.24                          222.10
731.25                          222.11
731.28                          224.01
731.29                          224.02
731.30                          222.12;
                                224.03
731.31                          224.04
731.32                          224.05
731.33                          224.06
731.34                          224.07
731.35                          224.08
731.36                          224.09
731.38                          224.10
731.40                          224.11
731.41                          224.12
731.42                          222.13
731.43(A)                       220.06
731.44                          220.07
731.45                          220.08
731.46                          220.09
731.47                          220.10
731.48                          226.01
731.49                          220.11
731.50                          220.12
733.23                          230.01
733.24                          232.01
733.25                          232.02
733.26                          238.01
733.261                         238.02
733.27                          238.03
733.28                          238.04
733.29                          238.05
733.30                          232.03
733.31(A)                       248.05
733.32                          232.04
733.33                          232.05
733.34                          232.06
733.35                          232.07
733.36                          232.08
733.37                          232.09
733.38                          232.10
733.39                          232.11
733.40                          232.12
733.41                          232.13
733.42                          240.01
733.43                          240.02
733.44                          240.03
733.45                          240.04
733.46                          240.05
733.47                          240.06
733.48                          236.01
733.68                          248.01
733.69                          248.02
733.70                          248.03
733.71                          248.04
733.72                          248.06
733.73                          248.07
733.74                          248.08
733.75                          248.08
733.76                          248.10
733.77                          248.11
733.79                          248.12
733.80                          248.13
733.82                          240.07
735.27                          220.13
735.271                         234.01
735.272                         234.02
735.273                         234.03
735.28                          270.01
735.29                          270.02
735.31                          242.01
735.32                          242.02
735.33                          242.03
737.04                          244.15
737.041                         244.16
737.15                          244.02
737.16                          244.03
737.161                         244.04
737.162                         244.05
737.17                          244.06
737.171                         244.07
737.18                          244.08
737.19                          244.09
737.20                          244.10
737.21                          246.01
737.22                          246.02
737.221                         246.02
737.23                          246.03
737.24                          246.04
737.25                          246.05
737.27                          246.06
737.28                          246.07
737.29                          244.11
737.31                          244.12
737.32                          244.13
737.33                          244.14
755.14                          280.01
755.15                          280.02
755.20                          282.01
755.21                          282.02
755.22                          282.03
755.23                          282.04
755.24                          282.05
901.51                          642.04
901.99(A)                       642.04
925.62                          618.06
925.99(B)                       618.06
951.02                          618.01
951.99                          618.01
955.10                          618.10
955.11(A)                       618.01
955.21                          618.08
955.22                          618.01
955.222                         618.01
955.24                          618.09
955.25                          618.11
955.54                          618.16
955.99(B)                       618.09—
                                618.11
955.99(E)                       618.01;
                                618.08
955.99(F)                       618.01
955.99(G)                       618.01
955.99(H)                       618.01
955.99(J)                       618.01
955.99(L)                       618.01
955.99(M)                       618.01
955.99(N)                       618.01
955.99(O)                       618.16
955.99(P)                       618.01
955.99(Q)                       618.01
959.01                          618.02
959.02                          618.03
959.03                          618.04
959.13                          618.05
959.131                         618.05
959.21                          618.17
959.99(B)                       618.03
959.99(C)                       618.04
959.99(D)                       618.05;
                                618.17
959.99(E)                       618.05
959.99(E)(3)                    618.02
959.99(E)(7)                    618.07
1332.32(A)                      808.02
1349.17                         672.12
1349.99                         672.12
1546.01                         448.01
1547.02                         448.01
1547.03                         448.02
1547.04                         448.03
1547.05                         448.04
1547.051                        448.04
1547.052                        448.04
1547.06                         448.05
1547.07                         448.06
1547.071                        448.07
1547.072                        448.06
1547.08                         448.08
1547.09                         448.09
1547.10                         448.39
1547.11                         448.10
1547.111                        448.11
1547.12                         448.12
1547.132                        448.06
1547.14                         448.13
1547.15                         448.14
1547.16                         448.15
1547.18                         448.16
1547.19                         448.17
1547.20                         448.18
1547.21                         448.19
1547.22                         448.20
1547.23                         448.21
1547.24                         448.22
1547.25                         448.23
1547.251                        448.24
1547.26                         448.25
1547.27                         448.26
1547.28                         448.27
1547.29                         448.28
1547.30                         448.29
1547.301                        448.29
1547.302                        448.29
1547.303                        448.29
1547.304                        448.29
1547.31(A)—(H)                448.30
1547.32                         448.33
1547.33                         448.33
1547.34                         448.34
1547.38                         448.31
1547.39                         448.32
1547.40                         448.32
1547.41                         448.35
1547.53                         448.36
1547.531                        448.37
1547.533                        448.37
1547.59                         448.39
1547.63                         448.40
1547.65                         448.44
1547.66                         448.38
1547.69                         448.45
1547.92                         448.46
                                448.08;
1547.99(B)                      448.11;
                                448.38;
                                448.39
                                448.02—
                                448.05;
                                448.08;
                                448.09;
                                448.13—
                                448.18;
                                448.20—
1547.99(C)                      448.22;
                                448.24—
                                448.26;
                                448.28;
                                448.29;
                                448.32;
                                448.36;
                                448.37;
                                448.99
1547.99(D)                      448.06;
                                448.12
1547.99(E)                      448.06;
                                448.12
                                448.23;
                                448.29;
1547.99(F)                      448.31;
                                448.32;
                                448.44—
                                448.46
1547.99(G)                      448.10
1547.99(H)                      448.29
1547.99(J)                      448.30
1547.99(K)                      448.04
1547.99(L)                      448.04;
                                448.99
1548.01(B), (C)                 448.41
1548.03                         448.41
1548.05                         448.42
1548.18                         448.43
1548.99(A)                      448.43
1905.01                         298.01
1905.20                         298.02
1905.201                        298.03
2901.01                         606.01
2901.02                         606.01
2901.03                         606.03
2901.04                         606.04
2901.09                         606.13
2901.11                         606.05
2901.13                         606.06
2901.21                         606.07
2901.22                         606.08
2901.23                         606.09
2901.24                         606.10
2903.05                         636.02
2903.06                         434.11
2903.08                         434.11
2903.09                         636.01
2903.10                         636.23
2903.13                         636.03
2903.14                         636.04
2903.16                         636.23
2903.21                         636.05
2903.211                        636.06
2903.216                        636.24
2903.22                         636.07
2903.31                         636.19
2903.311(B), (C)                636.19
2905.03                         636.08
2905.12                         636.10
2907.01                         666.01
2907.04                         666.02
2907.06                         666.03
2907.071                        666.23
2907.08                         666.05
2907.09                         666.04
2907.10                         666.06
2907.23                         666.07
2907.24(A), (C)(1), (D), (E)    666.08
2907.241                        666.09
2907.25                         666.10
2907.26                         666.11
2907.31                         666.12
2907.311                        666.13
2907.33                         666.14
2907.35                         666.15
2907.36                         666.16
2907.37                         666.17
2907.38                         666.18
2907.39                         666.19
2907.40                         666.20
2909.01                         642.01
2909.03                         642.06
2909.06                         642.08
2909.07                         642.09
2909.08(A)—(E)                678.13
2909.09                         642.08
2909.10                         642.13
2909.101                        642.13
2909.11(B)—(D)                642.07
2909.31                         654.18
2911.21                         642.10
2911.211                        642.11
2911.23                         642.10
2911.32                         672.06
2913.01                         642.01
2913.02                         672.01
2913.03                         672.09
2913.04                         642.03
2913.07                         672.25
2913.11                         672.10
2913.21                         672.11
2913.31(B), (C)(2)              672.13
2913.32                         672.14
2913.33                         672.15
2913.40                         672.23
2913.401                        672.23
2913.41                         672.16
2913.42                         672.17
2913.43                         672.18
2913.44                         672.19
2913.441                        654.15
2913.45                         672.20
2913.47                         672.21
2913.48                         672.22
2913.51                         672.02
2913.61(B)—(E)                672.03
2913.71                         672.04
2913.72                         672.05
2915.01                         630.01
2915.02(A)—(G), (K)           630.02
2915.03                         630.03
2915.04                         630.04
2915.05                         630.05
2915.06                         630.14
2915.061                        630.14
2915.09                         630.06
2915.091                        630.10
2915.092                        630.11
2915.093                        630.12
2915.094                        630.13
2915.10                         630.07
2915.11                         630.08
2915.12                         630.09
2915.13                         630.12
2915.14                         630.15
2917.01                         648.09
2917.03                         648.01
2917.031                        648.01
2917.04                         648.02
2917.05                         648.03
2917.11                         648.04
2917.12                         648.05
2917.13                         648.06
2917.14                         648.10
2917.21                         636.15
2917.211                        666.22
2917.31                         648.07
2917.32                         648.08
2917.40                         636.18
2917.41                         672.07
2919.21                         636.11
2919.22(A)—(E), (H)           636.12
2919.23                         636.13
2919.24                         636.14
2919.25                         636.17
2919.27                         636.06
2921.01                         606.01
2921.13                         654.01
2921.14                         654.02
2921.21                         654.03
2921.22                         654.04
2921.23                         654.05
2921.29                         654.18
2921.31                         654.06
2921.32                         654.07
2921.321                        642.12
2921.33                         654.08
2921.331(A)—(C), (E), (F)     654.09
2921.36                         612.09
2921.42                         654.10
2921.43                         654.11
2921.44                         654.12
2921.45                         654.13
2921.51                         654.14
2921.52(A)—(D)                654.20
2923.02                         606.11
2923.03                         606.12
2923.11                         678.01
2923.12                         678.02
2923.1211(B), (C)               678.16
2923.1212                       678.16
2923.122(C)—(G)               678.15
2923.126                        678.16
2923.131                        678.03
2923.15                         678.04
2923.16                         678.05
2923.162                        678.11
2923.18                         678.06
2923.19                         678.07
2923.20                         678.08
2923.201                        678.17
2923.211                        678.09
2923.24                         678.14
2925.01                         624.01
2925.04(A), (B), (C)(5), (G)    624.03
2925.11                         624.04
2925.12                         624.05
2925.13                         624.06
2925.14                         624.07
2925.31                         624.08
2925.32(B)(4), (D)(2), (F), (G) 624.09
2925.33                         624.10
2925.34                         624.19
2925.36(A)—(D), (F)           624.11
2925.37(A), (G), (M)            624.12
2925.50                         624.16
2925.51                         624.15
2925.511                        624.15
2925.55                         624.18
2925.56                         624.18
2925.57                         624.18
2925.58                         624.18
2925.62                         624.20
2927.02                         636.19
2927.021                        636.19
2927.022                        636.19
2927.023                        636.19
2927.024                        636.19
2927.03                         636.22
2927.11                         642.05
2927.12                         636.21
2927.15                         636.09
2927.17                         666.21
2929.21                         698.02
2929.22                         698.03
2929.23                         666.99
2929.24                         698.02
2929.25                         698.02
2929.26                         698.02
2929.27                         698.02
2929.28                         698.02
2929.31                         698.04
2929.41                         698.05
2935.041                        654.17
2935.36(E)                      698.01
2981.07                         672.24
2981.11                         654.16
2981.12                         654.16
2981.13(A)                      654.16
3701.81                         660.02
3701.82                         660.01
3701.99(B)                      660.01
3701.99(C)                      660.02
3715.05                         624.18
3715.06                         624.18
3716.11                         636.16
3716.99(C)                      636.16
3719.08(A), (E)                 624.13
3719.172(A), (B)                624.14
3719.19                         624.16
3719.99(C)                      624.13
3719.99(E)                      624.14
3737.14(A)                      246.10
3737.24                         246.09
3743.01                         678.12
3743.45                         678.12
3743.54                         678.12
3743.60(E)—(L)                678.12
3743.61(E)—(L)                678.12
3743.63                         678.12
3743.64                         678.12
3743.65(A)—(E), (G), (H)      678.12
3743.66                         678.12
3743.68(B)                      678.12
3743.80                         678.12
3743.99(C), (D), (F)—(H)      678.12
3767.13                         660.04
3767.29                         660.06
3767.32                         660.03
3767.99(B)                      660.06
3767.99(C)                      660.03;
                                660.04
3780.36                         624.02
3780.99                         624.02
3781.55                         666.04
3791.031                        660.13
4115.02                         246.08
4301.01                         612.01
4301.22(A)(2)                   612.10
4301.22(B)                      612.03
4301.244                        612.01
4301.62                         612.07
4301.63                         612.02
4301.631                        612.10
4301.633                        612.02
4301.634                        612.02
4301.637                        612.06
4301.64                         612.04
4301.65                         612.11
4301.69                         612.02
4301.70                         612.06
                                612.06;
4301.99(A)                      612.07;
                                612.11
4301.99(B)                      612.04;
                                612.10
4301.99(C)                      612.02
4301.99(D)                      612.02;
                                612.03
4301.99(E)                      612.02;
                                612.10
4301.99(F)                      612.02
4301.99(H)                      612.03
4301.99(I)                      612.02
4301.99(J)                      612.11
4303.202(D)(2)                  612.08
4303.208(C)                     612.08
4303.25                         612.05
4303.99(D)                      612.08
4501.01(LL)                     402.01
4501.01(TT)                     416.12
4503.11(A), (D)                 436.14
4503.111                        436.14
4503.12(A), (D)                 436.14
4503.21                         436.14
4505.18                         436.13
4506.01                         442.01
4506.011                        442.02
4506.04(A)—(C)                442.03
4506.10(A), (E)                 442.04
4506.12(I), (J)                 442.03
4506.15                         442.05
4506.19                         442.06
4506.20                         442.07
4506.23                         442.08
4507.02(A)(1)                   436.01
4507.02(A)(2)                   436.02
4507.03                         436.01
4507.04                         436.01
4507.05(F), (I)                 436.03
4507.071(B)—(J)               436.04
4507.213                        436.01
4507.30                         436.05
4507.35                         436.07
4507.99                         436.02
4509.102                        654.01
4510.037(J)                     438.08
                                436.08;
4510.04                         436.10—
                                436.12
4510.05                         408.03;
                                698.06
4510.11                         436.08
4510.111                        436.08
4510.12                         436.09
4510.14                         436.10
4510.16                         436.11
4510.21                         436.12
4510.44                         434.02
4511.01                         402.01
4511.03                         432.19
4511.031                        414.09
4511.04                         404.03
4511.041                        404.04
4511.042                        404.04
4511.05                         404.05
4511.051                        412.05
4511.12                         414.01
4511.121                        414.01
4511.13                         414.03
4511.131                        414.04
4511.132                        432.16
4511.14                         414.05
4511.16                         414.06
4511.17                         414.07
4511.18                         414.08
4511.181                        434.01
4511.19(A)—(F), (G)—(M)     434.01
4511.191(A), (D)                434.01
4511.192                        434.01
4511.194                        434.01
4511.20                         434.03
4511.201                        434.03
4511.202                        434.09
4511.203                        436.06
4511.204                        432.45
4511.205                        432.46
4511.21(A)—(G), (O), (P)      434.04
4511.211                        434.05
4511.213                        432.21
4511.214                        434.12
4511.215                        434.12
4511.22                         434.06
4511.23                         434.07
4511.24                         434.08
4511.25                         432.01
4511.251                        434.10
4511.26                         432.02
4511.27                         432.03
4511.28                         432.04
4511.29                         432.05
4511.30                         432.06
4511.31                         432.07
4511.32                         432.31
4511.33                         432.08
4511.34                         432.09
4511.35                         432.32
4511.36                         432.10
4511.37                         432.11
4511.38                         432.12
4511.39                         432.13
4511.40                         432.14
4511.41                         432.15
4511.42                         432.17
4511.43                         432.18
4511.431(A), (B)                432.22
4511.432                        432.23
4511.44                         432.22
4511.441                        416.09
4511.45                         432.20
4511.451                        432.24
4511.452                        416.08
4511.454                        432.20
4511.46                         416.01
4511.47                         416.02
4511.48                         416.03
4511.481                        416.10
4511.49                         416.04
4511.491                        416.11
4511.50                         416.05
4511.51                         416.06
4511.511                        416.07
4511.512                        416.12
4511.513                        416.13
4511.514                        416.14
4511.52                         444.01
4511.521                        444.06
4511.522                        444.11
4511.53                         444.02
4511.54                         444.03
4511.55                         444.04
4511.56                         444.05
4511.60                         432.30
4511.61                         432.35
4511.62                         432.34
4511.63                         432.35
4511.64                         432.36
4511.65                         414.02
4511.66                         452.01
4511.661                        452.07
4511.67                         452.02
4511.68                         452.03
4511.681                        452.06
4511.69                         452.04
4511.70                         432.26;
                                452.08
4511.701                        440.08
4511.71                         432.27
4511.711                        432.25
4511.712                        432.37
4511.713                        432.42
4511.714(A), (B)                432.27
4511.72                         432.28
4511.73                         432.29
4511.74                         412.01
4511.75                         432.33
4511.79                         442.09
4511.81(A)—(H), (K), (L)      438.30
4511.82                         432.43
4511.84                         432.44
4511.85                         440.10
4511.99                         408.02(a)
4511.991                        408.02(b)
4513.02(A), (H)                 438.01
4513.021                        438.28
4513.03                         438.02
4513.04                         438.03
4513.05                         438.04
4513.06                         438.05
4513.07                         438.06
4513.071                        438.27
4513.08                         438.07
4513.09                         438.08
4513.10                         438.09
4513.11                         438.10
4513.111                        438.10
4513.112                        438.10
4513.113                        438.10
4513.114                        438.10
4513.115                        438.10
4513.12                         438.11
4513.13                         438.12
4513.14                         438.13
4513.15                         438.14
4513.16                         438.15
4513.17                         438.16
4513.171                        438.17
4513.182                        438.18
4513.19                         438.19
4513.20                         438.20
4513.21                         438.21
4513.22                         438.22
4513.23                         438.23
4513.24                         438.24
4513.241(C)—(J), (K)          438.25
4513.263                        438.31
4513.29                         440.04
4513.30                         438.26
4513.31                         440.06
4513.32                         440.05
4513.34                         440.01
4513.36                         404.02
4513.361                        404.08
4513.60                         452.06
4513.601                        452.06
4513.61                         452.05
4513.64                         452.05
4513.65                         660.07
4513.66                         436.19
4513.68                         436.19
                                438.09;
                                438.18;
                                438.20;
4513.99                         438.25;
                                438.26;
                                440.01;
                                440.04—
                                440.06
4519.01                         446.01
4519.02                         446.08
4519.20                         446.02
4519.40                         446.03
4519.401                        434.12
4519.41                         446.04
4519.44                         446.05
4519.46                         446.06
4519.48                         446.07
4519.66                         446.09
4549.02                         436.15
4549.021                        436.17
4549.03                         436.18
4549.05                         404.01
4549.08                         436.15
4549.081(B), (C)                414.01
4549.11                         436.14
4549.12                         436.14
4549.20                         438.32
4933.18                         672.07
4933.19                         672.07
5577.05                         440.02
5577.06                         440.02
5577.11                         440.03
5577.15                         440.05
5577.99(C)                      440.02
5577.99(E)                      440.03
5589.08                         440.07
5589.081                        440.07
5589.12                         642.02
5589.99(B)                      440.07;
                                642.02
                                
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.  Date Passed Code Section
                      1040.01—
379       5-20-1946   1040.04;
                      1040.99
382       12-1-1947   412.06
388       3-21-1949   TSO Table C
396       7-2-1951    TSO Table A
397       8-20-1951   TSO Table A
398       8-20-1951   TSO Table A
399       10-15-1951  TSO Table A
413       11-10-1955  404.09
415       2-4-1957    TSO Table A
418       12-16-1957  TSO Table C
                      1426.01—
420       4-21-1958   1426.03;
                      1426.99
422       8-17-1959   TSO Table C
423       10-19-1959  238.06
                      1420.01;
426       6-20-1960   1420.02;
                      1420.99
429       4-3-1961    1020.01—
                      1020.04
                      1420.01;
430       4-17-1961   1420.02;
                      1420.99
432       9-5-1961    TSO Table A
433       9-18-1961   TSO Table F
434       1-9-1962    TSO Table A
437       6-18-1962   440.99; Ch. 460 Sch. II
438       7-2-1962    TSO Table A
439       7-2-1962    TSO Table A
443       7-15-1963   660.16
449       8-2-1965    432.47
453       8-15-1966   TSO Table F
454       8-15-1966   TSO Table A
467       5-6-1968    TSO Table A
473       12-15-1969  TSO Table A
477       7-6-1970    TSO Table A
479       9-7-1971    TSO Table F
488       3-19-1973   TSO Table A
495       4-1-1974    TSO Table C
499       7-15-1974   TSO Table A
501       9-23-1974   TSO Table A
503       9-23-1974   TSO Table A
510       6-2-1975    TSO Table C
511       6-2-1975    244.17—
                      244.23
512       6-2-1975    TSO Table F
513       7-7-1975    TSO Table C
515       9-8-1975    660.18
520       4-5-1976    244.20
521       6-7-1976    Ch. 460 Sch. I
523       7-19-1976   TSO Table A
525       8-2-1976    TSO Table A
526       8-18-1976   TSO Table A
527       9-7-1976    TSO Table F
528       10-4-1976   TSO Table A
524       2-7-1977    TSO Table A
532       8-15-1977   TSO Table A
535       2-20-1978   452.16;
                      452.99
539       8-21-1978   TSO Table A
544       11-20-1978  TSO Table H
548       5-21-1979   TSO Table A
549       9-17-1979   TSO Table C
                      1202.01—
618       4-18-1988   1202.14;
                      1202.99
704       2-27-2001   636.25
705       2-27-2001   TSO Table F
                      1402.01—
707       5-22-2001   1402.07;
                      1402.99
709       6-26-2001   TSO Table A
710       6-26-2001   438.34;
                      438.99
712       9-25-2001   TSO Table C
715       3-26-2002   1402.02;
                      1402.07
716       5-28-2002   660.14
719       11-26-2002  TSO Table A
723       4-22-2003   TSO Table C
727       5-25-2004   TSO Table E
728       5-25-2004   438.33;
                      438.99
730       5-25-2004   660.19
732       6-22-2004   452.03;
                      452.99
742       12-27-2005  246.12
751       7-25-2006   TSO Table I
758       4-24-2007   TSO Table B
759       9-25-2007   660.17
                      1436.01—
760       9-25-2007   1436.03;
                      1436.99
761       12-18-2007  1430.01—
                      1430.06
763       12-18-2007  660.15
                      804.01—
768       4-22-2008   804.10;
                      804.99
774       8-26-2008   1430.02;
                      1430.03
775       11-25-2008  1060.01
785       5-26-2009   298.04
805       3-22-2011   808.01—
                      808.03
816       12-17-2012  TSO Table F
823       6-25-2013   618.19
827       8-27-2013   Ch. 460 Sch. II
852       - -2016     618.20
853       - -2016     618.18
856       - -2016     452.15
868       8-28-2018   660.20
870       12-18-2018  222.14
874       1-22-2019   230.03
                      892.01—
873       12-17-2019  892.61;
                      892.99
875       12-17-2019  230.02
O2020-015 11-24-2020  248.15
O2021-008 6-22-2021   890.01
O2021-009 6-22-2021   238.07
O2021-013 11-23-2021  272.02
O2021-014 12-14-2021  230.03
O2021-015 12-14-2021  230.04
O2022-005 6-28-2022   230.05
O2022-006 8-22-2022   248.15
                      892.06;
                      892.08;
2024-002  2-17-2024   892.16;
                      892.27;
                      892.30;
                      892.61
                      1022.01—
2024-009  8-27-2024   1022.08;
                      1022.99
                     
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No.      Date Passed Code Section
Res. 2025-004 4-22-2025   660.21
Res. 2025-012 9-23-2025   1022.05
                         
 
 
Comprehensive Ordinance List
Publisher's Note: The following table lists all ordinances passed by the
Village of Risingsun. The table includes links to the ordinances, as maintained
in PDF format. For other legislation, including ordinances passed prior to
2014, please contact the Village of Risingsun.
 
Ordinances that amend the Code and are not yet effective have their
identifiying information highlighted in yellow. Changes made by those
ordinances are not incorporated into the text of the Code until the amending
ordinances are effective. Ordinances that do not affect the code have been
grayed out.
 
Jump to:
2024 Legislation
2025 Legislation
2026 Legislation
2024 Legislation
 
Ord. No. Eff. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
                   Amending Chapter 181, Ohio Income Tax
2024-002 2-17-2024  
                   181.013, 181.03, 181.062, 181.094, 181.10, Adding 181.46
2024-009 8-27-2024 Establishing street opening, road cut, and boring
                   regulations and standards
 
2025 Legislation
 
Ord. No.      Eff. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
Res_2025-001  2-25-2025 Ohio Cooperative Purchasing Program
                        Resolution to fix the policies, procedures, and
Res._2025-004 4-22-2025 obligations for the disposition of the remains of its
                        indigent residents
2025-006      8-26-2025 Setting police wages
Res_2025-012  9-23-2025 Setting rates for permits to work within the rights of
                        ways
                       
 
 
2026 Legislation
 
Ord. No. Eff. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
2026-001 1-27-2026 Enacting a public records request policy
                  
 
 
