SOLON, OHIO
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-11 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through December 15, 2025
State legislation current through 6-26-24
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
DIRECTORY OF OFFICIALS
(2026)
COUNCIL
E. Macke Bentley                      Ward 1
Robert N. Pelunis                     Ward 2
Jeremy Zelwin                         Ward 3
Michael Kan                           Ward 4
Nancy E. Meany, Vice Mayor            Ward 5
Robert P. Shimits                     Ward 6
Brian Laubscher                       Ward 7
Donna J. Letourneau, Clerk of Council
 
OFFICIALS
Mayor                                 Edward H. Kraus
Director of Finance                   Tinita Tillman
Director of Law                       Thomas G. Lobe
Prosecutor/Assistant Director of Law  Lon D. Stolarsky
Associate Director of Law             Sarah Kostura
Police Chief                          Courtenay Perkin
Fire Chief                            Shawn Toth
Public Works Commissioner             William J. Drsek
City Engineer                         John J. Busch, P.E.
Chief Building Official               Russ Rodic (contracted service from
                                      Safebuilt)
Director of Planning and Community    Michael Ionna
Development
Director of City Services             Mark Hawley
Director of Water Reclamation         Paul Solanics
Director of Recreation                Richard Parker
Director of Senior Services           Jill Frankel
Director of Economic Development      Vacant
Director of Human Resources           Samikia Burton
Director of Information Technology    Jim Gibbs
Director of Community and Cultural    Tracy Sullivan
Enrichment
                                      
PLANNING COMMISSION/BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
Councilman E. Macke Bentley
Kim Sutton, Chairperson
Robert Benjamin
Vacant
Mayor Edward H. Kraus
ADOPTING ORDINANCES
ORDINANCE NO: 2014-207
 
10/6/14 - 1st reading  City of Solon         
10/20/14 - 2nd reading Record of Ordinances  
11/3/14 - 3rd reading                       
Requested by the Mayor                     ORDINANCE NO: 2014-207
                                            INTRODUCED BY: Pelunis
 
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF SOLON, OHIO,
REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL
ORDINANCES OF THE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH
CODE OF ORDINANCES, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY
   WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the City of Solon
have not been updated, reformatted or reviewed for inconsistencies since 1991;
and
   WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Ohio empower and
authorize the political subdivision to revise, amend, restate, codify and
compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted
or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book
form; and
   WHEREAS, the Council of the City of Solon has authorized a general
compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the City of Solon
of a general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinance in book
form; and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date.
   NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Council of the City of Solon, State of
Ohio:
   SECTION 1.   That the general ordinances of the City of Solon, Ohio as
revised, amended, restated, codified and compiled in book form are hereby
adopted as and shall constitute the “Code of Ordinances of the City of Solon,
Ohio.”
   SECTION 2.   That such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall
consist of the titles in the Table of Contents attached hereto as Exhibit “A,”
and incorporated herein fully as if by reference.
   SECTION 3.   That the Clerk of Council is hereby authorized to make
incidental clerical changes, corrections to typographical errors, punctuation,
etc. to the “Code of Ordinances of the City of Solon, Ohio.
   SECTION 4.   That all prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in
such Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective
date of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or
in part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense
committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective
date of this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of
ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase of sale or real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use,
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall
such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
   SECTION 5.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Council and the Clerk of the City of Solon is
hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code of Ordinances in the
Office of the Clerk.
   SECTION 6.   That such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in
Section 7, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places
of the ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations
therein contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly
signed, attested, recorded and approved and that any public hearings and
notices thereof as required by law have been given.
   SECTION 7.   This Ordinance is hereby declared to be an emergency measure
necessary for the immediate preservation of the public health, safety and
welfare and for the further reason that it is necessary to have an updated Code
of Laws which is consistent with the latest State law to administer the affairs
of the City of Solon and avoid practical and legal issues; wherefore, provided
this Ordinance receives the affirmative vote of two-thirds of the members of
Council elected or appointed, it shall take effect immediately upon its passage
and execution by the Mayor; otherwise, it shall take effect and be in force
from and after the earliest period allowed by law.
Passed:   November 17, 2014
                                                   Susan A. Drucker /s/
                                                   Mayor
ATTEST:
Carol J. McConoughey /s/
Clerk of Council
CHARTER
OF THE
CITY OF SOLON, OHIO
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Editor’s note:
   The Solon Charter was originally adopted on November 2, 1954. Dates
appearing in parentheses following a section heading indicate that the section
was subsequently amended or added on the date given. Ordinance No. 2021-173,
passed August 16, 2021, amended the Charter as it pertains to Article XIII,
Section 7, Charter Technical Changes.
Preamble
ARTICLE I   Name
ARTICLE II   Boundaries
ARTICLE III   Powers
ARTICLE IV   The Council
   
Section 1.   Composition and Term (11-8-1988; 11-8-2005)
   
Section 1A.   Alterations in Ward Boundaries; Procedure (11-7-1967; 11-8-2005)
   
Section 2.   Ward Boundaries (Repealed 11-7-2000)
   
Section 3.   Powers of the Council
   
Section 4.   Council Meetings
   
Section 5.   General Ordinances (11-3-2015; 11-5-2019)
   
Section 6.   Effective Date of Ordinances and Resolutions (11-8-1977; 11-6-
2012; 11-5-2019)
   
Section 7.   Vacancies in Council (11-8-1988; 11-7-1995; 11-7-00; 11-8-2005)
   
Section 8.   Clerk and Other Employees
   
Section 9.   Salaries and Bonds (11-8-1988)
   
Section 10.   Salary or Compensation of the Mayor (11-5-2002)
ARTICLE V      The Mayor
   
Section 1.   Term of Office of the Mayor (11-8-1988)
   
Section 2.   Qualifications of the Mayor (11-8-1988)
   
Section 3.   Legislative Powers of the Mayor (11-2-1971)
   
Section 4.   Veto Powers of the Mayor (11-5-2019)
   
Section 5.   Executive Powers of the Mayor (11-8-1988; 11-7-2000)
   
Section 6.   The Vice-Mayor; Vacancy in Office of Mayor (11-8-1988; 11-7-1995;
11-7-2000)
ARTICLE VI   Administrative Departments and Commissions
   
Section 1.   General Provisions
   
Section 2.   Director of Law (11-8-1988; 11-2-2021)
   
Section 3.   Director of Finance (11-8-1988; 11-7-2000; 11-8-2005)
   
Section 4.   The Civil Service Commission (11-7-2000)
   
Section 5.   The City Planning Commission
   
Section 6.   Grantwood Recreational Park (11-7-1972; 5-8-2001; 11-4-2008)
   
Section 7.   City Engineer (11-8-1988)
   
Section 8.   Charter Review Commission (11-2-1971; 11-7-2000)
   
Section 9.   City Planning and Development Director (11-8-1988)
   
Section 10A.   Update of the City of Solon Master Plan/Master Plan Citizen’s
Committee (11-8-2005; 11-3-2015; 11-2-2021)
   
Section 10B.   Appointment, Composition, and Terms of the Master Plan Citizen’s
Committee (11-8-2005; 11-3-2015; 11-2-2021)
   
Section 10C.   Duties of the Master Plan Citizen’s Committee (11-8-2005; 11-3-
2015)
   
Section 10D.   Master Plan Review by the Planning Commission (11-8-2005; 11-3-
2015)
   
Section 10E.   Master Plan Review by City Council (11-8-2005)
ARTICLE VII   Salaries and Bonds (Repealed 11-8-1988)
ARTICLE VIII   Nominations and Elections
   
Section 1.   Procedures (11-7-1972; 11-8-2005; 11-4-2008; 11-6-2012)
   
Section 2.   Qualifications of Officers (11-8-1988; 11-7-2000)
ARTICLE IX   Referendum, Initiative and Recall (11-5-2019)
   
Section 1.   Initiative and Referendum (11-8-1977; 5-3-1988; 11-5-2019)
   
Section 2.   Recall (11-7-1995; 11-3-2015)
   
Section 3.   Assistance From Law Director to Initiative, Referendum or Recall
(11-2-1971; 11-8-2005)
ARTICLE X   Finances
ARTICLE XI   Franchises
ARTICLE XII   Amendments to Charter
ARTICLE XIII   Miscellaneous
   
Section 1.   Effective Date of the Charter
   
Section 2.   Effect of Partial Invalidity
   
Section 3.   Effect on Existing Laws and Rights
   
Section 4.   Interpretation of the Charter
   
Section 5.   Open Meetings With Executive Session Authorization (11-7-2000)
   
Section 6.   Words Held to be Inclusive (Repealed 5-3-2022)
   
Section 7.   Charter Technical Changes (11-3-2015)
ARTICLE XIV   Voter Approval of Zoning Changes
   
Section 1.   Zoning District Change (5-3-1988; 11-3-2015; 11-5-2019)
   
Section 2.   Zoning Use Change (5-3-1988; 11-3-2015; 11-5-2019)
   
Section 3.   Zoning Code Changes by Initiative Petition (11-5-2019)
   
Section 4.   Zoning Changes to the Central Retail District (11-2-2021)
Preamble
   We, the people of the Village of Solon, in the County of Cuyahoga, State of
Ohio, in order to secure the benefits of municipal home rule and local self-
government under the Constitution and laws of the State of Ohio, do hereby
adopt this Charter.
ARTICLE I
NAME
   The municipality now existing in the County of Cuyahoga, State of Ohio, and
known as Solon shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the name
of the Village of Solon. If and when the municipality of Solon shall, under the
Constitution and the general laws of the State of Ohio, become a city, it shall
be known as the City of Solon, and wherever in this Charter the word “Village”
appears, it shall then be construed to read “City,” and the provisions of this
Charter shall apply whether this municipality is a Village or a City.
ARTICLE II
BOUNDARIES
   The City of Solon shall have the same boundaries as now exist, but with
power and authority to change its boundaries in the manner authorized by the
laws of Ohio, except that no territory shall be detached from or annexed to the
City, nor shall the City be annexed to, or merged with, any other body politic,
nor shall the corporate existence of the City be terminated, without the assent
of a majority of the electors of the City voting on such proposal, or the
assent of the Council subject to approval by a vote of a majority of electors
of the City voting on such proposal. Any such proposal shall be submitted to
the electors only at a general election in such manner as the Council shall by
resolution or ordinance prescribe.
ARTICLE III
POWERS
   The City of Solon shall have all the powers, general or special,
governmental or proprietary, which may now or hereafter lawfully be possessed
or exercised by municipalities under the laws of Ohio. All such powers may be
exercised in the manner prescribed in this Charter; or, if not prescribed
herein, in such manner as Council may determine; or, unless a contrary intent
appears in this Charter or in the enactments of the Council, as may now or
hereafter be provided by the laws of Ohio.
ARTICLE IV
THE COUNCIL
SECTION 1. COMPOSITION AND TERM.
   The legislative power of the City, except as limited by this Charter and
such additional powers as may be expressly granted by this Charter, shall be
vested in a Council of seven members. Each member of Council shall be a
resident of and elected from each of the wards set forth in
Section 1A hereof. The terms of the members of the Council shall begin the
first day of December next following their election and they shall serve for a
term of four years or until their successors are chosen and qualified except
that the four members of Council elected from Wards 1, 3, 5 and 7 at the
regular municipal election in the year 1989 shall serve for two years only, and
thereafter for a term of four years.
(Approved by voters 11-8-1988; 11-8-2005)
SECTION 1A. ALTERATIONS IN WARD BOUNDARIES; PROCEDURE.
   (a)   The Council of the City shall, after each recurring Federal census,
and within 180 days after the issuance of the proclamation of the Secretary of
State of the State of Ohio as to the population of the City, adopt an ordinance
subdividing the City into seven wards as nearly equal in population as
practicable. All wards shall be bounded as far as practicable by county lines,
streets, alleys, avenues, public grounds, watercourses, municipal corporation
lines and centerlines of platted streets or railroads, and shall be composed of
adjacent and compact territory.
   (b)   In the interim between Federal census dates, the Council may review
the population of the wards of the City and if it is deemed necessary to change
the boundaries of the wards to insure representation equal to population, it
may adopt an ordinance changing ward boundaries during any even-numbered year.
   (c)   Prior to taking any action to change the ward boundaries of the City,
the Council shall appoint a Commission composed of not less than one adult
resident of each ward of the City to study and review the ward boundaries and
to make its recommendations to the Council.
   (d)   In the event that Council does not pass by ordinance updated ward
boundaries within 180 days after the issuance of the proclamation of the
Secretary of the State of Ohio as to the population of the City, then the Mayor
shall determine the ward boundaries which shall be enacted at the time set
forth below.
   (e)   Upon the adoption of an ordinance, or submittal by the Mayor changing
ward boundaries as authorized in this
Section 1A , the ward boundaries described in
Section 1  of Article IV shall not be in effect after the expiration of the
current terms of incumbent Councilperson.
   (f)   This
Section 1A  of Article IV of the City Charter shall become effective on January
1, 2006.
(Approved by voters 11-7-1967; 11-8-2005)
SECTION 2. WARD BOUNDARIES. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Charter Article IV, Section 2, was repealed by the voters on November 7,
2000.
SECTION 3. POWERS OF THE COUNCIL.
   All the legislative powers of the City of Solon, and all such other powers
as may be granted by this Charter, together with all such powers as are now or
may hereafter be granted by the laws of Ohio to boards of control, municipal
tax commissions, boards of health or any other municipal commission, board or
body now or hereafter created, shall be vested in the Council except as
otherwise provided in this Charter.
SECTION 4. COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   The Council shall hold at least one regular meeting in each calendar month.
A majority of the members of the Council shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business at any meeting of the Council, but a lesser number may
adjourn the meeting from time to time and compel the attendance of absent
members in such manner and under such penalties as may be prescribed by
ordinance. At any meeting at which a quorum is present, any ordinance or
resolution may be passed or adopted, or any other action taken, by the
affirmative votes of four members of the Council unless a larger number be
required by the provisions of this Charter or by the laws of Ohio. The Clerk of
the Council shall keep a record of its proceedings in a journal in which the
yea or nay vote of each member of Council voting on an ordinance or resolution
shall be recorded. All meetings of the Council shall be open to the public and
its journal shall be available for public inspection at all reasonable times.
SECTION 5. GENERAL ORDINANCES.
   The Council shall by ordinance make provision for:
   (a)   The time and place of regular meetings of the Council;
   (b)   The method of calling special meetings of the Council;
   (c)   The form and method of enactment of its ordinances and adoption of its
resolutions except that each ordinance or resolution shall, before its passage,
be read by title only on three separate days, and except as hereinafter set
forth, unless the requirement for such reading be dispensed with by the
concurrence of at least five Councilmen; provided, however, that any emergency
measure may be passed after one reading and the legislative authority may
require any reading to be in full by a majority vote of its members and in the
case of an Ordinance being considered for certification to the Board of
Elections to place an initiative on the ballot regarding any amendment to the
Zoning Code and/or map of the City shall, without exception, be read by title
at three consecutive regular meetings of Council;
   (d)   The method of giving public notice of the enactment of its ordinances
and adoption of its resolutions, and of any other of its acts or proceedings
which it deems proper to publish;
   (e)   The procedure for making public improvements and levying assessments,
including the procedure for combining two or more public improvements, and the
levying of assessments therefor, in one proceeding if the Council finds that it
will be economical and practical to undertake such improvements jointly;
   (f)   The advertising and awarding of contracts;
   (g)   Such other general regulations as the Council may deem necessary,
including regulations as to the custody and use by the Clerk of Council of an
official seal.
(Approved by voters 11-3-2015; 11-5-2019)
SECTION 6. EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   Each ordinance providing for (a) the appropriation of money, (b) an annual
tax levy, and (c) improvements petitioned for by the owners of a majority of
the foot frontage of the property benefited and to be specially assessed
therefor, and (d) any emergency ordinance or resolution necessary for the
immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety, shall take
effect, unless a later time be specified therein, upon its signature by the
Mayor, or upon the expiration of the time within which it may be disapproved by
the Mayor, or upon its passage after disapproval by the Mayor, as the case may
be. No ordinance, resolution or initiative petition that must be approved by a
majority of the electors voting thereon, in accordance with the provisions of
Article XIV of this Charter, regarding any addition or deletion of uses in a
zoning district, or changes the zoning map of any property in the City shall go
into effect until approved by a majority of electors voting thereon, and at
that same election by a majority of the electors voting thereon in each ward
where (i) property is located on which a zoning map change would occur, or (ii)
there is a change in the uses in a zoning district located in any ward in the
City, and the results of the election at which said vote is had are officially
certified by the appropriate election authorities. Any ordinance adopted by the
Council certifying an initiative to the Board of Elections for placement on the
ballot shall take immediate effect upon adoption by a majority of Council,
shall not be required to be signed by the Mayor, and shall not be subject to
referendum, in order to carry out the Ohio constitutional right of initiative
provided to the electors of the City. No other ordinance or resolution shall go
into effect until 40 days after its final passage by the Council. Each
emergency measure shall contain a statement of the necessity for such emergency
action and shall require the affirmative votes of at least five members of the
Council for its enactment. No action of the Council (a) providing for the
surrender or joint exercise of any of its powers, (b) granting any franchise,
or (c) contracting for the supply to the City or its inhabitants of the product
or service of any utility, whether municipally owned or not, shall be taken as
an emergency measure.
(Approved by voters 11-8-1977; 11-6-2012; 11-5-2019)
SECTION 7. VACANCIES IN COUNCIL.
   In the event that Council determines that a member of Council is unable to
perform his or her duties because of prolonged illness, physical or mental
disability or absence from the municipality, Council may, after written notice
and a public hearing has been provided the member of Council so affected and/or
his representative, and upon the affirmative vote of five members, declare the
office of such member of Council vacant. In the event that the office of a
member of Council shall become vacant by reason of death, resignation,
disqualification from office, by declaration of Council pursuant to and for the
reasons stated in this section, such vacancy in Council shall be filled by a
majority vote of all the remaining members of Council. If the vacancy shall not
be so filled within 45 days from the date of such vacancy, the Mayor shall fill
it by appointment. Any such appointee shall qualify under
Article VIII, Section 2 and shall hold office and serve for the unexpired term
or until a successor is elected and qualified. A successor shall be elected
(for the balance of the unexpired term) at the next regular municipal election
for municipal officers, provided that:
   (a)   Such election occurs at least two years prior to the expiration of the
unexpired term; and
   (b)   The vacancy occurs more than 90 days prior to such election.
   Within five days after the occurrence of the vacancy, Council shall convene
and officially cause written notice to be immediately delivered to the Board of
Elections of Cuyahoga County advising such Board of Elections of the existence
of the vacancy and the need for a municipal election to be held pursuant to the
provisions of this section and other provisions of this Charter. The candidate
receiving the largest number of votes to fill the vacancy at the regular
municipal election for municipal officers shall be declared elected to such
office and shall assume the office of Councilperson for the unexpired term then
remaining immediately upon certification.
(Approved by voters 11-8-1988; 11-7-1995; 11-7-00; 11-8-2005)
SECTION 8. CLERK AND OTHER EMPLOYEES.
   (a)   Council may, by ordinance, provide for the appointment by its members
of a clerk, fix the terms and conditions of the office for such clerk and
compensation and qualifications therefor. Among other duties, the Clerk of
Council shall act as the Secretary of the City Planning Commission. In such
capacity, he shall keep the record of all of said bodies, and shall
authenticate all records, documents and instruments of the City on which
authentication is proper. Council may employ any other employees it may deem
necessary for the proper discharge of its duties. Any person employed by the
Council shall serve at the pleasure of the Council.
   (b)   All notices or other communications to Council and to the City
Planning Commission shall be presented to the Clerk of Council.
(Approved by voters 11-8-1988)
SECTION 9. SALARIES AND BONDS.
   Council shall fix the salary or compensation of each officer, employee or
member of any board or commission of the City. Any such person may be required
by the Council from time to time, to furnish a bond or bonds for the faithful
performance of his or her duties, and the Council may provide that the premium
for any such bond shall be paid by the City. The compensation of each member of
the Council shall be fixed at least 120 days prior to their election for the
terms beginning on the next succeeding first day of December, and shall not
thereafter be changed in respect to any such terms or part thereof, except that
the compensation of members of Council for the unexpired portion of their four-
year terms shall be changed to correspond to the compensation fixed for members
of Council commencing new four-year terms, so that a uniform rate of
compensation will be paid to all members of Council. The compensation of each
other officer, employee and any member of a board or commission of the City
shall be fixed by Council and, subject to the power of Council to provide
otherwise by ordinance or resolution, may be changed at any time at its
discretion. Council may authorize the payment or reimbursement of expenses
incurred by any officer or employee of the City or by any member of any board
or commission of the City in trips taken in the interest of the City. (Approved
by voters 11-8-1988)
SECTION 10. SALARY OR COMPENSATION OF THE MAYOR.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Charter, the compensation of the
Mayor shall be fixed by Council not less than 120 days prior to his election
for the term beginning on the next succeeding first day of December and shall
thereafter be reviewed by Council on an annual basis in respect to any such
terms or any part thereof. The Mayor shall be the highest compensated executive
officer of the City. Another City executive officer’s longevity compensation
shall be excluded from the calculation to determine whether the Mayor is the
highest compensated executive officer of the City.
(Approved by voters 11-8-1988; 11-5-2002)
ARTICLE V
THE MAYOR
SECTION 1. TERM OF OFFICE OF THE MAYOR.
   Commencing with the regular municipal election in 1989, the Mayor shall be
elected for a term of four years commencing on the first day of December next
after such election.
(Approved by voters 11-8-1988)
SECTION 2. QUALIFICATIONS OF THE MAYOR.
Editor’s note:
   As originally approved by the voters, Section 2 provided for the judicial
powers of the Mayor. That Section was repealed and replaced with the present
Section on November 8, 1988.
   The Mayor shall be a qualified elector of the Municipality and a resident
thereof for 24 consecutive months immediately prior to the date of his
election. During his term of office, he shall continue to be a resident and
qualified elector of the Municipality. The position of Mayor shall be full
time, and he shall hold no other elected public office. Furthermore, the Mayor
shall hold no other full-time public or private employment that would interfere
with his duties as Mayor of the City of Solon, except Notary Public or a member
of the State Militia or Reserve Corps of the United States. The Mayor shall not
be interested in the profits or emoluments of any contract, job, work or
service with or for the Municipality as provided by the general laws of Ohio.
If the Mayor shall cease to be a qualified elector or resident of this
Municipality, such Mayor's office shall immediately become vacant.
(Approved by voters 11-8-1988)
SECTION 3. LEGISLATIVE POWERS OF THE MAYOR.
   The Mayor shall attend all meetings of the Council but shall have no vote
therein. The Mayor may, however, introduce ordinances and resolutions, and take
part in the discussion on all matters coming before the Council.
(Approved by voters 11-2-1971)
SECTION 4. VETO POWERS OF THE MAYOR.
   Every ordinance or resolution of the Council shall be attested by the Clerk
of the Council and promptly presented to the Mayor for consideration before it
goes into effect. If the Mayor approves such legislation he shall sign it and
file it with the Clerk. The Mayor may approve or disapprove the whole or any
part of any item of an ordinance appropriating money, but otherwise his
approval or disapproval shall be addressed to the entire ordinance or
resolution. If he disapproves it or any item of it he shall file it with
written notice of the disapproval with the Clerk. Unless an ordinance or
resolution is filed with the Clerk with written notice of disapproval within
ten days after its passage by the Council, it shall take effect as though the
Mayor had signed it. When the Mayor has disapproved an ordinance or resolution
or item of it as herein provided, the Council may, at its next regular meeting
thereafter, reconsider it, and if upon such reconsideration the ordinance,
resolution or item is approved by five or more members of the Council, it shall
take effect notwithstanding the disapproval of the Mayor. Notwithstanding the
foregoing set forth in this Section 4, any Ordinance adopted by Council to
certify an initiative to the Board of Elections shall not require the signature
of the Mayor and the Mayor shall have no veto power regarding such Ordinance.
The signature of the Mayor shall not be required on any Ordinance adopted by
Council certifying an initiative to the Board of Elections to be placed on the
ballot for consideration by the electors of the City.
(Approved by voters 11-5-2019)
SECTION 5. EXECUTIVE POWERS OF THE MAYOR.
   (a)   The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the City. He shall
supervise the administration of the City’s affairs, and shall exercise control
of all departments and divisions. He shall be the chief conservator of the
peace within the City and shall see that all laws and ordinances are enforced
therein. He shall be responsible for the preparation and submission of the
annual estimates of receipts and expenditures, and all appropriation measures,
and shall at all times keep the Council fully advised as to the financial
condition and needs of the City. He shall see that all terms and conditions
imposed in favor of the City or its inhabitants in any franchise or contract to
which the City is a party are faithfully kept and performed.
   (b)   The Mayor shall have the power, subject to the other provisions of
this Charter, to appoint, promote, transfer, reduce or remove any officer or
employee of the City except those required by this Charter to be elected or
heads of departments, for whom other provision is made in this Charter.
   (c)   The heads of all departments, except for the head of the Police
Department and head of the Fire Department, shall be appointed by the Mayor,
subject to confirmation by a majority of the members of Council, for a term
running concurrently with the Mayor. The Mayor shall have the power, subject to
the approval of a majority of the members of Council, to transfer, reduce or
remove any department head during his term for just cause.
(Approved by voters 11-8-1988)
   (d)   The head of the Police Department and the head of the Fire Department,
once appointed by the Mayor and their appointment is confirmed by five members
of the Council, shall hold office until resignation, retirement, transfer,
reduction or removal. The Mayor may transfer, reduce or remove the head of the
Police Department or the head of the Fire Department subject to the approval of
five members of the Council in accordance with Chapter 733 of the Ohio Revised
Code and any amendment thereto. The Council may remove the head of the Police
Department or the head of the Fire Department by the affirmative vote of six
members of the Council, in accordance with Chapter 733 of the Ohio Revised Code
and any amendment thereto, without the approval of the Mayor. The head of the
Police Department, if appointed from the Division of Police, and the head of
the Fire Department, if appointed from the Division of Fire, if transferred or
reduced, shall revert to the classified civil service status held by him at the
time of his appointment to the position of Chief of the Police Department or
Chief of the Fire Department, respectively.
(Approved by voters 11-7-2000)
   (e)   The Mayor shall execute, on behalf of the City, all contracts,
conveyances, evidences of indebtedness and all other instruments to which the
City is a party. He shall have custody of the seal of the City and may affix it
to all of the above mentioned instruments, but the absence of the seal shall
not affect the validity of any such instrument.
   (f)   The Mayor shall be recognized as the official and ceremonial head of
the City government by the Governor for military purposes, and by the courts
for the purpose of serving civil processes.
(Approved by voters 11-8-1988)
SECTION 6. THE VICE-MAYOR; VACANCY IN OFFICE OF MAYOR.
   (a)   In December of each odd-numbered year following the regular municipal
election for municipal officers, the Mayor shall appoint one of the members of
Council as Vice-Mayor and one of the members of Council as alternate Vice-Mayor
who shall serve, respectively, as Vice-Mayor and alternate Vice-Mayor for a
term of two years beginning on the first day of December of each year following
each regular municipal election for municipal officers. If the Vice-Mayor or
the alternate ceases to be a Councilperson, resigns or is removed from the
position by the affirmative vote of six members of the Council, the Mayor shall
appoint one of the remaining members of Council to the position of Vice-Mayor
or alternate Vice-Mayor to serve for the balance of the term. The Vice-Mayor
shall preside at all Council meetings.
   (b)   The Vice-Mayor, during any period when the Mayor shall be absent or
unavailable or unable for any cause to perform his duties, shall be the Acting
Mayor and shall also continue as Councilperson with all the powers and duties
of a Councilperson.
   (c)   In the event of a vacancy in the office of Mayor, the Vice-Mayor shall
thereupon become Acting Mayor and shall hold office and serve for the unexpired
term of the Mayor or until the beginning of the term of a successor duly
elected and qualified for the expired term. The successor can be elected either
at the next regular municipal election for municipal officers provided such
vacancy occurred more than 90 days prior to such election or at a special
municipal election as set forth herein. The Vice-Mayor shall also continue as
Councilperson with all the powers and duties of a Councilperson. If the Vice-
Mayor refuses to serve as Acting Mayor or if the Office of Vice-Mayor is
vacant, the Alternate Vice-Mayor shall become Acting Mayor as specified above.
If both the Vice-Mayor and the Alternate Vice-Mayor refuse to serve as Acting
Mayor or if both offices are vacant, the Council shall convene within ten days
and appoint an individual who meets all of the qualifications contained in
Article V, Section 2, of the Charter, to serve as Acting Mayor until his
successor is duly elected and qualified pursuant to this Section 6 of Article
V.
   (d)   In the event that the Vice-Mayor succeeds the Mayor hereunder, during
the period of such succession, the Councilperson so filling the office of the
Mayor shall be exempt from the full-time requirement as set out in Article V,
Section 2, of this Charter, but in no event shall the waiver contained herein
last past the balance of the unexpired term. Council shall establish a salary
for the position of Mayor for the balance of the unexpired term based upon the
time the succeeding Mayor is able to devote to the position.
   (e)   A special municipal election to fill the vacancy in the office of
Mayor shall be held on the first date authorized for a special election by the
Board of Elections of Cuyahoga County occurring after 60 days from the date on
which said vacancy occurs. The person so elected at said special municipal
election shall assume the office of Mayor immediately upon certification by the
Board of Elections of Cuyahoga County that such person was elected and such
person has qualification and such person shall serve the unexpired term of
Mayor to which he is elected.
   (f)   The name of any qualified candidate for the office of Mayor for which
the special election is to be held shall be printed upon the ballot for such
election when a petition conforming to the requirements of the general laws of
the State of Ohio is filed with the Board of Elections of Cuyahoga County at
least 40 days prior to the date of the special municipal election.
   (g)   Within five days after the occurrence of the vacancy, Council shall
convene and officially cause written notice to be immediately delivered to the
Board of Elections of Cuyahoga County advising such Board of Elections of the
existence of the vacancy and the need for a special municipal election to be
held pursuant to the provisions of this section.
   (h)   The candidate receiving the largest number of votes for the office of
Mayor at the special municipal election shall be declared elected to such
office.
   (i)   In the event of a tie, the Election authorities shall determine by lot
which of said candidates shall be elected.
(Approved by voters 11-8-1988; 11-7-1995; 11-7-2000)
ARTICLE VI
ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS AND COMMISSIONS
SECTION 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   Initially the City shall have a Law Department, a Finance Department, a
Service Department, a Police Department and a Fire Department; and the Council
shall provide by ordinance for the organization and duties thereof not provided
by this Charter. The City shall also have a Civil Service Commission and a City
Planning Commission. The Council may by ordinance establish additional
departments and commissions, or divisions thereof, and provide for such boards,
officers and employees as it may deem necessary. The Council may combine or
abolish any department, division, board, commission, nonelective office or job
classification; and may authorize one person to serve in any capacity in two or
more departments, divisions, boards or commissions.
SECTION 2. DIRECTOR OF LAW.
   The Director of Law shall be the head of the Law Department and shall be
appointed by the Mayor as provided in
Article V, Section 5(c). The Director of Law shall serve the Mayor, the
Council, the administrative departments and the officers, boards and
commissions of the City as legal counsel in connection with municipal affairs,
and, subject to the direction of the Mayor or the Council, shall represent the
City in all proceedings in Court or before any administrative board. The
Director of Law shall be admitted to practice law in the State of Ohio, hold an
active license in good standing to practice law in the State of Ohio, have held
such license in good standing for at least five years, and have experience in
municipal or governmental law.
(Approved by voters 11-8-1988; 11-2-2021)
SECTION 3. DIRECTOR OF FINANCE.
   The Director of Finance shall be the head of the Finance Department and the
fiscal officer of the City. The Director of Finance shall be appointed by the
Mayor, subject to confirmation by a majority of the members of Council, for a
term running concurrently with the Mayor. The Director of Finance shall serve
the Mayor and the Council as financial advisor in connection with municipal
affairs. The Director of Finance shall examine all payrolls, bills and other
claims against the City and shall issue no warrant unless such Director of
Finance shall find that the claim is in proper form, correctly computed and
duly approved, and that it is due and payable, and that an appropriation has
been made therefor. The Director of Finance shall conduct internal audits of
the assets and financial records of all city departments as the Mayor, Council
or such Director of Finance shall find necessary. In addition, the Director of
Finance shall perform such other duties consistent with his office as the Mayor
or the Council may request. The Director of Finance shall have knowledge and
experience in accounting, taxation or business administration and provide
evidence of either: (1) a license as a certified public accountant, with at
least three years experience in municipal government accounting or (2) a
bachelor’s degree with a major in finance, accounting, or business-related
field and shall have no less than six years accounting experience with at least
three such years working in municipal governmental accounting.
(Approved by voters 11-8-1988; 11-7-2000; 11-8-2005)
SECTION 4. THE CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION.
   (a)   The Civil Service Commission shall consist of three electors of the
City, not holding other municipal office, to be appointed by the Mayor for a
term of six years. The six-year terms of the members of the Civil Service
Commission shall remain staggered so that the Mayor shall appoint one member to
a six-year term every two years. A vacancy occurring during the term of any
member of the Civil Service Commission shall be filled for the unexpired term
in the manner authorized for an original appointment.
   (b)   The Civil Service Commission shall designate one of its members as the
Chairperson of the Civil Service Commission, and shall appoint a Secretary. The
Secretary of the Civil Service Commission need not be a member of the
Commission and may hold other municipal office or appointment.
   (c)   The Civil Service Commission shall provide by rule for the
ascertainment of merit and fitness as the basis for appointment and promotion
in the service of the City, and for appeals from the action of the Mayor in any
case of transfer, reduction or removal, except as otherwise provided in this
Charter. The action of the Commission on any such appeal shall be final except
as otherwise provided by the laws of Ohio.
   (d)   Civil service examinations shall not be required for the appointment
of any member of a board or commission, or any head of a department including
the heads of the Police Department and the Fire Department, or any assistant to
the Director of Law or to the Director of Finance, or any secretary to the
Mayor or to the head of any department, or for appointment to any other office
or position requiring peculiar and exceptional qualifications. Any person who
shall have served the City for at least one year next preceding the taking
effect of this Charter may be retained in the same or any similar position
without examination. Except as herein provided, the Civil Service Commission
shall determine the practicability of competitive examinations for any
nonelective office or job classification in the service of the City.
(Approved by voters 11-7-2000)
SECTION 5. THE CITY PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (a)   The City Planning Commission shall consist of the Mayor, one member of
the Council to be appointed by the Council, and three electors of the City, not
holding other municipal office, to be appointed by the Mayor. The terms of the
present members of the Planning Commission shall terminate on December 31,
1955, and their successors shall be appointed by the Mayor for a term of six
years except that, of the three appointed for the terms beginning January 1,
1956, one shall be appointed for a term of two years, one for a term of four
years and one for a term of six years. A vacancy occurring during the term of
any member of the City Planning Commission shall be filled for the unexpired
term in the manner authorized for an original appointment.
   (b)   The City Planning Commission shall have such powers and duties as
shall be conferred upon it by the Council concerning (a) the plan, design,
location, removal, relocation and alteration of any buildings or structures
owned by the public or located on public streets or public property; (b) the
location, relocation, widening, extension and vacation of streets, parkways,
playgrounds and other public places; (c) the approval of plats for the
subdivision of land; and (d) the zoning of the City for any lawful purpose or
purposes.
SECTION 6. GRANTWOOD RECREATIONAL PARK.
   (a)   The Grantwood Recreational Park is hereby defined as a tract of land
on the north side of Aurora Road adjoining the Geauga County line, now
consisting of approximately 367.67 acres, of which approximately 160 acres are
presently developed as a golf course and the remainder of which is presently
undeveloped.
   (b)   The Council shall, by Ordinance, establish a department or a division
thereof, in accordance with
Article VI, Section 6 , for the operation, maintenance, control and development
of the Grantwood Recreational Park and the activities conducted in connection
therewith. The Council may, by ordinance, create an Advisory Board to assist
the City with any matter related to Grantwood Recreational Park.
   (c)   All revenue derived from the operation of the Grantwood Recreational
Park shall be used exclusively for the daily operations of, the Grantwood
Recreational Park. To the extent reasonable and practical, the golf course
shall be operated so as to be financially self-sustaining. However, capital
expenditures for projects or items with useful lives of five years or more and
debt service payments for Grantwood Recreational Park may be made from other
City funds established for those purposes.
   (d)   No part of the land of the Grantwood Recreational Park shall be
leased, sold, transferred or exchanged without approval of the electors of the
City; but this shall not prohibit the leasing of buildings or concessions for
terms of less than two years to be operated within the Grantwood Recreational
Park. The undeveloped area, exclusive of the golf course, shall be preserved in
its natural state to the extent reasonable and practical, and the entire Park
shall be used exclusively for recreational purposes.
(Approved by voters 11-7-1972; 5-8-2001; 11-4-2008)
SECTION 7. CITY ENGINEER.
   Commencing January 1, 1972, there is established the position of City
Engineer, who shall be the head of the Engineering Department. The City
Engineer shall be appointed by the Mayor as provided in
Article V, Section 5(c). The City Engineer shall serve the Mayor, the Council,
the Administrative Departments and the City officials in connection with all
civil engineering matters of the City. The City Engineer shall perform all
duties now or hereafter imposed upon city engineers under the laws of Ohio, and
such other duties as prescribed by ordinance of the Council. No person shall
act as City Engineer unless duly registered as a professional engineer in civil
engineering in the State of Ohio.
(Approved by voters 11-8-1988)
SECTION 8. CHARTER REVIEW COMMISSION.
   (a)   Within five years after this section becomes effective, and at
intervals of no more than five years thereafter, the Mayor, with the approval
of Council, shall appoint a Charter Review Commission. The Charter Review
Commission shall be composed of nine members, each of whom shall be an elector
of the City. Seven members, one from each ward, shall be appointed to represent
the ward in which each resides, and two members shall be appointed at-large to
represent the City as a whole. Any vacancy on the Charter Review Commission
shall be filled by the Mayor, with the approval of Council, with an individual
who meets the qualifications contained herein.
   (b)   The Charter Review Commission shall review the City Charter and make
recommendations to Council as to any amendments to the City Charter which it
deems necessary and advisable.
(Approved by the voters 11-2-1971; 11-7-2000)
SECTION 9. CITY PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR.
   Commencing January 1, 1989, there is hereby established the position of
Director of Planning and Community Development who shall be head of the
Community Development Department. The Director of Planning and Community
Development shall be appointed by the Mayor as provided in
Article V, Section 5(c). The Director of Planning and Community Development
shall serve the Mayor, the Council, the Planning Commission, and the
Administrative Departments and City officials in connection with all planning
and community development matters of the City. The Director of Planning and
Community Development shall perform all duties now or hereafter imposed upon
all Planning and Community Development Directors under the laws of Ohio and
such other duties as prescribed by ordinance of the Council.
(Approved by voters 11-8-1988)
SECTION 10.A. UPDATE OF THE CITY OF SOLON MASTER PLAN/MASTER PLAN CITIZEN’S
COMMITTEE.
   (a)   On or before January of 2022 the Director of Planning and Community
Development shall commence a comprehensive review of the recommendations, data,
maps, charts, and other information contained in the most recently adopted City
of Solon Master Plan and shall prepare recommended amendments and revisions to
the Master Plan as necessary. In the course of reviewing the Master Plan, the
Director of Planning and Community Development shall at a minimum address the
Master Plan Components provided in Section 10 herein, and shall regularly meet
with and seek input from the Master Plan Citizen’s Committee as provided in
Section 10.C herein.
   (b)   Any proposed amendment or revision to the City of Solon Master Plan
that arises pursuant to the review conducted under this Section 10.A. shall
then be submitted to the Planning Commission and City Council for further
review as per Sections
10.D and
10.E below.
   (c)   The Director of Planning and Community Development, with the
assistance of the Master Plan Citizen’s Committee, shall subsequently commence
at least one comprehensive review of the City of Solon Master Plan, and amend
and revise the plan as necessary in at least every ten (10) year period after
January of 2022. The commencing of a review of the Master Plan occurring prior
to the expiration of the required ten (10) year period shall occur at the
discretion of the Director of Planning and Community Development and/or as
directed by the Mayor.
(Approved by voters 11-8-2005; 11-3-2015; 11-2-2021)
SECTION 10.B. APPOINTMENT, COMPOSITION, AND TERMS OF THE MASTER PLAN CITIZEN’S
COMMITTEE.
   On and after November 2021, the Master Plan Citizen's Committee shall
consist of the following members: (1) the members of the Solon Planning
Commission, other than the Mayor; (2) the Director of Planning and Community
Development; (3) one qualified elector resident in each Ward who is appointed
by the respective Council representative of each such elector; and (4) fifteen
(15) members appointed by the Mayor, with each such member being a
representative of a business located in the City or a qualified elector who
resides in the City. Each member of the Master Plan Citizen’s Committee shall
serve without compensation and shall serve until their duties as outlined in
Section 10.C hereof are completed. A subsequent Committee shall be appointed
each year that a subsequent update of the City of Solon Master Plan is
commenced. In the years in which the Committee is to be convened, the
appointment of the members shall be made in accordance with this Section 10.B.
in January of that year.
(Approved by voters 11-8-2005; 11-3-2015; 11-2-2021)
SECTION 10.C. DUTIES OF THE MASTER PLAN CITIZEN’S COMMITTEE.
   The Master Plan Citizen’s Committee shall be an advisory body intended to
represent a broad cross section of community attitudes regarding the present
and desired future physical environment of the community. Through their input
the Master Plan Citizen’s Committee shall be responsible for assisting the
Director of Planning and Community Development in formulating the Goals of the
Master Plan. The Committee may also be convened from time to time at the
discretion of the Director of Planning and Community Development to provide
feedback on various issues associated with the development of the Master Plan
Document. The Director of Planning and Community Development shall convene and
seek input from the Master Plan Citizen’s Committee on a regular basis
throughout the goal formulation process and on an as needed basis throughout
the balance of the plan review and preparation process.
(Approved by voters 11-8-2005; 11-3-2015)
SECTION 10.D. MASTER PLAN REVIEW BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION.
   Within four months of the receipt of any proposed recommendations to amend
or revise the City of Solon Master Plan from the Director of Planning and
Community Development, the Planning Commission shall review such
recommendations, and shall recommend that the proposed amendments be approved,
denied, or modified, and shall forward their recommendations to City Council
for further consideration and action.
(Approved by voters 11-8-2005; 11-3-2015)
SECTION 10.E. MASTER PLAN REVIEW BY CITY COUNCIL.
   Within three months of the receipt of any proposal to approve, deny, or
modify the City of Solon Master Plan from the Planning Commission, City Council
shall review and consider those recommendations and shall either approve and
adopt the Master Plan Recommendations, or approve some modification thereof.
After the Master Plan has been approved by City Council, the Planning
Commission and City Council shall consult with the Master Plan and adhere to
its recommendations to the extent reasonable and practical in performing their
duties and exercising their powers.
(Approved by voters 11-8-2005)
ARTICLE VII
SALARIES AND BONDS
Editor’s note:
   This Article was repealed by the voters on November 8, 1988.
ARTICLE VIII
NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS
SECTION 1. PROCEDURES.
   Nominations for elective offices of the City shall be made only by petition.
Petitions for ward Councilperson shall be signed by not less than three percent
of the number voting in said ward at the last preceding general election, and
petitions for City offices-at-large shall be signed by not less than three
percent of the number voting in the City at the last preceding general
election. The name of each elector signing a nomination petition must appear on
the registration books of the last preceding general election and the electors
who sign a nominating petition for a ward Councilperson must reside in the ward
of the nominee whose petition he signs. Each nominating petition shall be
accompanied by the written acceptance of the nominee. Nominating petitions
shall be filed with the election authorities not later than 90 days before the
date set for the primary election and no nomination for any such office shall
be of any effect unless made as required of this
Section 1. In the event that more than two persons are nominated, as provided
herein, for the office of Mayor or for the office of ward Councilperson, then a
primary election shall be held on the second Tuesday in September next
preceding the general election for the purpose of selecting two candidates for
each such office. The two candidates for each such office shall be the two
candidates receiving the highest number of votes cast in the primary election.
The ballot used in both the primary election and the general election shall be
without party mark or designation. The names of all candidates for any City
office shall be placed upon the same ballot and shall be rotated in the manner
provided by the laws of Ohio. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the
laws of Ohio shall govern the nomination and election of the elective officers
of this City.
(Approved by voters 11-7-1972; 11-8-2005; 11-4-2008; 11-6-2012)
SECTION 2. QUALIFICATION OF OFFICERS.
   (a)   With the exception of the office of Mayor, for whom qualifications are
set forth in
Article V, Section 2 , each elective officer of the City shall be a resident of
the City of Solon for 18 consecutive months immediately prior to the date of
his election and shall be a qualified elector of his ward as of the date of his
election and, during the term of his office, shall continue to be a resident of
that ward and a qualified elector. He shall hold no other elected public
office, except that of Notary Public or member of the State Militia or Reserve
Corps of the United States, and he shall not hold public employment with the
City of Solon.
   (b)   No officer of the City, elective or otherwise, shall have any
financial interest in any contract with or expenditure of money by the City
other than his fixed compensation and expenses for traveling. Any officer of
the City who fails to comply with the requirements or qualifications of this
section shall forfeit his office forthwith.
(Approved by voters 11-8-1988; 11-7-2000)
ARTICLE IX
REFERENDUM, INITIATIVE AND RECALL
SECTION 1. INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM.
   (a)   The electors of this Municipality shall have the power to approve or
reject at the polls any ordinance, resolution, or other action passed or
adopted by the Council, whether legislative or administrative in nature, except
as hereinafter provided.
      (1)   Within 40 days after the final passage by Council or approval by
the Mayor, whichever is later, of an ordinance, resolution or other action,
whether styled an emergency or not, a petition, signed by at least that number
of electors which equals 10% of the electors voting at the last preceding
general Municipal election, may be filed with the Clerk of Council, requesting
that such ordinance, resolution or other action, whether legislative or
administrative in nature, be either repealed or submitted to a vote of the
electors. If said petition is signed by that number of electors which equals
20% or more of such electors, the date of the election may be fixed therein,
which shall be not less than 90 days from the time of filing thereof. When said
petition is filed, the Clerk shall first ascertain the sufficiency of the
petition and, if found sufficient, the Council shall thereupon, within 30 days
of the filing of such petition, reconsider such ordinance, resolution or other
action. If, upon such reconsideration, the ordinance, resolution or other
action is not repealed, the Council shall submit it to a vote of the electors
on the date fixed in the petition or, if no date be so fixed, at the first
general election in any year occurring more than 90 days after the filing of
such petition. No such ordinance, resolution or other action shall go into
effect until approved by a majority of those voting thereon.
      (2)   Ordinances and resolutions providing for a tax levy or for
improvements petitioned for by the owners of a majority of the front footage of
the property benefited and to be specially assessed therefor, and appropriation
ordinances and resolutions, limited to the subject of appropriations, shall not
be subject to referendum. Further, whenever the Council is required to pass
more than one ordinance, resolution or other action to complete the financing
and assessment of the cost of any public improvement previously finally
approved, only the first resolution, ordinance or other action relating to said
financing and assessment shall be subject to referendum, and any subsequent
resolution, ordinance or other action relating to the financing and assessment
of the cost of said public improvement, as previously finally approved, shall
not be subject to referendum.
      (3)   If, when submitted to a vote of the electors, an emergency
ordinance, resolution or other action be not approved by a majority of those
voting thereon, it shall be considered repealed as regards any action, future
or past, and any prior action shall be considered void and a nullity, except
that such ordinance, resolution or other action shall be deemed sufficient
authority for payment, in accordance with the ordinance, resolution or other
action, of any costs or expenses actually incurred previous to the referendum
vote thereon, but not for any “in futuro” costs or expenses allegedly incurred
or obligated with respect thereto.
      (4)   Any Ordinance adopted to certify an initiative to the Board of
Elections to be considered by the electors shall not be subject to referendum.
   (b)   The reasons for, necessity for, facts supporting the reasons for and/
or necessity for, and/or the bonafides of any emergency ordinance, resolution
or other action of Council shall be subject to judicial review.
   (c)   Each contract, consent agreement, compact or other means by which the
City of Solon cooperates with, is or becomes a member of, or contributes to the
operation, in any way, of any other governmental unit, agency or association,
including a regional government or agency or group of government units, shall
be terminable by the people at any time by a referendum as provided in
Article IX, Section 1 , and no “in futuro” obligations with respect thereto
shall thereafter be binding upon the City or its citizens, if said referendum
passes, except as to their proper share of debts already lawfully incurred and
as the referendum petitions provide for the City of Solon or citizens thereof
to pay its or their share of in futuro maintenance and operating costs of any
particular improvement which has been built and is used, in part at least, by
said City or one or more of its citizens or to continue to participate as to
specified activities.
(Approved by voters 11-8-1977)
   (d)   Ordinances and other measures may be proposed by initiative petition
and adopted by election, in the manner now or hereafter provided by the
Constitution or the laws of Ohio, except that ordinances proposed by initiative
petition to amend the zoning code and/or the zoning map of the City shall be
subject to the procedures, process, review certification to the Board of
Elections and other requirements contained in Article XIV of this Charter, and
only in the event that this Charter is silent on a matter, or there is no
conflict with this Charter, in accordance with the laws of Ohio. It is hereby
declared that in the event of a conflict between the Charter and the Ohio
Revised Code, and as permitted by the home rule powers granted to
municipalities, and the Ohio Revised Code and in particular Ohio Revised Code
Section 731.41, the manner, means, method, consideration and placement on the
ballot of initiatives shall be governed by this Charter.
(Approved by voters 5-3-1988; 11-5-2019)
   (e)   This section shall be severable and if any subsection, paragraph,
part, word or application thereof is held invalid for any reason, such holding
shall not invalidate or affect the force and effect of any other subsection,
paragraph, part, word or application thereof.
(Approved by voters 11-8-1977; 11-5-2019)
SECTION 2. RECALL.
   (a)   The electors shall have the power to remove from office by a recall
election any elected officer of the City. If an elected officer shall have
served for six months of his term, a petition demanding his removal may be
filed with the Clerk of the Council who shall note thereon the name and address
of the person filing the petition and the date of such filing. Such petition
may be circulated in separate parts, but the separate parts shall be bound
together and filed as one instrument. Each part shall contain the name and
office of the person whose removal is sought and a statement in not more than
200 words of the grounds for the removal. Such petition shall be signed by at
least that number of electors which equals 25 percent of the electors voting
for that office at the last preceding general election. Within ten days after
the day on which such petition shall have been filed, the Clerk shall determine
whether or not it meets the requirements hereof.
   (b)   If the Clerk shall find the petition insufficient, the clerk shall
promptly certify the particulars in which the petition is defective, deliver a
copy of his certificate to the person who filed the petition with the clerk,
and make a record of such delivery. Such person shall be allowed a period of 20
days after the day on which such delivery was made in which to make the
petition sufficient. If the Clerk shall find the petition sufficient, the clerk
shall promptly so certify to the Council, shall deliver a copy of such
certificate to the officer whose removal is sought, and shall make a record of
such delivery. If such officer shall not resign within five days after the day
on which such delivery shall have been made, the Council shall thereupon fix a
day for holding a recall election, not less than 75 days, nor more than 120
days after the date of such delivery. At such recall election this question
shall be placed on the ballot: “Shall (naming the officer) be allowed to
continue as (naming the office)?” with provision on the ballot for voting
affirmatively or negatively on such question. If a majority of the votes cast
at such election shall be voted affirmatively, such officer shall remain in
office. If a majority of the votes cast shall be voted negatively, such officer
shall be considered as removed, such office shall be deemed vacant, and such
vacancy shall be filled as provided in this Charter. The officer removed by
such recall election shall not be eligible for appointment to the vacancy
created thereby.
(Approved by voters 11-7-1995; 11-3-2015)
SECTION 3. ASSISTANCE FROM LAW DIRECTOR TO INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM OR RECALL.
   (a)   The electors who sponsor an initiative, referendum or recall petition
may, if they desire, request certain assistance from the City Council;
provided, however, that the electors who sponsor such petitions and who request
such assistance present to the City Council a written request stating their
proposal and signed by at least 100 registered voters, or by a number of
registered voters equal to at least one percent of the number of electors who
voted for Governor at the last preceding general election in Solon, whichever
is the greater.
   (b)   The assistance requested from the City Council may include all or part
of the following:
      (1)   Approval as to form of such petition prior to the circulation
thereof; provided however, that in the case of referendum petitions, the
submission of such petition to the City Council shall be made within a period
of five days after the adoption of the ordinance or other measure sought to be
referred.
      (2)   Advice as to the legal requirements involved in the circulation and
filing of such petition.
   (c)   City Council shall supply the group an attorney as Special Counsel at
city expense to counsel the group as to the issue outlined in (a) and (b).
(Approved by voters 11-2-1971; 11-8-2005)
ARTICLE X
FINANCES
   The laws of Ohio relating generally to budgets, appropriations, deposits,
expenditures, debts, bonds, contracts and other fiscal matters of the
Municipality shall be applicable to this City except as modified by, or
necessarily inconsistent with, the provisions of this Charter, and except when
provision therefor is made in the Constitution of the State of Ohio.
ARTICLE XI
FRANCHISES
   The Council may by ordinance grant a non-exclusive franchise to any person,
firm or corporation to construct or operate a public utility on, across, under
or above any public street or real estate within the City for a period not in
excess of 25 years; and it may prescribe in the ordinance the kind or quality
of service or product to be furnished, the rate or rates to be charged
therefor, and such other terms as it shall deem conducive to the public
interest. Such franchise may be amended or renewed in the manner and subject to
the provisions established herein for original grants. No consent of the owner
of property abutting on any public street or real estate shall be necessary to
the effectiveness of any such grant, amendment or renewal. All such grants,
amendments and renewals shall be made subject to the continuing right of the
Council to provide reasonable regulations for the operation of such utilities
with reference to such streets and public real estate, including the right to
require such reconstruction, relocation, alteration or removal of structures
and equipment used in such streets or public grounds as shall, in the opinion
of the Council, be necessary in the public interest.
ARTICLE XII
AMENDMENTS TO CHARTER
   The Council may, by the affirmative vote of at least five of its members,
submit any proposed amendment to the Charter to the electors; and, upon receipt
of a petition signed by not less than ten percent of the registered electors of
the City setting forth any proposed amendment to the Charter, it shall submit
such proposed amendment to the electors. The Council shall determine the manner
of the submission of any proposed amendment to the electors to the extent that
such submission is not governed by the Constitution and the laws of Ohio. If
any such proposed amendment shall be approved by a majority of the electors
voting thereon, it shall become a part of this Charter; except that, if two or
more inconsistent proposed amendments on the same subject shall be submitted at
the same election, only the one of such amendments receiving the largest
affirmative vote, not less than a majority, shall become a part of the Charter.
ARTICLE XIII
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION 1. EFFECTIVE DATE OF THE CHARTER.
   For the purpose of nominating and electing officers of the Village, fixing
the compensation of those to be elected in 1955, and establishing the
provisions of Article II herein, this Charter shall be in effect from and after
the date of its approval by the electors of the Village; and for all other
purposes the Charter shall be in effect on and after the first day of January,
1956.
SECTION 2. EFFECT OF PARTIAL INVALIDITY.
   A determination that any part of this Charter is invalid shall not
invalidate or impair the force or effect of any other part hereof, except to
the extent that such other part is dependent for its operation upon the part
declared invalid.
SECTION 3. EFFECT ON EXISTING LAWS AND RIGHTS.
   This Charter shall not affect any vested rights or accrued liabilities of
the Municipality of Solon, nor any right or liability in any pending suit or
prosecution either on behalf of or against the Municipality, nor any contract
heretofore entered into by the Municipality, nor any franchise heretofore
granted by the Municipality, nor any prior or pending proceedings for the
authorization of public improvements or the levy of assessments therefor.
Except as a contrary intent appears herein, all acts of the Council of the
Municipality in effect as of December 31, 1955, shall continue thereafter in
effect until lawfully amended or repealed.
SECTION 4. INTERPRETATION OF THE CHARTER.
   The article and section headings herein have been inserted for convenience
in reference and are not intended to define or limit the scope of, or otherwise
affect, any provision of this Charter.
SECTION 5. OPEN MEETINGS WITH EXECUTIVE SESSION AUTHORIZATION.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Charter, including, but not
limited to,
Article IV, Section 4, above, all meetings, both regular and special, of all
municipal public bodies, including Council, its committees, and all boards and
commissions, shall be open to the public, except closed meetings may be held
after a majority of a quorum determines, by a roll call vote, to hold an
executive session for the sole purpose of considering any of the following
matters:
   (a)   (1)   To consider the appointment, employment, dismissal, discipline,
promotion, demotion or compensation of a public employee or official, or the
investigation of charges or complaints against a public employee, official,
licensee, or regulated individual, unless the public employee, official,
licensee, or regulated individual requests a public hearing. Except as
otherwise provided by law, no public body shall hold an executive session for
the discipline of an elected official for conduct related to the performance of
his official duties or for his removal from office.
      (2)   If a public body holds an executive session pursuant to this
subsection, the motion to vote to hold that executive session shall state which
one or more of the approved purposes listed in this subsection are the purposes
for which the executive session is to be held, but need not include the name of
any person to be considered at the meeting.
   (b)   (1)   To consider the purchase of property for public purposes, or for
the sale of property at competitive bidding, if premature disclosure of
information would give an unfair competitive or bargaining advantage to a
person whose personal, private interest is adverse to the general public
interest. No member of a public body shall use this division as a subterfuge
for providing covert information to prospective buyers or sellers. A purchase
or sale of public property is void if the seller or buyer of the public
property has received covert information from a member of a public body that
has not been disclosed to the general public in sufficient time for other
prospective buyers and sellers to prepare and submit offers.
      (2)   If the minutes of the public body show that all meetings and
deliberations of the public body have been conducted in compliance with this
section, any instrument executed by the public body purporting to convey,
lease, or otherwise dispose of any right, title or interest in any public
property shall be conclusively presumed to have been executed in compliance
with this section insofar as title or other interest of any bona fide
purchasers, lessees, or transferees of the property is concerned.
   (c)   Conferences with an attorney for the public body concerning disputes
involving the public body that are the subject of pending or imminent court
action.
   (d)   Preparing for, conducting or reviewing negotiations or bargaining
sessions with public employees concerning their compensation or other terms and
conditions of their employment.
   (e)   Matters required to be kept confidential by Federal law or rules or
State statutes.
   (f)   Specialized details of security arrangements where disclosure of the
matters discussed might reveal information that could be used for the purpose
of committing, or avoiding prosecution for, a violation of the law.
   If a public body holds an executive session to consider any of the matters
listed in subsections (b) through (f), the motion and vote to hold that
executive session shall state which one or more of the approved matters listed
in those subsections are to be considered at the executive sessions.
(Approved by voters 11-7-2000)
SECTION 6. WORDS HELD TO BE INCLUSIVE. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Charter Article XIII, Section 6, was repealed by the voters on May 3, 2022.
SECTION 7. CHARTER TECHNICAL CHANGES.
   The Council is granted the authority to, through ordinance adopted by
unanimous vote of the entire Council, incorporate technical changes to this
Charter. The ordinance providing for such technical changes shall not be passed
as an emergency measure and shall be subject to the referendum as provided for
in this Charter. Technical changes shall not affect the intent or purpose of
any part of the Charter and shall strictly be limited to the following:
correcting misspellings, obvious errors of grammar and/or punctuation.
(Approved by voters 11-3-2015)
ARTICLE XIV
VOTER APPROVAL OF ZONING CHANGES
SECTION 1. ZONING DISTRICT CHANGE.
   Any ordinance effecting a change in the zoning classification or district of
any property resulting in a zoning map change within the City shall not become
effective after the passage thereof until Council submits such Ordinance to the
electors at a regularly scheduled primary or general election, occurring more
than 90 days after the passage of the ordinance and such ordinance is approved
at such election by a majority of the electors voting thereon, in this City,
and by a majority of the electors in each ward in which a change in zoning
classification or district of any property is located, resulting in a zoning
map change, at the same election.
(Approved by voters 5-3-1988; 11-3-2015; 11-5-2019)
SECTION 2. ZONING USE CHANGE.
   Any ordinance effecting a change in the uses permitted in a zoning use
classification or district of the City, shall not become effective after the
passage thereof, until Council submits such ordinance, to the electors at a
regularly scheduled primary or general election, occurring more than 90 days
after the passage of the ordinance and such ordinance is approved by the
majority of the electors voting thereon in the City and by a majority of the
electors in each ward in which the zoning use change is applicable to any
property with such designated zoning district classification at the same
election.
(Approved by voters 5-3-1988; 11-3-2015; 11-5-2019)
SECTION 3. ZONING CODE CHANGES BY INITIATIVE PETITION.
   (a)   Any initiative petition that proposes a change in the zoning code of
the City or any change in the zoning map of the City shall first be filed by
the petitioner with the Clerk of Council to be held for a period of 10 days.
After the initiative petition has been filed with the Clerk of Council for a
period of 10 days, the petitioners may circulate the petition filed with the
Clerk of Council.
   (b)   After the petitioners have submitted their petitions to the Clerk of
Council, and upon completion of circulation within the City, the Clerk of
Council shall submit such petitions to the Board of Elections to determine if
there are sufficient valid signatures of electors of the City. The Board of
Elections shall certify whether such petitions contain the signatures of not
less than 10 percent of the number of electors who voted for Governor at the
most recent general election for the Office of Governor in the City. In the
event such initiative petitions do not contain sufficient signatures to meet or
exceed 10 percent of the number of electors that voted for Governor at the most
recent general election for the office of Governor in the City, the petitioners
may seek additional signatures of electors of the City.
   (c)   Once the initiative petitions are certified by the Board of Elections
to have not less than 10 percent of the number of electors who voted for
Governor at the most recent general election for the office of Governor in the
City, the initiative shall be placed on the agenda for the next regular Council
meeting. At the first regular Council meeting at which the initiative is
considered, a public hearing before Council shall be set with at least 10 days
advance notice. The notice shall conform to the requirements for notification
of public hearings whenever any amendment to the zoning code and/or map of the
City is being proposed as provided in the zoning code of the City. The public
hearing shall be held at a regular Council meeting.
   (d)   The Ordinance before Council shall be read at three consecutive
regular meetings and shall not be read at any special meeting. At the third
regular meeting, and after the public hearing on the initiative proposal,
Council shall determine if the initiative petitions, and the process of placing
such initiative before Council, comply with the Charter and, to the extent
applicable, the Ohio Revised Code. The form of the petition and circulation and
signing of the petitions by the circulators shall conform to the requirements
of the Ohio Revised Code.
   (e)   Council shall act upon the initiative petitions to determine whether
the petitions are to be certified to the Board of Elections for consideration
at the next regularly held general or primary election no later than the third
reading and the Council may only deny certification if they find the petitions
are not sufficient and valid by specifying how the petitions do not comply with
the Charter and/or the Ohio Revised Code.
   (f)   Upon adoption of any Ordinance to certify the initiative to the Board
of Elections, the Clerk of Council, no later than five days after passage of
such Ordinance, shall certify the Ordinance to the Board of Elections and
deliver the initiative petitions to the Board of Elections requesting that the
initiative be placed on the ballot of the next regularly held primary or
general election occurring more than 90 days after adoption of the Ordinance
certifying the initiative to the Board of Elections. Any Ordinance approving
certification of the initiative to the Board of Elections to be placed on the
ballot to be considered by the electors shall take effect immediately upon
final action by Council, and the Clerk of Council shall forthwith certify the
Ordinance for delivery to the Board of Elections. Council shall not dispense
with three readings of the Ordinance at three consecutive regular Council
meetings to submit an initiative to the Board of Elections, and adoption of any
such ordinance cannot be accomplished by resolution or motion.
(Approved by voters 11-5-2019)
SECTION 4. ZONING CHANGES TO THE CENTRAL RETAIL DISTRICT.
   The provisions in
Section 1 and
Section 2 in Article XIV shall not apply to the Central Retail District as
identified and described within the City of Solon Master Plan. Council shall
adopt a procedure and process for the Zoning and Development of the Central
Retail District as identified and described within the City of Solon Master
Plan, which shall not employ the procedure and process contained in
Section 1 and
Section 2 in Article XIV.
(Approved by voters 11-2-2021)
PART TWO - ADMINISTRATION CODE
         TITLE TWO - General Provisions
            Chap.
202.   Codified Ordinances
            Chap.
204.   Official Standards
            Chap.
206.   Wards and Boundaries
            Chap.
208.   Open Meetings
            Chap.
210.   Purchasing and Contracts
            Chap.
212.   Naming Rights Procedure Policy
         TITLE FOUR - Legislation
            Chap.
220.   Council
            Chap.
222.   Ordinances and Resolutions
         TITLE SIX - Administration
            Chap.
230.   Mayor
            Chap.
234.   Finance Department
            Chap.
238.   Department of Public Safety
            Chap.
240.   Police Department
            Chap.
242.   Fire Department
            Chap.
244.   Service Department
            Chap.
246.   Public Works Division
            Chap.
248.   Engineering Department
            Chap.
249.   Construction Department
            Chap.
250.   Building Department
            Chap.
252.   Water Reclamation Department
            Chap.
253.   Economic Development Department
            Chap.
254.   Planning and Community Development Department
            Chap.
255.   Information Technology Department
            Chap.
256.   Recreation Department
            Chap.
257.   Senior Services Department
            Chap.
258.   Grantwood Department
            Chap.
259.   Solon Center for the Arts
            Chap.
260.   Employees Generally
         TITLE EIGHT - Boards and Commissions
            Chap.
270.   City Planning Commission
            Chap.
282.   Records Commission
            Chap.
294.   Civil Service Commission
         TITLE TEN - Judiciary
            Chap.
298.   Mayor’s Court
            
APPENDIX I - Compensation Schedules
            
APPENDIX II - Employment Agreements
TITLE TWO - GENERAL PROVISIONS
            Chap.
202.   Codified Ordinances
            Chap.
204.   Official Standards
            Chap.
206.   Wards and Boundaries
            Chap.
208.   Open Meetings
            Chap.
210.   Purchasing and Contracts
            Chap.
212.   Naming Rights Procedure Policy
CHAPTER 202: CODIFIED ORDINANCES
Section
   
202.01   Designation; citation; headings
   
202.02   General definitions
   
202.03   Rules of construction
   
202.04   Revivor; effect of re-enactment, amendment or repeal
   
202.05   Construction of section references
   
202.06   Separability
   
202.99   General penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Codification in book form, see R.C. § 731.23
   Imprisonment until fine paid, see R.C. §§ 1905.30, 2947.14
   Ordinances and resolutions, see
Ch. 222
   Statute of limitations on prosecutions, see §
606.06
§ 202.01 DESIGNATION; CITATION; HEADINGS.
   This volume consists of all ordinances and resolutions of a permanent and
general nature of the municipality, revised, codified, arranged, numbered and
consolidated into component codes, titles, chapters and sections, and as such
shall be known and may be designated as the Codified Ordinances of Solon, Ohio,
2013, for which designation “Codified Ordinances” may be substituted. Code,
title, chapter and section headings do not constitute any part of the law as
contained in the Codified Ordinances.
(R.C. § 1.01)
§ 202.02 GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of the Codified Ordinances, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   AND. May be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the sense requires it.
   (b)   ANOTHER. When used to designate the owner of property which is the
subject of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other
owner of property.
   (c)   BOND. Includes an undertaking.
   (d)   CHILD. Includes child by adoption.
   (e)   COUNCIL. The legislative authority of the municipality.
   (f)   COUNTY. Cuyahoga County.
   (g)   FIRE CHIEF. Includes the Chief of the Fire Department if such Fire
Department has been established in the municipality, and shall include the Fire
Prevention Officer if no Fire Department has been established in the
municipality.
   (h)   IMPRISONED. The same meaning as in R.C. § 1.05.
   (i)   INTERNET. The international computer network of both federal and non-
federal interoperable packet switched data networks, including the graphical
subnetwork known as the world wide web.
   (j)   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by
themselves or as a servant, agent or employee.
   (k)   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes rights and easements of incorporeal
nature.
   (l)   LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY. The legislative authority of the municipality.
   (m)   MAY. Permissive.
   (n)   MUNICIPALITY or CITY. When used in these Codified Ordinances shall
mean the City of Solon, Ohio.
   (o)   O.A.C. The Ohio Administrative Code.
   (p)   OATH. Includes affirmation; and SWEAR includes affirm.
   (q)   OF UNSOUND MIND. The person lacks the relevant mental capacity.
   (r)   OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner
or tenant in common of the whole or part of such property.
   (s)   PERSON. Includes an individual, corporation, business trust, estate,
trust, partnership and association.
   (t)   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property except real property.
   (u)   PLAN OF SEWERAGE, SYSTEM OF SEWERAGE, SEWER AND SEWERS. Includes
sewers, sewage disposal works and treatment plants, and sewage pumping
stations, together with facilities and appurtenances necessary and proper
therefor.
   (v)   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   (w)   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates and interests.
   (x)   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes boards of education; the municipal, county,
state or federal government, its officers or an agency thereof; or any duly
authorized public official.
   (y)   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school
yard, body of water or watercourse, public conveyance or any other place for
the sale of merchandise, public accommodation or amusement.
   (z)   R.C. or REVISED CODE. The Ohio Revised Code.
   (aa)   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   (bb)   REGISTERED MAIL. Includes certified mail; and CERTIFIED MAIL includes
registered mail.
   (cc)   SHALL. Mandatory.
   (dd)   SIDEWALK. The portion of the street between the curb line and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   (ee)   STATE. The State of Ohio.
   (ff)   STREET. Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways,
viaducts and all other public thoroughfares within the municipality.
   (gg)   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person
holding a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part
of such premises, alone or with others.
   (hh)   UNDERTAKING. Includes a bond.
   (ii)   WEEK. Seven consecutive days.
   (jj)   WHOEVER. Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners;
principals, agents and employees; and all officials, public or private.
   (kk)   WRITING. Includes printing.
   (ll)   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. Includes any representation of words, letters,
symbols or figures; this provision does not affect any law relating to
signatures.
   (mm)   YEAR. Twelve consecutive months.
(R.C. §§ 1.02, 1.05, 1.44, 1.59, 701.01)
§ 202.03 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   Common and technical use. Words and phrases shall be read in context
and construed according to the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and
phrases that have acquired a technical or particular meaning, whether by
legislative definition or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
(R.C. § 1.42)
   (b)   Singular and plural; gender; tense.
      (1)   The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the
singular.
      (2)   Words of one gender include the other genders.
      (3)   Words in the present tense include the future.
(R.C. § 1.43)
   (c)   Computation of time.
      (1)   The time within which an act is required by law to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day, except that when
the last day falls on Sunday or a legal holiday, then the act may be done on
that next succeeding day which is not Sunday or a legal holiday.
      (2)   When a public office, in which an act required by law is to be
performed, is closed to the public for the entire day which constitutes the
last day for doing such act or before its usual closing time on such day, then
such act may be performed on the next succeeding day which is not a Sunday or a
legal holiday as defined in R.C. § 1.14.
(R.C. § 1.14)
      (3)   LEGAL HOLIDAY, as used in divisions (c)(1) and (c)(2) of this
section, means the following days:
         A.   The first day of January, known as New Year’s Day;
         B.   The third Monday in January, known as Martin Luther King Day;
         C.   The third Monday in February, known as Washington-Lincoln Day;
         D.   The day designated in the “Act of June 28, 1968,” 82 Stat. 250, 5
U.S.C. § 6103, as amended, for the commemoration of Memorial Day;
         E.   The nineteenth day of June, known as Juneteenth day;
         F.   The fourth day of July, known as Independence Day;
         G.   The first Monday in September, known as Labor Day;
         H.   The second Monday in October, known as Columbus Day;
         I.   The fourth Thursday in November, known as Thanksgiving Day;
         J.   The fourth Friday in November, known as Day after Thanksgiving;
         K.   The twenty-fifth day of December, known as Christmas Day; and
         L.   Any day appointed and recommended by the Governor of this state
or the President of the United States as a holiday.
      (4)   If any day designated in this section as a legal holiday falls on a
Sunday, the next succeeding day is a legal holiday.
(R.C. § 1.14)
      (5)   When an act is to take effect or become operative from and after a
day named, no part of that day shall be included. If priority of legal rights
depends upon the order of events on the same day, such priority shall be
determined by the times in the day at which they respectively occurred.
(R.C. § 1.15)
      (6)   If a number of months is to be computed by counting the months from
a particular day, the period ends on the same numerical day in the concluding
month as the day of the month from which the computation is begun, unless there
are not that many days in the concluding month, in which case the period ends
on the last day of that month.
(R.C. § 1.45)
   (d)   Authority. When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as
well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be
construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.
   (e)   Joint authority. All words purporting to give joint authority to three
or more municipal officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such
authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it shall be
otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority, or inconsistent
with state statute or Charter provisions.
   (f)   Exceptions. The rules of construction shall not apply to any law which
shall contain any express provision excluding such construction, or when the
subject matter or context of such law may be repugnant thereto.
§ 202.04 REVIVOR; EFFECT OF RE-ENACTMENT, AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
   (a)   The repeal of a repealing provision of the Codified Ordinances does
not revive the provision originally repealed nor impair the effect of any
saving clause therein.
   (b)   The re-enactment, amendment or repeal of a provision of the Codified
Ordinances does not, except as provided in division (c) hereof:
      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the provision or any prior action
taken thereunder;
      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation or
liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded or incurred thereunder;
      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture or punishment
incurred with respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal; and/or
      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding or remedy with respect to any
such privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment; and
the investigation, proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or
enforced, and the penalty, forfeiture or punishment imposed, as if the
provision had not been repealed or amended.
   (c)   If the penalty, forfeiture or punishment for any offense is reduced by
a re-enactment or amendment of a provision of the Codified Ordinances, the
penalty, forfeiture or punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed
according to the provision as amended.
(R.C. § 1.58)
§ 202.05 CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.
   (a)   A reference to any portion of a provision of the Codified Ordinances
applies to all re-enactments or amendments thereof.
(R.C. § 1.55)
   (b)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
series of sections, or of divisions or other subdivisions of a section, such
reference shall be construed to mean a violation of any section, division or
other such subdivision included in such reference.
   (c)   References in the Codified Ordinances to action taken or authorized
under designated sections of the Codified Ordinances include, in every case,
action taken or authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is
superseded by the Codified Ordinances.
(R.C. § 1.23)
§ 202.06 SEPARABILITY.
   If any provision of a section of the Codified Ordinances or the application
thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity does not
affect other provisions or applications of the section or related sections
which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to
this end the provisions are separable.
(R.C. § 1.50)
§ 202.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (a)   Whenever, in the Codified Ordinances or in any ordinance of the
municipality, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an
offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the
failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is
otherwise provided, whoever violates any such provision shall be subject to a
misdemeanor of the 1st degree which will include a fine not exceeding $1,000, a
term of imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation continues or
occurs.
   (b)   The failure of any officer or employee of the municipality to perform
any official duty imposed by this Model Ohio Municipal Code shall not subject
the officer or employee to the penalty imposed for a violation unless a penalty
is specifically provided for the failure.
Statutory reference:
   Ordinance violations and penalties, see R.C. § 715.67
CHAPTER 204: OFFICIAL STANDARDS
Editor’s note:
   The State of Ohio operates on Eastern Daylight Savings Time from 2:00 a.m.
of the first Sunday in April until 2:00 a.m. of the last Sunday in October.
Congress, on March 22, 1966, passed the Uniform Time Act requiring uniform
observance throughout the nation of Daylight Savings Time starting in 1967,
except that a state legislature could exempt the entire state from Daylight
Savings Time or divide a state into not more than two parts, each with a
different time standard. The Ohio legislature, through inaction, has elected to
observe Eastern Daylight Savings Time throughout the State of Ohio.
   On August 8, 2005, the Energy Policy Act of 2005 was enacted. This Act
changed the time change dates for Daylight Saving Time in the United States.
Beginning in 2007, the State of Ohio begins Daylight Saving Time at 2:00 a.m.
on the second Sunday in March and reverts to standard time at 2:00 a.m. on the
first Sunday in November. The Secretary of Energy will report the impact of
this change to Congress. Congress retains the right to resume the 2005 Daylight
Saving Time schedule once the Department of Energy study is complete.
Section
   
204.01   City emblem display on city vehicles; exceptions
   CROSS REFERENCES
   State flag and other insignia, see R.C. §§ 5.01 et seq.
   State legal holidays, see R.C. §§ 1.14, 5.20 et seq., 1303.45
   State motto, see R.C. § 5.06
   State seals, see R.C. §§ 5.10 et seq.
   State standard of time, see R.C. § 1.04
§ 204.01 CITY EMBLEM DISPLAY ON CITY VEHICLES; EXCEPTIONS.
   All vehicles owned or leased by the city shall display the city emblem on
each front door. The aforesaid city emblem shall be at least ten inches in
height and five and one-quarter inches in width. The emblem shall be reflective
in nature and permanently affixed to the vehicles. Magnetic emblems are
unacceptable. In addition to the city emblem, each city vehicle shall display a
vehicle number for immediate visual identification. This legislation does not
apply to the Mayor’s vehicle or to vehicles used by the city in undercover
investigatory operations. Fire Department vehicles may display the fire/rescue
emblem in lieu of the city emblem.
(Ord. 1988-41, passed 3-21-1988; Ord. 2002-279, passed 12-16-2002; Ord. 2003-5,
passed 2-3-2003)
CHAPTER 206: WARDS AND BOUNDARIES
Section
   
206.01   Ward boundaries
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Boundaries of city, see
Charter Art. II
   Boundary alterations, see
Charter Art. IV, § 1A
   Notification of adjustments of lot boundaries, see §
1252.03
   Ward boundaries, see
Charter Art. IV, § 2
§ 206.01 WARD BOUNDARIES.
   The councilmanic ward boundaries shall be, and they hereby are, described as
follows:
WARD 1: Beginning at the southeast corner of the City boundary line; thence
westerly along the south City boundary line to its intersection with the west
City boundary line; thence northerly along the west City boundary line to its
intersection with the north rear lot line of the lots on the north side of
North Burr Oak Drive; thence easterly along the north rear property line of the
lots on the north side of North Burr Oak to the west property line of 7450
White Oak Drive; thence northerly along the west property line of 7450 White
Oak Drive to the north property line of 7450 White Oak Drive; thence easterly
along the north property line of 7450 White Oak Drive to the centerline of
White Oak Drive; thence southerly along the centerline of White Oak Drive to
the intersection of the north rear property line of the lots on the north side
of North Burr Oak; thence easterly along the north rear property lines of the
lots on the north side of North Burr Oak to the centerline of SOM Center Road;
thence northerly along the centerline of SOM Center Road to its intersection
with the north property line of 7031 SOM Center Road; thence easterly along the
north property line of 7031 SOM Center Road to the east property line of 7031
SOM Center Road; thence southerly along the east property line of 7031 SOM
Center Road to the intersection with the north property line of 7041 SOM Center
Road; thence easterly along the north property line of 7041 SOM Center Road to
the east property line of 7041 SOM Center Road; thence southerly along the east
property line of 7041 SOM Center Road and along the east property line of the
lots on the east side of SOM Center Road to the intersection with the north
property line of PPN# 956-02-001; then easterly along the north property line
of PPN# 956-02-001 to the intersection with the west property line of 7070
Woodduck Court; thence southerly along the east property line of PPN# 956-02-
001 and continuing southerly along the east property line of 7135 SOM Center
Road (also known as the CEI right-of-way) to the south property line of 7135
SOM Center Road; then continuing southerly along the east property line of 7163
Southside Park Drive to the southern-most property line of PPN# 956-06-016;
thence easterly along the most southerly line of the PPN# 956-06-016 to the
northwest property corner of 7110 Witchhazel Lane; thence southerly along the
west property lines of the lots on the west side of Witchhazel Lane to the
southwest property corner of 7160 Witchhazel Lane; thence easterly, southerly
and easterly along the southerly property line of 7160 Witchhazel Lane,
crossing Witchhazel Lane and continuing easterly along the south property line
of 7155 Witchhazel Lane and the south property line of the lots on the south
side of Sedge Circle to the west property line of 7130 Liberty Road; thence
northerly along the west property lines of the lots on the west side of Liberty
Road to the northeast property corner of 35960 Spatterdock Lane; thence east
and northeast along the rear property line of the lots on the east side of
Spatterdock Lane and its northeasterly extension thereof to the centerline of
Liberty Road; thence northerly along the centerline of Liberty Road to the
extension of the north property line of 6885 Liberty Road; thence easterly
along the north lot of 6885 Liberty Road to the northeast corner of the
property at 6885 Liberty Road; thence southerly along the east lot line of 6885
Liberty Road to the intersection with the north property line of PPN# 955-28-
020; thence easterly along the north lot line of PPN# 955-28-020 to the west
property line of 36700 Aurora Road; thence southerly along the west property
line of 36700 Aurora Road to the intersection with the north property line of
6995 Woodlands Lane; thence easterly along the north lot line of 6995 Woodlands
Lane and continuing along the north lot line of the properties on the north
side of Woodlands Lane and continuing along its extension to the center line of
Aurora Road; thence southeasterly along the center line of Aurora Road to the
extension of the east property line of 37500 Aurora Road; thence south,
southwesterly, southeasterly, and southerly along the east property line of
37500 Aurora Road to the intersection with the northeast corner of the property
at 37505 Pettibone Road; thence southerly and easterly along the north property
line of 37505 Pettibone Road to the east property line of 37505 Pettibone Road;
thence southerly along the east lot line of 37505 Pettibone Road and along its
extension to the center line of Pettibone Road; thence easterly along the
centerline of Pettibone Road, crossing Aurora Road to its intersection with the
east City boundary line; thence southerly along the east City boundary line to
the southeast corner of the City boundary line and the place of beginning.
WARD 2: Beginning at the intersection of the west City boundary line with the
most northerly line of the CEI right-of-way between the Hunt Club and the
Liberty Hills subdivisions; thence easterly along the most northerly CEI right-
of-way to the west property line of 33439 Hanover Woods Trail; thence northerly
along the west property line of the lots on the west side of Hanover Woods
Trail to its intersection with the north property line of 33689 Hanover Woods
Trail; thence easterly along the north property line of the lots on the north
side of Hanover Woods Trail to the intersection with the west property line of
7036 SOM Center Road; thence northerly along the west property line of the lots
on the west side of SOM Center Road to the intersection with the north property
line of 33535 Arlesford Drive; thence westerly along the north property line of
the lots on the north side of Arlesford Drive to the southeast corner of the
property at 6975 Fox Hill Drive; thence northerly along the east property line
of the lots on the east side of Fox Hill Drive to the northeast corner of 6935
Fox Hill Drive; thence westerly along the north property line of 6935 Fox Hill
Drive and its extension to the centerline of Fox Hill Drive; thence northerly
along the centerline of Fox Hill Drive and continuing across Arthur Road to the
centerline of Solon Boulevard and continuing north along the centerline of
Solon Boulevard to the intersection with the extension of the north property
line of 32955 Arthur Road; thence easterly and northeasterly along the north
property line of the lots on the north side of Arthur Road to the northwest
corner of the property at 33425 Arthur Road; thence northeasterly, southerly,
easterly, and northerly along the north property line of 33425 Arthur Road to
the southwest corner of the lot at 6800 SOM Center Road; thence easterly to the
intersection with the west property line of 6826 SOM Center Road; thence south
along the west property line of the lots on the west side of SOM Center Road
and extending to the center line of Arthur Road; thence easterly along the
centerline of Arthur Road to the centerline of SOM Center Road; and its
extension to the centerline of SOM Center Road; thence northerly along the
centerline of SOM Center Road to the intersection of the north property line of
6881 SOM Center Road; thence easterly along the north property line of 6881 SOM
Center Road and easterly, southerly and easterly along the north rear property
lines of the lots on the north side of Ada Drive to the east property line of
35075 Ada Drive; thence southerly along the east property line of 35075 Ada
Drive and its extension over Ada Drive; thence southerly along the east
property line of 35050 Ada Drive and the east lot lines of the lots on the east
side of Navajo Trail to the southeast corner of PPN# 956-01-078; thence
westerly along the south property line of PPN# 956-01-078 and continuing
westerly along the south property lines of the lots on the south side of Navajo
Trail and continuing along the south property line of PPN# 956-01-007 to the
southeast corner of 7101 SOM Center Road; thence northerly, westerly, and
northerly along the east property line of the lots on the east side of SOM
Center Road to the intersection with the south property line of the property at
34160 Seminole Way; thence westerly along the north lot line of 7031 SOM Center
Road and its extension to the center line of SOM Center Road; and its extension
to the intersection of the most southerly line of the CEI right-of-way; thence
westerly along the most southerly line of the CEI right-of-way to the
centerline of SOM Center Road; thence southerly along the centerline of SOM
Center Road to the easterly extension of the north south property line of 33621
North Burr Oak Drive 7488 SOM Center Road; thence westerly along the south
property line of 7488 SOM Center Road and north property lines of the lots on
the north side of North Burr Oak Drive to the intersection of the centerline of
White Oak Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of White Oak Drive to
the north property line of 7450 White Oak Drive; thence westerly along the
north property line of 7450 White Oak Drive to the west property line of 7450
White Oak Drive; thence southerly along the west property line of 7450 White
Oak Drive to the north rear lot line of the lots on the north side of North
Burr Oak Drive; thence westerly along the north rear lot line of the lots on
the north side of North Burr Oak Drive to its intersection with the west City
boundary line; thence northerly, westerly, then northerly along the west City
boundary line to the most northerly line of the CEI right-of-way between the
Hunt Club and the Liberty Hills subdivisions and the place of beginning.
WARD 3: Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Pettibone Road with
the east City boundary line; thence northerly along the east City boundary line
to its intersection with the north City boundary line; thence westerly along
the north City boundary line to its intersection with the centerline of Liberty
Road; thence southerly along the centerline of Liberty Road to its intersection
with the centerline of Pettibone Bainbridge Road; thence westerly along the
centerline of Bainbridge Road to the intersection with the centerline of
Huntington Drive; thence southerly along the centerline of Huntington Drive to
the extension of the south property line of 35520 Bainbridge Road; thence
easterly along the south lot line of the properties on the south side of
Bainbridge Road and continuing along its extension to the intersection with the
west property line of 35650 Bainbridge Road; thence southerly along the west
property line of 35650 Bainbridge Road to the intersection with the south
property line at 35650 Bainbridge Road; thence easterly along the south lot
line of the lots on the south side of Bainbridge Road to the intersection with
the west property line of 36000 Bainbridge Road; thence southerly along the
west property line of 36000 Bainbridge Road and continuing on the west property
line of the lots on the west side of Liberty Road to the intersection with the
north property line of 6575 Woodbury Drive; thence easterly along the north lot
line of the properties on the north side of Woodbury Drive to the northwest
corner of the property at 6550 Liberty Road; thence southerly along the west
property line of lots on the west side of Liberty Road and continuing along the
extension of the west property line of 6560 Liberty Road to the centerline of
Woodbury Drive; thence easterly along the centerline of Woodbury Drive to the
centerline of Liberty Road; thence southerly along the centerline of Liberty
Road, crossing Aurora Road and continuing along the centerline of Liberty Road
until the intersection with the extension of the north property line at 6885
Liberty Road; thence easterly along the north lot line of 6885 Liberty Road to
the northeast corner of the property at 6885 Liberty Road; thence southerly
along the east lot line of 6885 Liberty Road to the intersection with the north
property line of PPN# 955-28-020; thence easterly along the north lot line of
PPN# 955-28-020 to the west property line of 36700 Aurora Road; thence
southerly along the west property line of 36700 Aurora Road to the intersection
with the north property line of 6995 Woodlands Lane; thence easterly along the
north lot line of 6995 Woodlands Lane and continuing along the north lot line
of the properties on the north side of Woodlands Lane and continuing along its
extension to the center line of Aurora Road; thence southeasterly along the
center line of Aurora Road to the extension of the east property line of 37500
Aurora Road; thence south, southwesterly, southeasterly, and southerly along
the east property line of 37500 Aurora Road to the intersection with the
northeast corner of the property at 37505 Pettibone Road; thence southerly and
easterly along the north property line of 37505 Pettibone Road to the east
property line of 37505 Pettibone Road; thence southerly along the east lot line
of 37505 Pettibone Road and along its extension to the center line of Pettibone
Road; thence easterly along the centerline of Pettibone Road, crossing Aurora
Road, to its intersection with the east City boundary line and the place of
beginning.
WARD 4: Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of SOM Center Road with
the centerline of relocated U.S. Route 422; thence southerly along the
centerline of SOM Center Road to its intersection with the extension of the
south lot line of 34200 Bainbridge Road; thence southeasterly along the south
property line of 34200 Bainbridge Road and continuing along the south property
line of the lots on the south side of Bainbridge Road to the southeast corner
of the property at 34830 Bainbridge Road; thence northerly along the east
property line of 34830 Bainbridge Road to the southwest corner of 34900
Bainbridge Road; thence easterly along the south lot line of 34900 Bainbridge
Road and continuing along the south property line of the lots on the south side
of Bainbridge Road to the southwest corner of the property at 6414 Woodbury
Drive; thence northerly along the west property line of 6414 Woodbury Drive and
continuing along the west lot line of the properties on the west side of
Woodbury Drive to the southwest corner of the property at 35200 Bainbridge
Road; thence easterly along the south lot line of 35200 Bainbridge Road and
continuing along the south lot line of the properties on the south side of
Bainbridge Road and continuing along its extension to the centerline of
Huntington Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of Huntington Drive to
the centerline of Bainbridge Road; thence easterly along the center line of
Bainbridge Road to its intersection with the centerline of Liberty Road; thence
northerly along the centerline of Liberty Road to its intersection with the
north City boundary line; thence westerly along the north City boundary line to
its intersection with the northeast City boundary line; thence northerly along
the northeast City boundary line to its intersection with the north City
boundary line; thence westerly along the north City boundary line to its
intersection with the east property line of the lot at 5001 Lansdowne Drive;
thence southerly along the east property lines of the lots on the east side of
Lansdowne Drive to the north property line of 32165 Burlwood Drive; thence
westerly along the north property lines of the lots on the north side of
Burlwood Drive to the east property line of 5203 Cheswick Drive; thence
southerly along the east property lines of the lots on the east side of
Cheswick Drive to the northeast corner of 5295 Fairfield Oval; thence westerly
along the north property line of 5295 Fairfield Oval and continuing westerly
along the north property lines of the lots on the north side of Fairfield Oval
to the northwest corner of 5235 Fairfield Oval; thence southerly along the west
property line of 5235 Fairfield Oval and continuing southerly along the west
property line of the lots on the west side of the cul-de-sac on Fairfield Oval
to the southwest corner of the property at 5240 Fairfield Oval; thence easterly
along the south property line of 5240 Fairfield Oval and continuing easterly
along the south property line of the lots on the south side of Fairfield Oval,
crossing Fairfield Oval and continuing along the south property line of 5315
Fairfield Oval to intersection with the west property line of 31760 Woodsdale
Lane; thence southerly along the west property line of 31760 Woodsdale Lane and
continuing along its extension across Hawthorn Parkway to the south property
line on the Cleveland Metroparks property; thence easterly along the south
property line of the Cleveland Metroparks property to the northeast corner of
PPN# 951-39-065; thence southerly along the east property line of PPN# 951-39-
065 to the intersection with the north property line of PPN# 951-39-066; thence
westerly along the north lot line of PPN# 951-39-066 to the northwest corner of
the property; thence southerly along the west property line of PPN# 951-39-066
to the southwest corner of the property; thence easterly along the south
property line of PPN# 951-39-066 to the northeast corner of 5425 Ridge Lane;
and its extension over the Cleveland Metropolitan Park District parcel,
continuing south to the north property line of 31775 Birch Circle; thence east
along the north property line to the northeast property corner of 31775 Birch
Circle; thence south along the east property line of 31775 Birch Circle; thence
easterly along the north property line of 5425 Ridge Lane to the intersection
with the east property line of 5425 Ridge Lane; thence southerly along the east
property lines of the lots on the east side of Ridge Lane to its intersection
with the centerline of Cannon Road; thence easterly along the centerline of
Cannon Road to the west property line of 31950 Cannon Road; thence southerly
along the west property line of 31950 Cannon Road and the west property lines
of the lots on the cul-de-sac of Tracy Lane to the most south property line of
31980 Tracy Lane; thence easterly along the south property lines of Tracy Lane,
Cannon Road, and High Point Drive and 5540 SOM Center Road to the intersection
with the centerline of SOM Center Road; thence southerly along the centerline
of SOM Center Road to its intersection with relocated U.S. Route 422 and the
place of beginning.
WARD 5: Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Aurora Road and the
centerline of Cochran Road thence southerly along the centerline of Cochran
Road to its intersection with the centerline of Solon Road thence westerly
along the centerline of Solon Road to the intersection with the extension of
the west property line at 28800 Solon Road; thence southerly along with west
property line of 28800 Solon Road to the intersection with the north property
line of PPN# 953-14-001, thence westerly along the north property line of PPN#
953-14-001 to the intersection with the east lot line of the Cleveland
Metroparks property at 27570 Solon Road; thence southerly along the east
property line of 27570 Solon Road to the intersection with the south city
boundary line; thence westerly along the south City boundary line to the west
City boundary line located at the center line of Richmond Road; of the west
City boundary line, thence northerly along the west City boundary line to the
intersection of the north City boundary line thence easterly along the north
City boundary line to its intersection with the east property line of 5001
Lansdowne Drive, thence southerly along the east property lines of the lots on
the east side of Lansdowne Drive to the north property line of 32165 Burlwood
Drive; thence westerly along the north property lines of the lots on the north
side of Burlwood Drive to the east property line of 5203 Cheswick Drive; thence
southerly along the east property lines of the lots on the east side of
Cheswick Drive, to the northeast corner of 5295 Fairfield Oval; thence westerly
along the north property line of 5295 Fairfield Oval and continuing westerly
along the north property lines of the lots on the north side of Fairfield Oval
to the northwest corner of 5235 Fairfield Oval; thence southerly along the west
property line of 5235 Fairfield Oval and continuing southerly along the west
property line of the lots on the west side of the cul-de-sac on Fairfield Oval
to the southwest corner of the property at 5240 Fairfield Oval; thence easterly
along the south property line of 5240 Fairfield Oval and continuing easterly
along the south property line of the lots on the south side of Fairfield Oval,
crossing Fairfield Oval and continuing along the south property line of 5315
Fairfield Oval to intersection with the west property line of 31760 Woodsdale
Lane; thence southerly along the west property line of 31760 Woodsdale Lane and
continuing along its extension across Hawthorn Parkway to the south property
line on the Cleveland Metroparks property; thence easterly along the south
property line of the Cleveland Metroparks property to the northeast corner of
PPN# 951-39-065; thence southerly along the east property line of PPN# 951-39-
065 to the intersection with the north property line of PPN# 951-39-066; thence
westerly along the north lot line of PPN# 951-39-066 to the northwest corner of
the property; thence southerly along the west property line of PPN# 951-39-066
to the southwest corner of the property; thence easterly along the south
property line of PPN# 951-39-066 to the northeast corner of 5425 Ridge Lane;
and its extension over the Cleveland Metropolitan Park District parcel,
continuing south to the north property line of 31775 Birch Circle; then east
along the north property line of 31775 Birch Circle to the northeast property
corner of 31775 Birch Circle; thence south along the east property line of
31775 Birch Circle thence easterly along the north property line of 5425 Ridge
Lane to the intersection with the east property line of 5425 Ridge Lane, thence
southerly along the east property lines of the lots on the east side of Ridge
Lane to its intersection with the centerline of Cannon Road; thence easterly
along the centerline of Cannon Road to the intersection of the west property
line of 31950 Cannon Road; thence southerly along the east property lines of
the lots on the east side of Janet Boulevard and the west property line of
31975 Haverhill and its extension over Farm Drive to the intersection with the
east property line of 31900 Farm Drive; thence southerly along the east lot
line of 31900 Farm Drive to the southeast property corner of 31900 Farm Drive;
thence westerly along the rear lot lines of the lots on the south side of Farm
Drive to its intersection with the north east property corner of 5835 Elm Hill
Drive; thence southerly along the east property lines of the lots on the east
side of Elm Hill Drive and its extension along the east property line of 5935
Stephanie Lane to its intersection of relocated U.S. Route 422; thence westerly
along the centerline of relocated U.S. Route 422 to its intersection with the
extension of the east property line of 30003 Bainbridge Road (951-33-014
parcel); thence southerly along the east property line of 30003 Bainbridge Road
and its extension to the intersection with the centerline of Bainbridge Road;
thence easterly along the centerline of Bainbridge Road to the intersection
with the extension of the east property line of 30000 Bainbridge Road; thence
southerly along the east property line of 30000 Bainbridge Road to the
intersection of the north property line centerline of the Erie Lackawanna
Railroad; thence westerly along the north property line centerline of the Erie
Lackawanna Railroad to its intersection with the centerline of relocated Harper
Road; thence southerly along the centerline of relocated Harper Road to the
place of beginning.
WARD 6: Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Cochran Road and the
centerline of Solon Road; thence easterly along the centerline of Solon Road to
the intersection of the centerline of Aurora Road; thence southerly and
easterly along the centerline of Aurora Road to the intersection of the
centerline of Solon Boulevard; thence southerly along the centerline of Solon
Boulevard to the intersection of the centerline of Linden Drive; thence
easterly along the centerline of Linden Drive to the intersection of the
centerline of SOM Center Road; thence southerly along the centerline of SOM
Center Road to the intersection with the extension of the north property line
of 6881 SOM Center Road; thence easterly along the north property line of 6881
SOM Center Road and easterly, southerly and easterly along the north rear
property lines of the lots on the north side of Ada Drive to the east property
line of 35075 Ada Drive; thence southerly along the east property line of 35075
Ada Drive and its extension over Ada Drive; thence southerly along the east
property line of 35050 Ada Drive and the rear east lot line of lots on the east
side of Navajo Trail and its extension across Spatterdock Lane and along the
west property line of 34940 Spatterdock Lane and continuing southerly along the
east property line of 7135 SOM Center Road (also known as the CEI right-of-way)
to the south property line of the CEI right-of-way; then continuing southerly
along the east property line of 7163 Southside Park Drive to the southern-most
property line of the PPN# 956-06-016; and its extension to the intersection of
the most southerly line of the CEI right-of-way; thence easterly along the most
southerly line of the CEI right-of-way PPN# 956-06-016 to the northwesterly
property corner of 7110 Witchhazel Lane; thence southerly along the west
property lines of the lots on the west side of Witchhazel Lane to the southwest
property corner of 7160 Witchhazel Lane thence easterly, southerly and easterly
along the southerly property line of 7160 Witchhazel Lane, crossing Witchhazel
Lane and to the south property line of 7155 Witchhazel Lane; thence continuing
easterly along the south property line of 7155 Witchhazel Lane and the south
property line of the lots on the south side of Sedge Circle to the northwest
property line corner of 7130 Liberty Road; thence northerly along the west rear
property line of the lots on the west side of Liberty Road to the northeast
property corner of 35960 Spatterdock Lane; thence east and northeast along the
rear property line of the lots on the east side of Spatterdock Lane and its
northeasterly extension thereof to the centerline of Liberty Road; thence
northerly along the centerline of Liberty Road to its intersection with the
extension of the centerline of Woodbury Drive; thence westerly along the
centerline of Woodbury Drive to the intersection with the extension of the west
lot line of 6560 Liberty Road; thence northerly along the rear west lot lines
of the properties on the west side of Liberty Road to the northwest corner of
the property at 6550 Liberty Road; thence westerly along the north lot line of
the lots on the north side of Woodbury Drive to the southwest property corner
of 6516 Liberty Road; thence northerly along the rear west lot line of the lots
on the west side of Liberty Road to the southeast corner of 35900 Bainbridge
Road; thence westerly along the south lot line of the properties on the south
side of Bainbridge Road to the southwest corner of 35650 Bainbridge Road;
thence northerly along the west property line of 35650 Bainbridge Road to the
intersection with the extension of the south property line of 35600 Bainbridge
Road; thence westerly across 35630 Bainbridge Road along the extension of the
south property line of 35600 Bainbridge Road and continuing westerly along the
south lot line of the properties on the south side of Bainbridge Road across
Huntington Drive and continuing along the south property line of the lots on
the south side of Bainbridge Road to the northwest corner of 6374 Woodbury
Drive; thence southerly along the west lot line of the properties on the west
side of Woodbury Drive to the intersection with the southwest corner of 6414
Woodbury Drive; thence westerly along the south property line of the lots on
the south side of Bainbridge Road to the intersection with the east property
line of 34830 Bainbridge Road; thence southerly along the east property line of
34830 Bainbridge Road to the southeast corner of the property at 34830
Bainbridge Road; thence northwesterly along the south property line of 34830
Bainbridge Road and the south property line of the lots on the south side of
Bainbridge Road and extending to Bainbridge Road; thence westerly along the
centerline of Bainbridge Road to its intersection with the centerline of SOM
Center Road; thence northerly along the centerline of SOM Center Road to the
intersection with the extension of the south property line of 5540 SOM Center
Road; thence westerly along the south lot lines of 5540 SOM Center Road, High
Point Drive, Cannon Road and Tracy Lane to the intersection of the east
property line of 5625 Janet Boulevard, thence southerly along the east property
lines of the lots on the east side of Janet Boulevard and along the west
property line of 31975 Haverhill and its extension over Farm Drive to the
intersection with the east property line of 31900 Farm Drive; thence southerly
along the east lot line of 31900 Farm Drive to the southeast property line of
31900 Farm Drive; thence westerly along the rear lot lines of the lots on the
south side of Farm Drive to its intersection with the northeast property corner
of 5835 Elm Hill Drive; thence southerly along the east property lines of the
lots on the east side of Elm Hill Drive and its extension along the east
property line of 5935 Stephanie Lane to its intersection of relocated U.S.
Route 422; thence westerly along the centerline of relocated U.S. Route 422 to
its intersection with the extension of the east property line of 30003
Bainbridge Road (951-33-014 parcel); thence southerly along the east property
line of 30003 Bainbridge Road and its extension to its intersection with the
centerline of Bainbridge Road, thence easterly along the centerline of
Bainbridge Road to the intersection with the extension of the east property
line of 30000 Bainbridge Road; thence southerly along the east property line of
30000 Bainbridge Road to the intersection of the north property line centerline
of the Erie Lackawanna Railroad; thence westerly along the north property line
centerline of the Erie Lackawanna Railroad to its intersection with the
centerline of relocated Harper Road; thence southerly along the centerline of
relocated Harper Road to the intersection of the centerline of Cochran Road to
the place of beginning.
WARD 7: Beginning at the intersection of the southwest City boundary line and
the most northerly line of the CEI right-of-way between the Hunt Club and
Liberty Hills subdivisions; thence westerly along the most northerly line of
the CEI right-of-way to the west City boundary line; thence northerly along the
west City boundary line to its intersection with the south property line of
6951 Cochran Road, also being the south City boundary line; thence westerly
along the south property line of 6951 Cochran Road and the south City boundary
line to its intersection with the centerline of Cochran Road; thence southerly
along the centerline of Cochran Road to the south City boundary line; thence
westerly along the south City boundary line to the southwest property corner of
28600 Fountain Parkway, also being a southwest corner of the City boundary
line; thence northwesterly along the southwesterly City boundary line, also
being the west property lines of 28600 and 28625 Fountain Parkway to its
intersection with the west City boundary line; thence northerly along the west
City boundary line to its intersection with the south City boundary line, also
being the southerly line of the Cleveland Metropolitan Park District parcel;
thence northerly along the east property line of the Cleveland Metropolitan
Park District parcel to the intersection with the north property line of PPN#
953-14-001; thence easterly along the north property line of PPN# 953-14-001 to
the southwest corner of 28800 Solon Road; thence northerly along the west
property line of 28800 Solon Road and its extension to the centerline of Solon
Road, thence westerly along the south City boundary line to its intersection
with the centerline of Richmond Road, also being the west City boundary line;
thence northerly along the west City boundary line and the centerline of
Richmond Road to its intersection with the centerline of Solon Road; thence
easterly along the centerline of Solon Road to its intersection with the
centerline of Aurora Road; thence southerly along the centerline of Aurora Road
to its intersection with the centerline of Solon Boulevard; thence southerly
along the centerline of Solon Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline
of Linden Drive; thence easterly along the centerline of Linden Drive to its
intersection with the centerline of SOM Center Road; thence southerly along the
centerline of SOM Center Road to its intersection with the centerline of Arthur
Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Arthur Road to the extension of
the west property line of the lots on the west side of SOM Center Road; thence
northerly along the west rear lot line of the properties on the west side of
SOM Center Road to the northeast corner of 33425 Arthur Road; thence westerly,
southerly, westerly, northerly, and southwesterly along the north property line
of 33425 Arthur Road; thence southwesterly along the north property line of the
lots on the north side of Arthur Road and along the extension of the north
property line of 32955 Arthur Road to the intersection with the centerline of
Solon Boulevard; thence southwesterly along the centerline of Solon Boulevard,
across Arthur Road and continuing southerly along the centerline of Fox Hill
Drive to the intersection with the extension of the south lot line of 32850
Arthur Road; thence easterly along the south lot lines of 32850 Arthur Road and
32900 Arthur Road to the intersection with the west property line of 32950
Arthur Road; thence southerly along the west property line of 32950 Arthur Road
to the southwest property corner of 32950 Arthur Road; thence easterly along
the rear south lot line of the properties on the south side of Arthur Road to
the northeast corner of 33535 Arlesford Drive; thence southerly along the east
property lines of the properties on the cul-de-sac of Arlesford Drive and
continuing southerly along the east property line of the lots on the cul-de-sac
of Outley Park Drive to the intersection with the north property line at 33789
Hanover Woods Trail; the easterly extension of the north property line of 33989
Hanover Woods Trail; thence westerly along the north property line of the lots
on the north side of Hanover Woods Trail to its intersection with the west
property line of 33689 Hanover Woods Trail; thence southerly along the west
property line of the lots on the west side of Hanover Woods Trail to the most
northerly line of the CEI right-of-way; thence westerly along the most
northerly line of the CEI right-of-way to the place of beginning.
(Ord. 2000-229, passed 9-5-2000; Ord. 2002-160, passed 8-19-2002; Ord. 2011-
153, passed 9-19-2011; Ord. 2022-144, passed 7-18-2022)
CHAPTER 208: OPEN MEETINGS
Section
   
208.01   Meetings to be open to public
   
208.02   Public notification
   
208.03   Personal notification
   
208.04   Minutes of meetings
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Council meetings, see
Charter Art. IV, § 4; §§
220.01 through
220.18
   Disturbing lawful meetings, see §
648.05
   Meetings of the City Planning Commission, see §
1202.02
   Meetings of the Records Commission, see §
282.01
   Open meetings, see R.C. § 121.22
   Open meetings with executive session authorization, see
Charter Art. XIII, § 5
§ 208.01 MEETINGS TO BE OPEN TO PUBLIC.
   (a)   Unless otherwise provided in the Codified Ordinances, all meetings of
Council, Council committees, commissions, boards, citizen advisory committees
to Council and other similar public bodies of the city, shall be held at the
City Hall, or any other place that may be designated in the published agenda.
   (b)   All meetings of the described public bodies shall be open to the
public, unless an executive session is expressly authorized under the
applicable provisions of state law. Nothing herein contained shall mandate that
any public body permit public participation in such open meetings, unless
specifically required by the provisions of the Charter or these Codified
Ordinances.
(Ord. 1975-174, passed 1-5-1976)
§ 208.02 PUBLIC NOTIFICATION.
   (a)   Regular meetings. The time and place of all regular meetings of
Council, Council committees, commissions, boards, citizen advisory committees
to Council and other similar public bodies of the city, shall be noted in a
calendar of monthly meetings. This calendar shall be posted at the places
specified in §
222.02.
   (b)   Special meetings. Notification of any special meeting of Council,
Council committees, commissions, boards, citizen advisory committees to Council
and other similar public bodies of the city, shall be made to any news media
requesting such notification 24 hours prior to the time of such meetings. This
notification shall include the time, place and purpose of the special meeting,
and such notification may be made by telephone.
   (c)   Emergency meetings. In the event of an emergency meeting, notice of
such emergency meeting shall be communicated to the news media that have
requested notification of the time, place and purpose of the emergency meeting.
(Ord. 1975-174, passed 1-5-1976)
§ 208.03 PERSONAL NOTIFICATION.
   (a)   Any person, organization or group of persons is entitled to mail
notice of the calendar of monthly meetings. To obtain this notice, such persons
are required to fill out a form provided by the Clerk of Council for such
purposes and provide self-addressed, stamped envelopes for the number of
calendars requested in addition to the regular fee of $0.20 duplicating cost
for the reproduction of documents.
   (b)   Any requesting person, organization or group of persons shall receive
advance notice of all meetings at which any specific type of public business
will be discussed and/or acted upon. To obtain this notice, such persons are
required to fill out a form provided by the Clerk of Council for such purposes,
and provide self-addressed, stamped envelopes for the number of notifications
requested in addition to the regular fee of $0.20 duplication cost for the
reproduction of documents.
§ 208.04 MINUTES OF MEETINGS.
   (a)   Minutes. Minutes of all regular and special meetings of Council,
Council committees, commissions, boards, citizen advisory committees and the
like shall promptly be recorded in writing and open to the public for
inspection. Minutes of executive sessions of public bodies need only reflect
the general subject matter of discussion in such executive sessions.
   (b)   Location of minute books. The Clerk of Council shall keep a minute
book for each public body. The minute books shall contain the minutes of all
meetings of each public body. The public may inspect the minute books at all
reasonable times.
(Ord. 1975-174, passed 1-5-1976)
CHAPTER 210: PURCHASING AND CONTRACTS
Section
   
210.01   Master repurchase agreements
   
210.02   Use of recyclable paper; preference to bids
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Cooperative purchasing, see §
230.06
   Infrastructure and building contracts, see §
234.04
   Participation in Ohio Department of Transportation contracts, see §
230.09
   Purchase of insurance, see §
234.02
   Purchasing Agent, see §
234.03
   Unlawful interest in contracts, see §
606.17
§ 210.01 MASTER REPURCHASE AGREEMENTS.
   The Mayor and Director of Finance are hereby authorized and directed to
enter into repurchase agreements with various brokerage institutions so long as
the agreements are in the form of a PSA Master Repurchase Agreement. Prior to
entering into any such agreement, the Mayor and Director of Finance shall first
notify the Finance Committee of their intent to enter into such agreement.
(Res. 1990-33, passed 2-19-1990)
§ 210.02 USE OF RECYCLABLE PAPER; PREFERENCE TO BIDS.
   (a)   Council hereby declares the intent of the city to use recyclable paper
whenever possible.
   (b)   Council will give preference to bids as much as 10% over the lowest
bid amount if recyclable paper is being used.
(Res. 1990-36, passed 2-19-1990)
CHAPTER 212: NAMING RIGHTS PROCEDURE POLICY
Section
   
212.01   Purpose
   
212.02   General guidelines
   
212.03   Standards for naming of city property, spaces and programs
   
212.04   Signage
   
212.05   Process for naming city property, spaces or programs
   
212.06   Amendments
§ 212.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this policy is to establish the authority and process for
naming and renaming city property, spaces and programs. Specific recognition
may be given to donors by way of naming an interior space, exterior space,
building, furnishing or fixture, placement of name on a donor wall or other
item that commemorate a gift.
(Ord. 2022-220, passed 12-5-2022)
§ 212.02 GENERAL GUIDELINES.
   (a)   Solon City Council shall have the authority to designate a certain
name, and approve the naming of, city property.
   (b)   The Mayor and City Council consider the naming of city property,
spaces and programs in honor or in memory of a living or deceased individual,
event, corporation, foundation or organization to be one of the highest
distinctions the city can bestow.
   (c)   No name shall be given to any public property that may limit its use.
   (d)   The naming of public property shall not provide a property right to
the individual, corporation or organization recognized in the name, nor to the
donor of the property or funds in the event the named property is donated or
purchased with funds designated for the acquisition of certain property by the
city.
   (e)   There shall be no assumption of right for a private donor to name a
public property because the property was a gift to the city unless such right
is expressly agreed upon in an agreement between the donor and the city.
   (f)   A developer may name the residential subdivision plats and streets if
the names are in compliance with the provisions of the Ohio Revised Code and
Solon Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 2022-220, passed 12-5-2022)
§ 212.03 STANDARDS FOR NAMING OF CITY PROPERTY, SPACES AND PROGRAMS.
   (a)   Community standards. The naming of city property, space or program
shall be considered by the members of City Council and shall fulfill at least
one of the following community standards for recognition:
      (1)   A person, living or deceased, or group is to be recognized by the
city for an action of historical or cultural significance or demonstrated
excellence to the City of Solon, the State of Ohio, the United States or the
world.
      (2)   A person, living or deceased, was associated with the City of Solon
as either a resident, elected official, or volunteer in the city community, and
was instrumental in furthering the interests of the city through leadership or
civic responsibility, and engaged in activities beneficial to the city.
      (3)   The person, living or deceased, risked their life to save or
protect others.
      (4)   Recognition of a certain person, group or event is consistent with
the public policy of the city.
      (5)   The requirements of philanthropic considerations, as discussed in
division (b) of this section, have been met and merit recognition.
   (b)   Philanthropic contractual agreements and plans. The naming of city
property, space or program may be considered as a part of a contractual
agreement between the city and a party for the provision of significant funding
toward the cost of renovation of city property or the construction of public
property and shall be referred to as a philanthropic contractual agreement.
Significant funding provided to the city under a philanthropic contractual
agreement shall be broadly construed but shall include substantial
contributions that completely or significantly enable a city property
renovation or construction project to occur. Significant funding under this
section shall include, but not be limited to, monetary donations, donations of
real property and sponsorship agreements. The naming of city property, space,
or program as a condition of a philanthropic contractual agreement shall be
reviewed as a part of any city project and shall be exempt from the general
process requirements of §
212.05. The Mayor shall review and present any proposal for a philanthropic
contractual agreement to City Council for its review and approval, and a
philanthropic contractual agreement shall not be effective without the approval
of City Council.
      (1)   City property, spaces or programs may be named after an individual,
group, entity or event pursuant to the terms and conditions of a philanthropic
contractual agreement meeting the requirements of this division (b) so long as
the philanthropic contract agreement provides the term, or length of time, the
city property, space or program shall hold the name specified, as well as one
of the following:
         A.   Real property donated to the city is, or shall be, deeded to the
city, and such donation or transfer of property is not required by a separate
agreement, or by reason of any ordinance, law or regulation.
         B.   The amount of the contribution of capital funding toward the city
project, by way of a donation, a series of donations, or sponsorship agreement,
is clearly specified in the philanthropic contractual agreement, and such
donation or sponsorship agreement is not required by a separate agreement, or
by reason of any ordinance, law or regulation.
      (2)   The city may establish philanthropic naming rights plans, approved
by City Council, for components of city facilities, including but not limited
to rooms within a building, athletic fields, gardens, playgrounds, bricks for a
path, walkway or building, subject to the following:
         A.   Assets for naming opportunities may be offered and may be valued
and allocated as donations towards capital costs, operating costs or
maintenance costs, and the same shall be determined based on the desirability
or marketability of the project and naming opportunity.
         B.   City Council shall approve the comprehensive naming rights plan
for a certain city project or facility, as the case may be, listing the naming
rights offered by the city in exchange for certain levels or values of funding
donated to the city.
         C.   Any naming rights plan or agreement enter into pursuant to this
subsection shall be consistent with this Policy.
   (c)   Limitations and restrictions on the naming of city property, spaces
and program.
      (1)   Naming rights may be approved by City Council for a specific term,
which may not be longer than the useful life of the property, space or program.
      (2)   Names that are contrary to public policy, such as discriminatory or
derogatory names, will not be considered by the Mayor or City Council.
      (3)   The receipt of a donation in exchange for the naming of city
property, space or program, shall be consistent with the public policy.
      (4)   The approval of naming rights for city property, spaces or programs
pursuant this Policy shall not entitle the naming person or entity, or donor,
to any preferential treatment by the city and all terms and conditions of
receipt by the city of a donation or sponsorship in exchange of the naming of
certain city property, space or program shall be contained within the agreement
between the parties.
(Ord. 2022-220, passed 12-5-2022)
§ 212.04 SIGNAGE.
   (a)   A sign or plaque that explains the significance of the name of city
property, space or program, so named pursuant to the requirements of this
Policy, may be placed on the site of the property, space or program.
   (b)   All signs or plaques placed on or at city property shall comply with
all city ordinances and requirements.
(Ord. 2022-220, passed 12-5-2022)
§ 212.05 PROCESS FOR NAMING CITY PROPERTY, SPACES OR PROGRAMS.
   (a)   In naming a city property, space or program the following process
shall be followed:
      (1)   The requesting party shall submit an application or proposal to the
Mayor that fulfills the requirements of §
212.03. The application or proposal shall specify the term, or length of time,
the city property, space or program shall have the proposed name. The Mayor
shall review the application or proposal and forward it to City Council with a
recommendation for consideration at the next most convenient Council meeting.
      (2)   Upon notice and review of the application or proposal and the
recommendation of the Mayor, City Council will, by majority vote, decide
whether to forward the application or proposal to an appropriate committee of
Council, to take no further action on the request, or to act on the application
or proposal immediately. Approval of any application or proposal shall only be
achieved by a majority vote of City Council members approving the application
or proposal to name a city property, space or program.
      (3)   If, under division (a)(2) of this section, City Council forwards
the application or proposal to a committee of Council, the following shall
apply:
         A.   The committee may consult with or obtain the agreement of the
parties involved in the naming of city property, space or program such as the
individual, or next of kin in the case of a deceased individual, or the
authorized representative of an entity, group or organization.
         B.   The committee must reach a decision and recommendation for naming
within 90 days of City Council's transfer of the matter to the committee, or
within such time provide notice to City Council of the committee's need for
additional time.
         C.   City Council shall review the recommendation of the committee and
determine, by majority vote, whether to approve the application or proposal.
      (4)   Approved applications, or proposals, shall be kept on file with the
Clerk of Council as a permanent record.
   (b)   The size and design of any signs or plaques associated with the naming
of city property, spaces or programs pursuant to this Policy shall comply with
city codes and ordinances and, if applicable, must be approved by the
appropriate city official, committee or City Council.
   (c)   It shall be the intent of this Policy that the naming of city
property, spaces or programs pursuant to this Policy shall be for a specific
term, or length of time, so specified in the application or proposal approved
by City Council. If City Council shall determine that renaming city property,
space or program, prior to the expiration of the term of the then present name
of the property, space or program so designated pursuant to City Council
approval, is in the best interest of the city, the following process and
considerations shall be followed:
      (1)   Renaming of city property, space or program, when such is already
named for a person, group, event or entity, shall only be undertaken when such
person, group, event or entity for whom the name so recognizes is determined to
be disreputable, immoral or otherwise undeserving of the honor of recognition
in or on city property.
      (2)   Honorary dedications may be included and added as a secondary name
to city property, space or program, rather than renaming the same, as long as
the second name complements the existing name of such city property, space or
program. It such case, the naming process of this section shall be followed to
add a secondary name or dedication.
(Ord. 2022-220, passed 12-5-2022)
§ 212.06 AMENDMENTS.
   The guidelines, policy and procedure of this Policy shall be amended as
necessary with the approval of City Council.
(Ord. 2022-220, passed 12-5-2022)
TITLE FOUR - LEGISLATION
            Chap.
220.   Council
            Chap.
222.   Ordinances and Resolutions
CHAPTER 220: COUNCIL
Section
   
220.01   Regular meetings
   
220.02   Special meetings
   
220.03   Rules of order
   
220.04   Compensation of Council members and Vice-Mayor
   
220.05   Expense accounts
   
220.06   Standing committees
   
220.07   Speaking time limitations
   
220.08   Information required of speakers
   
220.09   Roll call
   
220.10   Preparation of ordinances and resolutions; establishment of agenda
   
220.105   Consent agenda
   
220.11   Referral of legislation to committees
   
220.12   Industrial revenue bond financing
   
220.13   Vice-Mayor may comment
   
220.14   Smoking prohibited in chambers (Repealed)
   
220.15   Automatic rejection of legislation
   
220.16   Clerk of Council
   
220.17   Assistant to the Clerk of Council
   
220.18   City Council member liaisons
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Authority concerning Subdivision Regulations, see §
1246.01
   Council generally, see
Charter Art. IV
   Report of building inspections to, see §
1420.09
   Traffic control powers, see §
406.02
§ 220.01 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   The regular meetings of Council shall be held on the first and third Mondays
of each month with caucus at 7:00 p.m., or at an earlier time if so determined
by the Vice-Mayor, in the Caucus Chambers and meetings at 7:30 p.m. in the
Council Chamber at City Hall.
(Ord. 1992-26, passed 2-17-1992; Ord. 2004-225, passed 11-15-2004)
§ 220.02 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   The Mayor, or any three members of Council, may call special meetings upon
at least 12 hours’ notice to each member of Council, served personally or left
at his or her usual place of residence.
(Ord. 1964-131, passed 8-17-1964)
§ 220.03 RULES OF ORDER.
   Council’s deliberations and proceedings in meeting, except as may be
specifically provided for by ordinance, resolution or statute, shall be
governed and controlled in accordance with Robert’s Rules of Order, Newly
Revised, or as the same may be amended or revised.
(Ord. 1978-18, passed 2-21-1978)
§ 220.04 COMPENSATION OF COUNCIL MEMBERS AND VICE-MAYOR.
   The compensation of each member of the Council shall be $11,877.32 per year
commencing December 1, 2009, except that the compensation of the Council’s
representative to the Planning Commission shall be $12,773.54 per year
commencing December 1, 2009, and except that the compensation of the Vice-Mayor
shall be $13,162.50 per year commencing December 1, 2009.
(Ord. 2000-231, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2006-53, passed 5-15-2006)
§ 220.05 EXPENSE ACCOUNTS.
   In addition to the compensation provided for in §
220.04, each member of Council shall receive reimbursement for expenses
incurred in the conducting of city business in a sum not to exceed $1,000 per
year, beginning with the term commencing December 1, 1995, except that a member
of Council may be reimbursed for such expenses in excess of the sum of $1,000
per year when such reimbursement is authorized by a motion of Council, and
except, further, that a member of Council may be reimbursed up to an additional
sum of $1,000 for the cost of printing and mailing ward newsletters. Prior to
the payment of any expense, the member of Council shall furnish the Director of
Finance an accounting of money so spent, which may include the expense of the
use of a personal automobile on official business at the rate provided in §
260.11.
(Ord. 1996-8, passed 2-5-1996)
§ 220.06 STANDING COMMITTEES.
   (a)   Established. At the first meeting of Council in December of each odd-
numbered year, or as soon thereafter as may be practicable, the Mayor shall
appoint, subject to confirmation of Council, the following standing committees.
      (1)   Finance. The Finance Committee shall consist of three members of
Council. The Finance Committee shall be responsible for all financial and
money-related issues within the city.
      (2)   Public Works. The Public Works Committee shall consist of three
members of Council. The responsibilities of the Public Works Committee shall be
oversight of the Service Department, the Wastewater Treatment Plant, roads,
sewers (Stormwater Task Force), solid waste and sludge disposal and landfill
closure/methane gas.
      (3)   Safety and Public Properties. The Safety and Public Properties
Committee shall consist of three members of Council. The responsibilities of
the Safety and Public Properties Committee shall be oversight over all police
and fire issues, traffic issues (Traffic Safety Task Force), subdivision and
traffic signal devices, city land issues, city building projects and
development concepts and building maintenance.
   (b)   Vice-Mayor. The Vice-Mayor will serve as Council’s coordinator (or
whip) to help direct legislation to the proper committee and to facilitate the
movement of legislation through the committee process.
   (c)   Terms of committee members. Members of the committees shall serve for
two years during their terms as Council members. No Council member shall serve
on any committee beyond the term for which he or she was elected. The Mayor
shall appoint, subject to confirmation, new committees in December of each odd-
numbered year. Except as may be otherwise provided, the non-Councilmanic
members of the committees shall serve for terms of two years each, but no
longer than the period of the term of the elected officials then in office.
(Ord 1999-230, passed 12-6-1999)
§ 220.07 SPEAKING TIME LIMITATIONS.
   No member of Council shall be allowed to speak more than once upon any
subject until every member of Council has had an opportunity to speak on that
subject. Further, no member of Council shall speak more than twice upon any
subject nor for a time longer than five minutes, without leave of Council. No
member of the public shall be allowed to speak for a time longer than five
minutes, unless permitted by the Vice-Mayor.
(Ord. 1976-34, passed 4-5-1976; Ord. 2004-3, passed 1-20-2004)
§ 220.08 INFORMATION REQUIRED OF SPEAKERS.
   All persons addressing Council shall state their name, address and
affiliation before commencing their statement.
(Ord. 1976-34, passed 4-5-1976)
§ 220.09 ROLL CALL.
   The roll call of Council shall be in alphabetical order.
(Ord. 1976-34, passed 4-5-1976)
§ 220.10 PREPARATION OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS; ESTABLISHMENT OF AGENDA.
   All requests for preparation of ordinances or resolutions shall be made by
the Mayor, Director of Finance or a Chairperson of a committee of Council, upon
approval of the majority of the committee. Responsibility for the preparation
of the agenda for each meeting of Council shall vest with the Vice-Mayor, in
consultation with the Mayor, Director of Finance and the Chairpersons of the
committees of Council.
(Ord. 1989-248, passed 10-16-1989)
§ 220.105 CONSENT AGENDA.
   In preparation of the agenda for each meeting of Council, the Vice-Mayor may
designate a “consent” portion of the agenda, which may include reports from
various departments, bid awards, appointments to boards and commissions,
citizen recognitions, ordinances and resolutions and such other matters as
Council determines. Action on any item on the consent portion of the agenda
shall be taken by the unanimous consent of all members of Council in
attendance. Action on any item on the consent portion of the agenda shall not
eliminate the need for a greater majority vote if one is called for by the
Charter or these Codified Ordinances. At the request of any single member of
Council, an item in the consent portion of the agenda can be removed and placed
on a later portion of the agenda for regular action.
(Ord. 1997-166, passed 8-4-1997)
§ 220.11 REFERRAL OF LEGISLATION TO COMMITTEES.
   Referral of legislation to the proper committees for recommendation and
other action shall be made by the author of the legislation, unless otherwise
directed by Council.
(Ord. 1976-34, passed 4-5-1976)
§ 220.12 INDUSTRIAL REVENUE BOND FINANCING.
   No resolution finally approving industrial revenue bond financing shall be
adopted unless bond counsel is present.
(Ord. 1979-9, passed 1-15-1979)
§ 220.13 VICE-MAYOR MAY COMMENT.
   The Vice-Mayor may comment on any issues that pertain to his or her ward or
to the city as a whole at a proper time.
(Ord. 1976-34, passed 4-5-1976)
§ 220.14 SMOKING PROHIBITED IN CHAMBERS (REPEALED).
Editor’s note:
   Section 220.14 was repealed by Ordinance 1993-18, passed April 6, 1993.
§ 220.15 AUTOMATIC REJECTION OF LEGISLATION.
   Each resolution or ordinance which has not been enacted by Council shall be
deemed automatically rejected on the anniversary date of its introduction
before Council, unless extended by motion of Council.
(Ord. 1980-8, passed 1-21-1980)
§ 220.16 CLERK OF COUNCIL.
   (a)   There is hereby established a position of Clerk of Council to be
appointed by the Vice-Mayor and approved by the remaining members of Council
for a term running concurrently with the Vice-Mayor. The Clerk of Council shall
work under and be subject to the supervision of the Vice-Mayor and shall
perform such duties as may be delegated to him or her by the Vice-Mayor. Among
other duties, the Clerk of Council shall act as the Secretary of the Council
and of the City Planning Commission. In such capacity, the Clerk of Council
shall keep the record of Council and the Planning Commission and shall
authenticate all records, documents and instruments of the city on which
authentication is proper. All notices or other communications to Council and to
the City Planning Commission shall be presented to the Clerk of Council.
   (b)   The Clerk of Council shall serve during good behavior and shall be
removed only upon a two-thirds vote of all members elected or appointed to
Council.
(Ord. 1988-229, passed 12-5-1988)
   (c)   The Clerk of Council’s rate of pay shall be established from time to
time by Council. Additionally, the Clerk of Council shall receive all other
employment benefits as are furnished to full-time city employees.
§ 220.17 ASSISTANT TO THE CLERK OF COUNCIL.
   (a)   There is hereby established the position of Assistant to the Clerk of
Council in the Clerk of Council’s office, to be appointed by the Vice-Mayor and
approved by the remaining members of Council, for a term running concurrently
with the Vice-Mayor. The Assistant to the Clerk of Council shall work under and
be subject to the supervision of the Clerk of Council and shall perform such
duties as may be delegated to him or her by the Clerk of Council.
   (b)   The Assistant to the Clerk of Council shall serve during good behavior
and shall be removed only upon a two-thirds vote of all members elected or
appointed to Council.
   (c)   The Assistant to the Clerk of Council’s rate of pay shall be
established from time to time by Council. Additionally, the Assistant to the
Clerk of Council shall receive all other employment benefits as are furnished
to full-time city employees.
   (d)   During any period of time when the Clerk of Council is absent,
unavailable or unable for any cause to perform his or her duties, the Assistant
to the Clerk of Council shall serve and act in the Clerk of Council’s capacity
in all respects.
(Ord. 1999-212, passed 11-1-1999)
§ 220.18 CITY COUNCIL MEMBER LIAISONS.
   (a)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to appoint a City Council member as a
liaison to interface with and assist each of the following departments:
      (1)   Senior Services Department;
      (2)   Recreation Department;
      (3)   Information Technology Department; and
      (4)   Solon Center for the Arts.
   (b)   Such appointments shall be subject to the confirmation by a majority
of the members of Council. No member of Council shall serve as a liaison to
more than one of the named departments.
(Ord. 2007-297, passed 12-17-2007)
CHAPTER 222: ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
Section
   
222.01   Publication by posting
   
222.02   Posting places
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Automatic rejection, see §
220.15
   Codified Ordinances, see
Ch. 202
   Effective date of, see
Charter Art. IV, § 6
   General ordinances, see
Charter Art. IV, § 5
   Legislative powers of Mayor, see
Charter Art. V, § 3
   Preparation of, see §
220.10
§ 222.01 PUBLICATION BY POSTING.
   Council finds that in the city no newspaper is printed, as defined in R.C. §
7.12, and it determines that all ordinances, resolutions, statements, orders,
proclamations, notices and reports required by law or ordinance to be published
shall be published by posting copies thereof in not less than five of the most
public places in the city for a period of not less than 15 days.
(Ord. 1953-112, passed 12-30-1953)
§ 222.02 POSTING PLACES.
   Council hereby determines that the five most public places in the city are:
   (a)   The Fire Station located at 5595 Harper Road;
   (b)   The Solon Service Garage located at 6600 Cochran Road;
   (c)   The Police Station at 33000 Solon Road (Solon Road entrance);
   (d)   The City Hall at 34200 Bainbridge Road (Bainbridge Road entrance); and
   (e)   The Solon branch of the Cuyahoga County Public Library at 34125 Portz
Parkway.
TITLE SIX - ADMINISTRATION
            Chap.
230.   Mayor
            Chap.
234.   Finance Department
            Chap.
238.   Department of Public Safety
            Chap.
240.   Police Department
            Chap.
242.   Fire Department
            Chap.
244.   Service Department
            Chap.
246.   Public Works Division
            Chap.
248.   Engineering Department
            Chap.
249.   Construction Department
            Chap.
250.   Building Department
            Chap.
252.   Water Reclamation Department
            Chap.
253.   Economic Development Department
            Chap.
254.   Planning and Community Development Department
            Chap.
255.   Information Technology Department
            Chap.
256.   Recreation Department
            Chap.
257.   Senior Services Department
            Chap.
258.   Grantwood Department
            Chap.
259.   Solon Center for the Arts
            Chap.
260.   Employees Generally
CHAPTER 230: MAYOR
Section
   
230.01   Compensation
   
230.02   Expense account
   
230.03   Other full-time employment prohibited
   
230.04   Manager of City Facilities
   
230.05   Administrative Coordinator
   
230.06   Cooperative purchasing
   
230.07   Medicare (Repealed)
   
230.08   Director of Human Resources
   
230.09   Participation in contracts with the Ohio Department of Transportation
(ODOT)
   
230.10   General provisions
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Compensation, see
Charter Art. IV, § 10
   Mayor as Director of Public Safety, see §
238.02
   Mayor generally, see
Charter Art. V
   Mayor’s Court, see
Ch. 298
   State law provisions, see R.C. §§ 733.02 et seq.
   Vice-Mayor, see §§
220.04,
220.06(b),
220.13
§ 230.01 COMPENSATION.
   The salary of the Mayor shall be as established from time to time by
Council. Such salary shall be payable biweekly.
§ 230.02 EXPENSE ACCOUNT.
   In addition to his or her salary, the Mayor shall be allowed and paid
expenses incurred in conducting city business in a sum not to exceed $3,600 per
year for the term commencing December, 1981. Prior to payment for such expenses
the Mayor shall furnish to the Director of Finance an accounting of money so
spent, which may include the expense of the use of a personal automobile on
official business at the rate provided in §
260.11.
(Ord. 1981-36, passed 4-6-1981)
§ 230.03 OTHER FULL-TIME EMPLOYMENT PROHIBITED.
   During his or her tenure in office, the Mayor shall accept no other full-
time employment.
(Ord. 1968-79, passed 4-1-1968)
§ 230.04 MANAGER OF CITY FACILITIES.
   (a)   There is hereby established the position of Manager of City
Facilities. The Manager of City Facilities shall be appointed by the Mayor
pursuant to Article V, Section 5(b) of the City Charter. The Manager of City
Facilities shall report directly to the Mayor and shall perform such duties as
may be required by the Mayor and/or pursuant to the position's job description
on file in the Human Resource Department.
   (b)   The Manager of City Facilities is also responsible for the maintenance
and repair of buildings, inspection of facilities, determining the method of
maintenance and/or repair, formulates building maintenance procedures and
conducts annual audits of all city buildings.
(Ord. 2014-269, passed 1-20-2015)
§ 230.05 ADMINISTRATIVE COORDINATOR.
   There is hereby established the position of Administrative Coordinator to be
appointed by the Mayor pursuant to
Article V, § 5, of the City Charter. The Administrative Coordinator shall work
under and be subject to the supervision of the Mayor in conjunction with the
Director of Finance and shall perform such duties as may be delegated to him or
her by the Mayor. Among other duties which may be delegated to him or her, the
Administrative Coordinator may have principal authority as the City Income Tax
Director, Director of Purchasing and Special Projects Coordinator.
(Ord. 1989-194, passed 7-31-1989)
§ 230.06 COOPERATIVE PURCHASING.
   (a)   The Mayor hereby requests authority, in the name of the city, to
participate in state contracts which the Department of Administrative Services,
Office of State Purchasing, has entered into for the purchase of supplies,
services, equipment and certain materials pursuant to R.C. § 125.04.
   (b)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to agree, in the name of the city, to
be bound by all contract terms and conditions as the Department of
Administrative Services, Office of State Purchasing, prescribes. Such terms and
conditions may include a reasonable fee to cover the administrative costs which
the Department of Administrative Services incurs as a result of city
participation in a contract. Further, the Mayor does hereby agree to be bound
by all such terms and conditions.
   (c)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to agree, in the name of the city, to
directly pay the vendor, under each such state contract in which it
participates, for items it receives pursuant to the contract, and the Mayor
does hereby agree to directly pay the vendor.
(Res. 1987-225, passed 11-2-1987)
§ 230.07 MEDICARE (REPEALED).
Editor’s note:
   Section 230.07 was repealed by Ordinance 1998-2, passed January 5, 1998.
§ 230.08 DIRECTOR OF HUMAN RESOURCES.
   There is hereby established the position of Director of Human Resources. The
Director of Human Resources shall be appointed by the Mayor pursuant to
Article V, § 5, of the City Charter. The Director of Human Resources shall
report directly to the Mayor and shall perform such duties as may be required
by the Mayor pursuant to the position’s job description.
(Ord. 1997-206, passed 9-15-1997)
§ 230.09 PARTICIPATION IN CONTRACTS WITH THE OHIO DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
(ODOT).
   (a)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to request participation
by the city in the Ohio Department of Transportation Cooperative Purchasing
Program for the purchase of machinery, materials, supplies or other articles
which the Department has entered into pursuant to R.C. § 5513.01(B).
   (b)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to agree, in the name of
the city, to be bound by all terms and conditions as the Director of
Transportation prescribes.
   (c)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to agree, in the name of
the city, to pay vendors, under each such contract of the Ohio Department of
Transportation in which the city participates, for items it receives pursuant
to the contract.
   (d)   The city agrees to hold the Director of Transportation and the Ohio
Department of Transportation harmless for any claim or dispute arising out of
participation in a contract pursuant to R.C. § 5513.01(B).
(Res. 1997-262, passed 12-1-1997; Ord. 2014-95, passed 4-21-2014)
§ 230.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Whenever a vacancy occurs in the position of a department director or
chief officer of any city department, the Mayor shall have the authority to
appoint an interim director to that position within 30 days, and for a period
of not more than 90 days, until a permanent director is appointed by the Mayor
and confirmed by the Council.
   (b)   An interim appointment shall not be a bar to a permanent appointment
subject to the same advice and consent of the Council for all department
directors, or other chief officers of any city departments.
   (c)   An interim appointment to a vacant department director position shall
not result in an increase in compensation unless specifically authorized by the
Mayor.
   (d)   For any and all other administrative matters as noted or required by
these Codified Ordinances, the Mayor may appoint a designee to fulfill any
duties and responsibilities in furtherance of the intents of this section.
(Ord. 2012-203, passed 8-20-2012)
CHAPTER 234: FINANCE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
234.01   Assistant Director of Finance
   
234.015   Contract Compliance Officer
   
234.017   Business Operations Administrator
   
234.02   Purchase of insurance
   
234.03   Purchasing Policy
   
234.035   Credit card policy
   
234.04   Infrastructure and building contracts
   
234.05   Earned Interest Clearance Fund
   
234.06   Charges for documents
   
234.07   Petty Cash Funds
   
234.08   Grantwood Recreational Park Fund created; deposit and use
   
234.09   Solon Sanitary Landfill Enterprise Fund (Repealed)
   
234.10   Sale of recycled materials
   
234.11   Underground Storage Tank (UST) Fund
   
234.12   Investment Policy
   
234.13   Supervisor of Accounting
   
234.14   Audit Committee
   
234.15   General Fund Cash Reserve policy
   
234.16   Self Insured Workers Compensation Fund
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Establishment, see
Charter Art. VI, § 1
   Finance Committee, see §
220.06(a)(1)
   Finance Director generally, see
Charter Art. VI, § 3
   Finance generally, see
Charter Art. X
   State law provisions, see R.C. §§ 733.10 et seq.
§ 234.01 ASSISTANT DIRECTOR OF FINANCE.
   There is hereby established the position of Assistant Director of Finance in
the Finance Department, to be appointed by the Mayor pursuant to
Article V, § 5, of the City Charter. The Assistant Director of Finance shall
work under and be subject to the supervision of the Director of Finance and
shall perform such duties as may be delegated to him or her by the Director of
Finance. During any period of time when either the Director of Finance or the
Assistant Director of Finance is absent, unavailable or unable for any cause to
perform his or her duties, the Assistant Director of Finance, respectively,
shall serve in each other’s capacity in all respects.
(Ord. 1999-245, passed 12-20-1999)
§ 234.015 CONTRACT COMPLIANCE OFFICER.
   (a)   There is hereby established the position of Contract Compliance
Officer. The Contract Compliance Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor
pursuant to
Article V, § 5, of the City Charter. The Contract Compliance Officer shall
report directly to the Director of Finance and shall perform such duties as may
be required by the Mayor and/or the Director of Finance pursuant to the
position’s job description.
   (b)   The Contract Compliance Officer will review and monitor leases,
contracts and agreements to ensure compliance with policies and procedures,
monitor and facilitate the progress of projects through contract review, the
bid process and all phases of contract completion.
   (c)   The Contract Compliance Officer shall also be responsible for
coordinating city public record requests and record retention schedules to
ensure compliance with federal, state and local laws.
(Ord. 2012-249, passed 10-1-2012)
§ 234.017 BUSINESS OPERATIONS ADMINISTRATOR.
   (a)   There is hereby established the position of Business Operations
Administrator in the Department of Finance. The Business Operations
Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor pursuant to
Article V, Section 5, of the City Charter. The Business Operations
Administrator shall report directly to the Director of Finance and shall
perform such duties as may be required by the Mayor and/or the Director of
Finance pursuant to the position's job description.
   (b)   The Business Operations Administrator will assist the Director of
Finance in the administration, direction, planning and implementation of
policies, procedures and business operations in the Finance Department and
other departments as directed.
   (c)   The Business Operations Administrator shall also be responsible for
coordinating the procurement policies of the City on behalf of the Director of
Finance and other departments to ensure compliance with federal, state and
local laws.
(Ord. 2019-108, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 234.02 PURCHASE OF INSURANCE.
   When it becomes necessary to purchase insurance for the city, the Public
Property, Public Utilities and Transportation Committee will contact at least
three insurance agents and request such agents to submit recommendations as to
the best and most economical manner in which to meet the insurance needs of the
city. The Committee will then submit the recommendations to Council, which
shall study the recommendations and determine the types and amounts of
insurance to be purchased by the Director of Finance. If the premiums of such
insurance exceed $4,000, the Director shall be directed to advertise for bids
in the manner provided by law. The Director of Finance is authorized to
evaluate or continue participation in municipal insurance pools legally
established by one or more political subdivisions if the cost of such
membership in the pool is considered to be economically beneficial to the city.
(Ord. 1988-58, passed 5-16-1988)
§ 234.03 PURCHASING POLICY.
   The Director of Finance shall be the purchasing agent for the City and shall
have the authority to execute purchases for and on behalf of each department of
the City. The Department of Finance shall adopt rules and regulations for the
internal management and operation of the purchasing function. The Director of
Finance or designee shall prescribe and maintain such systems as reasonably
necessary to the operation of the purchasing function. All purchases must be
made from available appropriations and approved by City officials in accordance
with the following provisions:
   (a)   Purchase Authority.
      (1)   Purchases of $0 to $10,000.00 require approval by the Director of
Finance and Department Head for the department for which the purchase is being
made. Purchases between $0 and $10,000.00 require the purchase originator to
convey responsible purchasing procedures designed to promote the best interest
of the City. The Director of Finance reserves the right to establish such
procedures and to request any additional information and/or quotations for such
purchase(s).
      (2)   Purchases greater than $10,000.00 and up to $50,000.00 require
approval by the Director of Finance and Department Head for the department for
which the purchase is being made and, to the extent reasonable and practical,
the Director of Finance or Department Head requesting this purchase shall
obtain a minimum of three written quotations prior to seeking approval to make
the purchase unless a request to waive this requirement is approved in
accordance with division (a)(4) below. If the lowest quotation is not being
considered for the purchase, the originator must document reasoning why the
selected vendor or contract is in the best interest of the City. The Director
of Finance reserves the right to establish such procedures and to request any
additional information or quotations for such purchase(s).
      (3)   Purchases greater than $50,000.00 shall be procured in accordance
with competitive selection requirements as defined in division (b) below or
purchased from a cooperative purchasing contract as defined in division (d)
below or utilize an alternative method of project delivery as defined in
division (c), and shall require the approval of City Council as defined in
division (g) below. The Director of Finance is authorized to solicit bids, or
proposals, and request qualifications for purchases in which funds have been
appropriated for the designated purpose.
      (4)   The requirement for obtaining quotations as defined in division (a)
(2) above may be waived by the Director of Finance upon the request from the
requesting department of the purchase for the following reasons:
         A.   The purchase can be made using an approved cooperative purchasing
contract as defined in division (d);
         B.   The purchase can be made from another political subdivision;
         C.   For the purpose of accepting or renewing a maintenance, support
or professional services agreement;
         D.   For a proprietary service or sole source purchase as determined
by the Director of Finance;
         E.   An emergency purchase as defined in division (f) below;
         F.   For any other reasonable and practical limitations to obtaining
the required quotations defined in division (a)(2), the Director of Finance
reserves the right to establish such procedures and to request any additional
information or quotations for such purchase(s).
      (5)   Purchase Orders. Purchase orders shall be established as required
by R.C. § 5705.41(D) for all contracts and purchase commitments and to encumber
funds against available appropriations. Purchase orders shall be requested by
the originating department in accordance with established procedures and
approved by the Director of Finance as follows:
         A.   Regular purchase orders issued for a specific vendor or contract
and for an amount specified and in accordance with the procedures defined in
division (a). Regular purchase orders can encumber funds in multiple budget
account line items and expire when the contract of specified order is
fulfilled.
         B.   Blanket purchase orders may be issued to a vendor or for the
purchase of goods or services, and charged to one or more budget account line
items in an amount not to exceed $50,000.00 and for a period of up to one
fiscal year. Annual accruals of blanket purchase orders to the same vendor or
purpose within a departmental budget, as appropriated annually by City Council,
shall not supersede procedures established in division (a).
         C.   Super blanket purchase orders may be issued to a vendor for
professional services, materials, supplies, fuel, road salt, utilities and any
other specific recurring and reasonably predictable operating expenditure
charged to one specific expenditure budget account line item in an amount not
to exceed the line item budget for a period of up to one fiscal year. Such
purchase orders shall be established in accordance with the purchase authority
defined in division (a).
      (6)   Then and Now Certification. Purchase orders including those
authorized under division (a)(5) above shall be established prior to the time
that City funds are obligated by contract, invoice, or other means. If City
funds are obligated prior to the establishment of a valid purchase order, the
Director of Finance can certify that both at the time that the contract or
order was made and at the time of the certification, sufficient funds were
available or in the process of collection, to the credit of a proper fund,
properly appropriated and free from any previous encumbrance, the taxing
authority can authorize the drawing of a warrant. The Director of Finance shall
submit all certifications that are $3,000 or greater to Council for approval.
      (7)   Monthly report requirement for purchases greater than $10,000 - The
Director of Finance shall provide to City Council monthly, a report of
purchases greater than $10,000.00 as defined in division (a)(2). The report to
Council shall provide information on individual purchases including, purchase
amount, date, vendor, purpose, department, and budget account.
   (b)   Competitive Selection.
      (1)   Competitive Bidding. Sealed competitive bids are required to be
used for firm fixed price contracts where the aggregate dollar amount of the
purchase is reasonably expected to be greater than $50,000.00 and is used as
the preferred method for, but not limited to, public works improvement
projects. Bids shall be solicited from an adequate number of known suppliers
whenever practical and in accordance with R.C. § 735.05, applicable City Code
sections, and established City policies. Contracts awarded under sealed bid
procedures shall be based on the lowest, responsive, and responsible bidder. If
the lowest bidder is not recommended the Department Head or City official shall
provide in writing the reasons for not selecting the lowest price prior to
approval by Council in accordance with division (g) below. As an alternative to
in-person bid submissions and openings, the City may utilize an online bidding
information service as the preferred method for submitting and processing
sealed bids accepted by the City.
      (2)   Request for Proposals (RFP). Procurement by competitive request for
proposal (RFP) is permissible when sealed bids are not required by applicable
laws or City policies. An adequate number of qualified sources submit an offer
and either a fixed price or cost-reimbursement type contract is awarded based
on the recommendation of the Department Head and Director of Finance. Contracts
will be awarded to the responsible firm whose proposal is most advantageous to
the program, with price and other factors considered. The procedures and form
of the request for proposals shall be determined by the Director of Finance.
      (3)   Selection of Professional Design Services (RFQ). The City may use
competitive proposal procedures for qualifications-based procurement of
architectural/engineering professional services whereby competitors'
qualifications are evaluated and the most qualified competitor is selected,
subject to negotiation of fair and reasonable compensation. The method, where
price is not used as a selection factor, can only be used in procurement of
architectural/engineering professional service.
      (4)   Waiving of Competitive Selection. The requirements in divisions (b)
(1), (b)(2), and (b)(3) may be waived by City Council upon request of the
Department Head. A waiver may be approved for the following reasons:
         A.   The purchase is made using a cooperative purchasing contract in
accordance with division (d);
         B.   An alternative project delivery method as defined in division (c)
is used;
         C.   The purchase can be made from another political subdivision;
         D.   The purchase is for professional services as defined in division
(e);
         E.   For a proprietary service or sole source purchase as determined
by the Director of Finance;
         F.   The purchase qualifies as an emergency purchase in accordance
with division (f);
      (5)   A request for a waiver of competitive selection shall be approved
by the Mayor or Director of Finance prior to submitting the request to City
Council for approval in accordance with division (g). The Director of Finance
reserves the right to establish such procedures and to request any additional
information or quotations for such purchase(s).
   (c)   Alternate Project Delivery Methods.
      (1)   City Departments are authorized to utilize the services of a
design-build firm for the provision of design-build services, or services that
form an integrated delivery systems for which a person or firm is responsible
to the City for both the design, construction, demolition, alteration, repair,
or reconstruction of a public improvement pursuant to applicable sections of
R.C. §§ 153.65 through 153.99. Design-build or other similar services shall be
procured through a competitive process as defined in divisions (b)(2) or (b)(3)
unless the requirement for competitive selection is waived in accordance with
division (b)(4)B.
      (2)   Design-build. The purchase of supplies, materials and equipment or
the construction of public improvements may be obtained through the design-
build process in accordance with the procedures established in the Ohio Revised
Code, or pursuant to such other procedures as may be established by the
Director of Finance.
      (3)   Construction Manager or Construction Manager At-Risk. The purchase
of supplies, materials and equipment or the construction of public improvements
may be obtained through the construction manager or the construction manager-
at-risk process in accordance with the procedures established in Ohio Revised
Code, or pursuant to such other procedures as may be established by the
Director of Finance.
   (d)   Cooperative Purchasing.
      (1)   Cooperative Purchasing Contracts. The City shall have the authority
to purchase supplies, materials or equipment and obtain services through
cooperative purchasing programs, whereby the City shall be eligible, as a
member or otherwise, to join a group of governmental entities and share the
benefits and advantages of volume purchasing and reduced administrative costs,
to include without limitation state contract purchasing pursuant to R.C. §
125.04, joint purchasing and shared services provisions of R.C. § 9.48 and any
other similar program whether operated by a public or private entity. The Mayor
and the Director of Finance are hereby authorized to agree on behalf of the
City to be bound by all contract terms and conditions under each such
cooperative purchasing contract in which it participates. Further, the Mayor
and the Director of Finance are hereby authorized to agree in the name of the
City to directly pay the vendor, under each such cooperative purchasing
contract in which it participates for items it receives pursuant to the
contract terms.
      (2)   Authorized Cooperative Purchasing Programs. The City is authorized
by Solon Code §§ 230.06 and 230.09 to participate in purchasing contracts
entered into by the Ohio Department of Administrative Services, Office of State
Purchasing and the Ohio Department of Transportation Cooperative Purchasing
Program for the purchase of supplies, materials, services, and equipment.
Further, the Director of Finance shall designate on an annual basis other
eligible cooperative purchasing entities that the City will participate in
pursuant to joint purchasing and shared services provisions of R.C. § 9.48.
      (3)   United States General Services Administration (GSA). The City is
hereby authorized to participate in contracts entered into by the United States
General Services Administration (GSA) through its Multiple Awards Schedule
(MAS) Program for the purchase of supplies, services, equipment and certain
materials, pursuant to applicable federal law and related provisions. The Mayor
and Director of Finance are hereby further authorized to agree, on behalf of
the City, to be bound by all contract terms and conditions as the General
Services Administration (GSA) Multiple Awards Schedule Program prescribes.
      (4)   Certification of Equivalency. A purchase that is not made under a
cooperative purchasing contract as defined in division (d)(1) and that does not
use a competitive selection method described in division (b) can be approved if
the purchase can be made at a lower price and/or more favorable terms as
compared to an approved cooperative purchasing entity contract. An Affidavit to
Insure Equivalency of Offering form that validates equivalent pricing, and
terms of the contract in all aspects and specifications shall be completed
prior to approval of the purchase in accordance with divisions (a) and (g).
   (e)   Procurement of Professional Services.
      (1)   Contracts or agreements to provide unique services or professional
services including, but not limited to, consultants, accounting, architecture,
attorney at law, physician, professional engineer, construction project
manager, surveyor, appraiser, or financial advisory shall be purchased using
responsible purchasing procedures designed to promote the best interest of the
City.
      (2)   Contracts or agreements to provide professional services that are
less than $50,000.00 shall be approved in accordance with division (a)(4)C.
Contracts or agreements to provide professional services that exceed $50,000.00
shall be authorized in accordance with division (b)(4)D. and require a duly
enacted ordinance of City Council in accordance with division (g) prior to
entering into the contract or agreement for the purchase. Funds for the
purchase shall be encumbered with a purchase order in accordance with division
(a)(5).
   (f)   Emergency Purchases.
      (1)   An emergency purchase is necessary for the immediate preservation
of the public health, safety and welfare of the City or when an immediate
purchase of goods or services is necessary to prevent further damage to public
property or equipment. Emergency purchases shall be approved by the Mayor or
Director of Finance. A proper purchase order as defined in division (a)(5) will
be established in a reasonable and practical amount of time upon approval of
the emergency purchase.
      (2)   The pertinent information about the purchase including the details
of the circumstances requiring an emergency purchase should be filed by the
Department Head to the Director of Finance within five business days after the
date of the emergency purchase. The Director of Finance shall include all
emergency purchases in the required reporting to City Council as defined in
division (a)(7).
   (g)   Council Authorization. All contracts or agreements for the purchase of
goods, materials, or the provision of services that exceed $50,000.00 and
purchased in accordance with division (a)(3) shall be authorized by a duly
enacted ordinance of City Council prior to entering into the contract or
agreement for the purchase. Purchasing contracts shall be executed by the Mayor
in accordance with Article V, Section (5)(e) of the City Charter upon Council
approval.
   (h)   Policies and Procedures. The Director of Finance shall establish and
may amend the policies and procedures which are deemed necessary to the
operation of the purchasing function as defined herein. The establishment of
policies and procedures will include the issuance of manual(s), process
guidance, forms, reports, and the provision of information systems utilized in
furtherance of an efficient and effective purchasing function. Such policies
and procedures, and amendments thereto, shall be consistent with the City
Charter and the Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. 1999-245, passed 12-20-1999; Ord. 2004-97, passed 5-17-2004; Ord. 2007-
192, passed 8-6-2007; Ord. 2008-144, passed 6-2-2008; Ord. 2013-248, passed 12-
16-2013; Ord. 2016-17, passed 2-1-2016; Ord. 2023-91, passed 5-15-2023; Ord.
2024-2, passed 1-16-2024)
§ 234.035 CREDIT CARD POLICY.
   The purpose of this policy is to ensure that the appropriate level of
internal controls for city credit card accounts are maintained to provide for
and to guard against misuse or losses for which the city may be held
financially liable. This policy is intended to comply with the mandates set
forth in Sub HB 312 enacted by The 132nd Ohio General Assembly or any successor
legislation enacted for this purpose. The city's credit card accounts are not
intended for personal use, and city-issued credit cards will not be permitted
to be carried by city personnel on a regular basis for any reason. All city
credit card accounts shall be issued in the name of a city department.
   (a)   This policy applies to all (i) payment cards, checks or other payment
instruments associated with a credit account issued by a financial institution
or a retailer, and (ii) payment cards related to the receipt of grant funds.
All such cards and instruments are referred to herein as "credit cards".
   (b)   This policy does not apply to procurement cards (P-cards), or to
gasoline account cards or, other payment cards that are capable of use only for
the purchase of certain limited types of goods.
   (c)   The city will not obtain or maintain any debit cards.
   (d)   The Director of Finance will work with the appropriate financial
institutions that issue credit cards to determine the best type of credit card
accounts for the city, and also to determine which retail purpose credit card
accounts the city will be permitted to utilize.
      (1)   The Director of Finance is responsible for working with the issuing
financial institution to determine the dates when credit cards expire and the
re-issuance of replacement cards.
      (2)   The Director of Finance is responsible for determining, when
necessary, the need to cancel a credit card account and any adjustment to
credit limits on the credit cards.
      (3)   The Director of Finance is responsible for notifying the issuing
financial institution of a lost or stolen card.
   (e)   Credit cards will be established in the name of the City of Solon and
the specific name of a city department with a maximum credit limit for the card
program and for each card as set by the Director of Finance. No single credit
card purchase shall exceed the credit card limit without prior written
authorization from the Director of Finance. The credit limits on individual
departmental cards shall be communicated to city departments and be included in
the current version of the credit card policy manual as defined in section (p).
   (f)   Prior to initial receipt of a credit card, each departmental user must
acknowledge the requirements for use by signing the credit card authorization
and use procedures.
   (g)   The Mayor shall authorize the use of city credit cards for use in
connection with approved or city related activities and only those types of
expenses that are for the benefit of the city that serve a valid and proper
public purpose shall be paid for by credit card. Credit cards will be used
primarily for approved travel expenses, memberships, professional dues, and
prepayment for goods or services when required by a vendor. Credit cards may be
used only for expenditures that are within the applicable budget and
established purchasing guidelines as defined in §
234.03 of the Solon Code.
   (h)   Regular purchasing procedures must be followed for all credit card
purchases. Every credit card purchase must have a valid purchase order assigned
to it before the purchase is permitted. The purchase order must contain the
vendor and the purpose, account number and estimated amount.
   (i)   For each purchase made using a credit card, an itemized receipt
indicating the amount paid, the vendor, and the goods/services purchased must
be submitted to the Director of Finance promptly following the purchase.
   (j)   Use of a credit card for personal expenditures, for expenditures in
excess of the applicable credit limit, or otherwise in violation of this policy
constitutes a misuse of the credit card. Any city personnel engaging in misuse
of a credit card will be responsible to reimburse the city for any unauthorized
expenditures and may be subject to disciplinary action up to and including
termination of employment.
   (k)   The Director of Finance will designate a Finance Department employee
as Credit Card Compliance Officer to review all credit card accounts on an
annual basis, including; the number of accounts and issued/active cards,
account expiration dates and credit limits. The Director of Finance may not
also serve as the Compliance Officer.
   (l)   The Compliance Officer may not authorize city personnel to use a
credit card and may only use a credit card with the prior authorization of the
Director of Finance.
   (m)   If a credit card is lost or stolen, or if city personnel become aware
of unauthorized or fraudulent use of any of the city's credit card accounts,
the same must be reported immediately to the Director of Finance and Compliance
Officer.
   (n)   All monthly credit card statements, access to online credit card
accounts, and other correspondence associated with the credit card accounts
will be managed by the Director of Finance or the Compliance Officer or other
designee. Payment of the monthly statements must be made in a timely fashion so
that finance charges and late payment fees are not incurred.
   (o)   If the Compliance Officer is authorized to use a credit card, on a
monthly basis, the Director of Finance (or the Director of Finance's designee,
who may not be the Compliance Officer) will review the credit card statements
for proper use and documentation prior to submission for payment by the city.
   (p)   The Director of Finance shall establish and may amend the policies and
procedures which are deemed necessary to the operation of the credit card
policy as defined herein. The establishment of policies and procedures will
include the issuance of policy manual(s), process guidance, forms, reports, and
the provision of information systems utilized in furtherance of an efficient
and effective credit card policy. Such policies and procedures, and amendments
thereto, shall be consistent with the City Charter and the Codified Ordinances.
   (q)   On an annual basis, the Director of Finance will submit a report to
the Council Finance Committee that identifies the total credit card usage by
department and total rebates received for use of the cards.
(Ord. 2024-73, passed 4-15-2024)
§ 234.04 INFRASTRUCTURE AND BUILDING CONTRACTS.
   (a)   Escrow waiver. Any and all construction contracts executed by the city
must include an executed escrow waiver, a copy of which escrow waiver is
attached to Ordinance 2012-127 as Exhibit “A” or in substantial compliance with
the same, and incorporated herein fully as if by reference.
   (b)   Modifications. When it becomes necessary, in the opinion of the Mayor
or the head of the department authorized by ordinance to execute the original
contract, for infrastructure and/or building projects, to make a modification
or change order to the original contract, such modification or change order
shall not be effective and valid unless all of the following conditions have
been completed.
      (1)   Council has approved the modification or change order through
legislation and has appropriated sufficient amounts of money to cover both the
original contract and the cost of the modification or change order.
      (2)   An amendment to the contract in writing has been made by the Mayor
or the head of the department authorized to execute the original contract
describing the nature of the modification or change order. For modifications or
change orders involving price, the amendment shall state the original contract
price before the change order, the agreed net increase or decrease of the
proposed change order, and the new total contract price by reason of such
change order.
      (3)   The contract amendment has the written approval signatures of the
Mayor or the authorized head of the department involved, the contractor and the
Director of Finance, and has been approved as to form by the Director of Law.
   (c)   Payment of recovery. No contractor shall be paid or allowed to recover
anything for work or material in excess of the original contract, unless there
has been a duly executed and approved change order made in accordance with this
section.
   (d)   Duplicate copies. Duplicate copies of each contract shall be kept on
file in the office of the head of the department executing the contract or the
Mayor, as the case may be, and a copy thereof shall be kept on file in the
office of the Director of Finance and Clerk of Council.
(Ord. 2000-268, passed 11-6-2000; Ord. 2012-127, passed 5-7-2012; Ord. 2013-90,
passed 6-3-2013)
§ 234.05 EARNED INTEREST CLEARANCE FUND.
   (a)   There is hereby established a special revenue fund, to be known as the
Earned Interest Clearance Fund, under the provisions of R.C. § 5705.12.
   (b)   All interest earned and received on city treasury investments, with
the exception of the City Income Tax Fund, shall be credited to the Earned
Interest Clearance Fund. Transfers shall be made in each budget year from the
Earned Interest Clearance Fund to the following funds for their proportionate
share of interest earnings:
      (1)   Water Reclamation Fund;
      (2)   Water Reclamation Replacement and Improvement Fund;
      (3)   Grantwood Recreation Park Fund;
      (4)   Landfill Improvement Fund;
      (5)   Cable TV Fund;
      (6)   Street Construction Maintenance and Repair Fund; and
      (7)   State Highway Fund.
(Ord. 1976-199, passed 11-15-1976; Ord. 2001-30, passed 2-5-2001; Ord. 2002-
275, passed 12-2-2002; Ord. 2007-283, passed 12-3-2007)
§ 234.06 CHARGES FOR DOCUMENTS.
   (a)   Solon Master Plan. There are hereby established charges for copies of
the Solon Master Plan, prepared by the Regional Planning Commission, dated
1967, as follows:
 
For nonresidents $10 each
For residents    $5 each
 
   (b)   Specific documents. The following charges shall be made for the
documents indicated:
Document Charge
Document                                            Charge
City Building and Housing Code                      $11 per copy
Copies of agenda for Council or Planning Commission $16 per year
Copies of minutes of Council                        $69 per year
Copies of minutes of Planning Commission            $45 per year
DVD copy                                            $3 per disc
Monthly meeting calendar                            $7 per year
Planning and Zoning Code                            $24 per copy
Solon Zoning Map                                    $ 2.50 per copy
Videotape copy                                      $10 per tape
Ward map                                            $2.50 per copy
 
   (c)   Miscellaneous documents.
      (1)   Copies of any public record documents in black/white print:
 
8-1/2 in. x 11 in. sheet $0.10 each
8-1/2 in. x 14 in. sheet $0.10 each
24 in. x 36 in. sheet    $2 each
36 in. x 36 in. sheet    $3 each
48 in. x 36 in. sheet    $4 each
 
      (2)   Copies of any public record documents in colored print:
 
8-1/2 in. x 11 in. sheet $0.25 each
8-1/2 in. x 14 in. sheet $0.25 each
11 in. x 17 in. sheet    $0.30 each
 
   (d)   City employees and officials. No charge, inter-departmental or
otherwise, shall be made for copies of public record documents furnished to
employees or officials of the city.
   (e)   The Director of Finance is authorized to waive or reduce any charges
or fees associated with copies of documents if the cost of producing such
documents in a timely manner is not to the economic benefit of the city.
(Ord. 1989-199, passed 7-31-1989; Ord. 2004-270, passed 12-6-2004; Ord. 2005-
207, passed 9-19-2005)
§ 234.07 PETTY CASH FUNDS.
   (a)   There are hereby established the following Petty Cash Funds:
Department Amount
Department                             Amount
Arts Center                            $250
Building Department                    $150
City Hall Front Desk                   $25
Clerk of Council                       $200
Court Clerk                            $100
Engineering Department                 $300
Finance Department                     $200
Fire Department                        $200
Grantwood Bar, Change Box and Pro Shop $1,350
Grantwood Park                         $200
Mayor’s office                       $100
Police Department                      $200
Public Works Department                $150
Recreation Department                  $1,150
Senior Services Department             $250
Service Department                     $200
Sewer billing office                   $300
Water Reclamation Department           $200
 
   (b)   All Petty Cash Funds shall be expensed from their respective
department’s budget at their inception. Payments made from all Petty Cash Funds
shall be charged to the applicable expenditure budget accounts of the
respective department.
   (c)   The head of each department with petty cash shall designate a
custodian and alternate custodian(s) for his or her department’s petty cash.
   (d)   The Director of Finance shall establish procedures, rules and
regulations for the use of petty cash in all departments and administer them
accordingly. The Director of Finance shall notify department heads of such
procedures, rules and regulations.
(Ord. 1988-17, passed 2-1-1988; Ord. 2006-49, passed 3-6-2006; Ord. 2006-92,
passed 5-1-2006; Ord. 2009-174, passed 7-6-2009; Ord. 2011-76, passed 5-2-2011;
Ord. 2012-247, passed 9-19-2012; Ord. 2015- 125, passed 7-6-2015; Ord. 2021-
147, passed 7-19-2021; Ord. 2023-50, passed 2-21-23; Ord. 2024-3, passed 1-16-
2024)
§ 234.08 GRANTWOOD RECREATIONAL PARK FUND CREATED; DEPOSIT AND USE.
   (a)   There is hereby established a special fund, to be known as the
Grantwood Recreational Park Fund, under the provisions of R.C. § 5705.12.
   (b)   All revenue derived from the operation of the Grantwood Recreational
Park shall be deposited in that Fund and the revenue shall be used solely for
the operation, maintenance and repair of, and capital improvements for,
Grantwood Recreational Park.
   (c)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to send a certified copy
of this section to the Bureau of Inspection and Supervision of Public Offices
of the state.
(Ord. 1972-181, passed 10-16-1972)
§ 234.09 SOLON SANITARY LANDFILL ENTERPRISE FUND (REPEALED).
Editor’s note:
   Section
234.09 was repealed by Ordinance 2014-183, passed October 20, 2014.
§ 234.10 SALE OF RECYCLED MATERIALS.
   (a)   The Director of Finance or his or her designee shall, from time to
time, as recycled material accumulates, solicit bids or quotes for the sale of
recycled material generated by the city’s recycling program. In soliciting such
bids or quotes, the Director of Finance or his or her designee shall, if
possible, solicit the bids of no less than three potential purchasers. The
Director of Finance or his or her designee is authorized to sell from time to
time the recycled materials to the highest and best bidder, depending on market
conditions, so as to achieve maximum benefit to the city. The Director of
Finance or his or her designee shall be required, on no less than a yearly
basis, to report to Council the proceeds generated by the sale of such recycled
materials.
   (b)   All monies derived from the sale of recycled materials shall be
designated for use in the recycling program.
   (c)   Organic yard waste collected and stored by the Service Department
shall be sold at the following rates:
 
Leaf humus             $10 per cubic yard
Processed wood mulch   $10 per cubic yard
Unprocessed wood chips $5 per cubic yard
 
   (d)   The Director of Finance or his or her designee shall, as organic yard
waste accumulates, solicit bids or quotes for the sale of leaf humus when
necessary.
(Ord. 1990-63, passed 3-19-1990; Ord. 2005-223, passed 10-5-2005; Ord. 2012-
243, passed 9-19-2012)
§ 234.11 UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANK (UST) FUND.
   There is hereby created a special revenue fund to be known as the
Underground Storage Tank (UST) Fund, which Fund is dedicated to pay for taking
corrective action and for compensating third parties for bodily injury and
property damage caused by accidental releases arising from the operation of
petroleum underground storage tanks.
(Ord. 1994-129, passed 8-15-1994)
§ 234.12 INVESTMENT POLICY.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   ELIGIBLE DEPOSITORY. Any institution described in R.C. § 135.03.
      (2)   ELIGIBLE INVESTMENT. Any investment described in division (c)(1)
hereof.
      (3)   DELIVERY VERSUS PAYMENT. Delivery versus payment is delivery of
securities with an exchange of money for the securities.
      (4)   DERIVATIVE SECURITY. A financial instrument, contract or obligation
whose value or return is based upon or linked to another asset or index, or
both, separate from the financial instrument, contract or obligation itself,
but shall not include a written repurchase agreement that satisfies the
provisions of division (c)(1)E. hereof.
      (5)   INTERIM DEPOSITS. All public monies in the treasury of the city or
monies coming lawfully into the possession of the Director of Finance and are
not needed for immediate use but will be needed before the end of the period of
designation.
      (6)   INVESTMENT POOL. A fund established by another subdivision
(including a county), the Director of Finance, the Governing Board or the
Investing Authority (as each of those terms is defined in R.C. § 135.01), if
that fund was established for the purpose of investing the interim deposits of
other subdivisions, but shall not include the Ohio Subdivision’s Fund created
pursuant to R.C. § 135.45.
      (7)   QUALIFIED SECURITIES DEALER. A securities dealer who is a member of
the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, Inc.
      (8)   QUALIFIED TRUSTEE. A qualified trustee as described in R.C. §
135.18 of the Uniform Depository Act.
      (9)   REVERSE REPURCHASE AGREEMENT. A repurchase agreement under the
terms of which the Director of Finance or such Director of Finance’s designee
agrees to sell securities owned by the city to a purchaser and agrees with that
purchaser to unconditionally repurchase such securities.
      (10)   UNIFORM DEPOSITORY ACT. R.C. Chapter 135 and all amendments
thereto.
   (b)   Provisions.
      (1)   Scope. All interim deposits of the city as may be prescribed by the
Director of Finance, except as otherwise hereinafter provided, may be invested
by the Director of Finance or his or her designee in the eligible investments
described in division (c) hereof, which eligible investments shall be purchased
only through or from eligible depositories designated pursuant to the Uniform
Depository Act or a qualified securities dealer as defined in division (a)
hereof. However, interim deposits held by a trustee or escrow agent under a
trust agreement, trust indenture or escrow agreement between the city and such
trustee or escrow agent in connection with, or related to, an issue of bonds,
notes or other obligations of the city may be invested in any investments
permitted by such trust agreement, trust indenture or escrow agreement or as
are approved by the rating agency or rating agencies rating such bonds, notes
or other obligations, or interim deposits specifically exempted by ordinance
from this division (b) may be invested as permitted in such ordinance or other
ordinance related to such interim deposits. The Director of Finance is
authorized to pool cash balances of the several funds of the city for
investment hereunder.
      (2)   Objectives. The achievement of sound fiscal management for the city
requires effective investment of the interim deposits of the city. To that
effect, the following investment objectives shall be applied in the investment
of interim deposits.
         A.   Safety. The primary objective of the city’s investment policy is
the preservation of capital and the protection of investment principal. Subject
to the provisions of division (b)(3)B. hereof, each investment transaction
shall seek to first ensure that capital losses measured against the investment
portfolio as a whole are avoided, whether they be from securities’ defaults or
the erosion of market value.
         B.   Liquidity. The city’s investments shall remain sufficiently
liquid to enable the city to meet its operating requirements that might
reasonably be anticipated.
         C.   Yield. In the investment of the interim deposits of the city, the
Director of Finance and any designee of the Director of Finance as permitted
hereunder shall strive to attain a market-average rate of return throughout
budgetary and economic cycles, taking into account the city’s investment risk
constraints and the cash flow characteristics of the portfolio, but shall avoid
assuming unreasonable investment risks. Yield as an objective of this policy is
of least importance compared to safety and liquidity.
      (3)   Minimizing investment risk. The city acknowledges that investment
risk can result from a default by the issuer of the investment, changes in the
market price of the investment or technical complications leading to temporary
illiquidity of an investment. The following investment limitations are directed
at minimizing the effect of such investment risks:
         A.   To minimize the risk of default by the issuer of the investment:
            1.   Interim deposits of the city shall be invested only in
eligible investments permitted under division (c) hereof, except as otherwise
permitted under division (b)(1) hereof.
            2.   No more than 20% of the city’s interim deposits shall be
invested in the aggregate of the eligible investments described in divisions
(c)(1)C. and D. hereof (excluding bonds, notes and other obligations of the
city).
            3.   The Finance Director shall determine appropriate maximum
allocations of the city’s interim deposits available to be invested in the
aggregate of the eligible investments described in divisions (c)(1)E. and J.
hereof.
            4.   No more than 55% of the city's interim deposits shall be
invested in the aggregate of the eligible investments described in divisions
(c)(1)G., H. and I. hereof.
            5.   No interim deposits of the city shall be invested in any
derivative security, reverse repurchase agreement or investment pool or, except
as otherwise provided in this section, in any stripped principal or interest
obligation of any eligible investment.
            6.   The use of leveraging by the city solely as a speculative
investment strategy is prohibited under this investment policy. As used herein,
LEVERAGING shall mean the use of any of the city’s current assets as collateral
for the purpose of purchasing other assets.
            7.   The issuance of taxable notes by the city solely for the
purpose of arbitrating their proceeds is prohibited under this investment
policy.
            8.   Contracting for the sale of securities that have not yet been
acquired by the city for the purpose of purchasing such securities at a later
date on the speculation that their price will decline is prohibited under this
investment policy.
         B.   To minimize the risk of changes in the market price of an
eligible investment:
            1.   Any eligible investment made pursuant to this section with the
exception of eligible investments described in divisions (c)(1)C. and D. hereof
shall mature within five years from the date of settlement unless the eligible
investment is matched to a specific obligation or debt of the city; provided,
however, that no investment shall be made in any eligible investment hereunder
unless the Director of Finance or the authorized designee of such Director of
Finance reasonably expects that the eligible investment can be held until its
maturity and, with respect to any investment of the city’s interim deposits in
the Ohio Subdivision’s Fund created pursuant to R.C. § 135.45, the limitation
of this division (b) shall not be construed as restricting the maturity date of
any individual asset in which the Fund shall invest;
            2.   If at any time the city has no eligible investments maturing
within the next succeeding two calendar months from such time, and at such time
the Director of Finance reasonably expects that a portion of such eligible
investments may have to be liquidated to pay the costs of operating the city at
some time during such next succeeding two calendar months, any additional
interim deposits coming into the custody of the Director of Finance or such
Director’s designee, to the extent the Director of Finance or the Director’s
designee reasonably expects such interim deposits to be needed to pay the costs
of operating the city during such two calendar months, shall be invested only
in short-term eligible investments with a maturity that will allow the Director
of Finance or the Director’s designee to have available (without the need for
sale of such eligible investments in the secondary market) the proceeds of such
eligible investments at such a time that such proceeds can be timely applied to
meeting such operating expenses of the city; and
            3.   Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, nothing in
division (b)(2)A. or (b)(3)B. hereof shall be construed to prohibit such
Director of Finance or such designee from selling such eligible investment
prior to its maturity, or to impose liability on such Director of Finance or
such designee for any loss occasioned by the sale of any eligible investment
otherwise made in accordance with this section at a price or prices lower than
its cost or balance, if the liquidity needs of the city required such a sale or
if the yield on the reinvestment of the sale proceeds of such eligible
investment, after taking into account the loss incurred in connection with such
sale, will exceed the yield that the city otherwise would have earned if it had
held the original eligible investment to the earlier of its maturity date or
the maturity date of the eligible investment purchased with such sale proceeds.
      (4)   Standard of care. Investment of the interim deposits of the city
shall be made with the exercise of that degree of judgment and care, under
circumstances then prevailing, that persons of prudence, discretion and
intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs, not for
speculation, but for investment, considering the probable safety of their
capital as well as the probable income to be derived. The foregoing standard
shall be applied to the investment portfolio of the city as a whole.
      (5)   Authority to invest interim deposits. The Director of Finance is
hereby authorized and directed to invest the interim deposits of the city in
accordance with the provisions of this section. The Director of Finance may
delegate the authority to invest the interim deposits of the city hereunder to
another employee or employees of the city, provided that any such delegation
shall be in a writing that shall be filed with the Mayor, and such a delegation
shall be effective for all purposes of this section unless the Mayor
disapproves such a delegation within ten days of receipt of such written
delegation. Such a delegation may be for a limited or unlimited period of time;
provided that, if such delegation is for an unlimited period of time,
revocation of such delegation shall be effective only if made in a written
instrument signed by the Director of Finance and termination of the employment
by the city of such employee shall automatically terminate such employee’s
authority to invest the interim deposits of the city hereunder without the need
for a written instrument.
      (6)   Conflicts of interest.
         A.   Officers and employees of the city involved in making investment
decisions shall refrain from personal business activity that could conflict
with the proper execution and management of the investment program of the city,
or that could impair their ability to make impartial decisions regarding the
city’s investments, and from undertaking personal investment transactions with
the same individual or company with whom business is conducted on behalf of the
city, unless, with respect to the preceding item, such officer and employee
shall disclose in a writing filed with the Council of the city that such
officer or employee has undertaken, is undertaking and/or will undertake
personal investment transactions with the same individual or company, whose
name shall be set forth in the filing, with whom business is conducted on
behalf of the city and such an undertaking would not constitute a violation of
R.C. § 102.03 or 2921.42.
         B.   Officers and employees of the city involved in making investment
decisions shall disclose to the Council of the city any material interests in
eligible institutions or qualified securities dealers with which they conduct
investment business on behalf of the city, and any personal investment
positions that could materially affect, or be materially affected by, the
performance of the investment portfolio of the city.
      (7)   Periodic reports with respect to eligible investments. The Director
of Finance shall prepare at least quarterly an investment report, including a
management summary, describing the investment portfolio at the end of the
quarterly or other period, details of compliance metrics, the transactions made
over such period, and the performance of the investment portfolio relative to
an appropriate benchmark as determined by the Director of Finance. Such report
shall include a list by maturity date of all eligible investments (including,
without limitation, a description of the obligation or security that includes
the type, original cost, par value, maturity date, coupon interest rate and
yield to maturity) for the period covered by such report and held at the end of
such period; and the percentage of the total portfolio that each type of
investment represents. A copy of such report shall be delivered to the Council
and the Mayor.
      (8)   Authorized purchasers and sellers of eligible investments.
Purchases and sales of eligible investments hereunder shall be made only from
or to, as the case may be, an eligible depository or a qualified securities
dealer, which in either case has acknowledged to the city in writing that, in
the case of such a party that initiates investment transactions with the city,
it has received a copy of this section, and it will not sell to the city any
investment security prohibited hereunder or not included as an eligible
investment within the investment securities described in division (c) hereof
or, in the case of such a party that executes investment transactions initiated
by the city, it has received a copy of this section and it comprehends the
investment policy stated herein. The Director of Finance shall biannually
review the financial condition and registration of each eligible depository and
qualified securities dealer with or through whom the interim deposits of the
city are invested.
      (9)   Purchases and sales of eligible investments by the city. The
Director of Finance, or such Director of Finance’s designee, shall purchase an
eligible investment hereunder for cash at a price not in excess of the current
market price, which price shall be deemed to be the best price as determined
hereunder and shall sell any eligible investments for cash and for a sum not
less than their current market price, which price shall be deemed to be the
best price as determined hereunder. Except as otherwise provided in division
(b)(10)B. hereof, with respect to an overnight repurchase agreement, all
purchases and sales of eligible investments hereunder shall be made only on a
delivery versus payment basis. With respect to the purchase or sale of any
eligible investment other than the eligible investments described in divisions
(c)(1)I. and J. hereof, the Director of Finance or such Director of Finance’s
designee, subject to the provisions of division (b)(8) hereof and except as
otherwise provided in this division (b)(9), shall purchase or sell any eligible
investment at the best price based upon at least two bids if the eligible
investment is offered as such from any of the parties described in division (b)
(8) hereof. If there is no readily available competitive offering on the same
specific eligible investment, then the Director of Finance shall document
quotations for comparable or alternative eligible investments. When purchasing
original issue instrumentality securities, no competitive offerings will be
required as all dealers in the selling group offer those securities at the same
original issue price. As used in the immediately preceding sentence, in
connection with any purchase of an eligible investment, the BEST PRICE shall
mean that price which produces the highest yield to maturity with respect to
such eligible investment and, in connection with the sale of an eligible
investment, the “best price” shall mean the highest price with respect to such
eligible investment; provided, however, that in any case where there are two or
more bids at the best price, the Director of Finance or such Director of
Finance’s designee may, in his or her absolute discretion, determine which of
such bids constitutes the best price. The Director of Finance or his or her
designee shall keep a written record of the bids taken with respect to each
purchase or sale of an eligible investment. If the city utilizes the services
of an investment advisor and grants such investment advisor the authority to
execute investment transactions on behalf of the city, then the investment
advisor will retain documentation of the competitive pricing execution on each
transaction and will provide such documentation upon request.
      (10)   Registration, custody and safekeeping of eligible investments.
         A.   If any eligible investments purchased pursuant to this section
are to be issued to a designated payee or to the order of a designated payee,
the name of the Director of Finance and the title of his or her office shall be
so designated. If any such eligible investments are registrable either as to
principal or interest, or both, then such eligible investments shall be
registered in the name of the Director of Finance as such.
         B.   With respect to each eligible investment, the Director of Finance
shall obtain a document evidencing, in the case of a book-entry security, and
confirming, in the case of a certificated security held by other than the
Director of Finance, each such investment. The Director of Finance is
responsible for the safekeeping of all eligible investments and documents
evidencing such eligible investments acquired by the Director of Finance. All
eligible investments acquired as investments under this section by the Director
of Finance on behalf of the city, whether in certificated or book-entry form,
may be held on behalf of the city by a qualified trustee. Such qualified
trustee shall provide to the Director of Finance a copy of each document
evidencing or confirming such eligible investments which such qualified trustee
receives and shall be required to report to the Director of Finance or to the
Auditor of the state or a duly authorized independent auditor of the city at
any time upon request of such party the identity and location of the document
evidencing each eligible investment made hereunder and held by such qualified
trustee. In lieu of such custody, such eligible investments or documents
evidencing or confirming such eligible investments may be held in a safe or
other secure place at the office of the Director of Finance. With respect to
any repurchase agreement that matures on the business day that immediately
succeeds the business day on which such repurchase agreement was entered into,
if the participating institution is a designated depository of the city for the
current period of designation, the securities that are the subject of the
repurchase agreement may be held in trust by the participating institution on
behalf of the city, notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this division
(b)(10)B.
      (11)   Internal controls with respect to eligible investments. The
Director of Finance shall establish and maintain an internal control structure
designed to ensure that the assets of the city are protected against theft,
loss or misuse, and in connection therewith, shall maintain written procedures
relating to such internal control.
      (12)   Exemptions from this policy and general law.
         A.   Any investment of interim deposits which, on the effective date
of this section, does not qualify as an eligible investment under this section
(each an “ineligible investment”) may, notwithstanding anything herein to the
contrary, be held until the first to occur of either its maturity or its sale;
provided, however, that if the investment does not have a maturity date, it may
be held no later than five years from the effective date of this section. The
proceeds of any sale of an ineligible investment shall be reinvested, if at
all, only in an eligible investment.
         B.   The city and th e Director of Finance, any designee of the
Director of Finance pursuant to this section, and any other official of the
city, being governed by a charter adopted under Article XVIII of the Ohio
Constitution, and special provisions regarding the investment of the city’s
interim deposits having been made through the passage of this section, are
hereby exempted, except as otherwise expressly provided herein, from the
provisions of the general laws of the state, including, without limitation, the
Uniform Depository Act, applicable to the investment of the interim deposits of
the city.
      (13)   Annual review of policy amendments. This section shall be reviewed
on an annual basis by the Director of Finance and the Finance Committee of
Council to determine if amendments to this section are required in order to
further the best interests of the city in connection with the management of its
investment portfolio.
   (c)   Eligible investments.
      (1)   The Director of Finance or his or her designee may invest in any of
the following classifications of obligations which are hereby determined to be
eligible for investment of the interim deposits of the city (“eligible
investments”):
         A.   United States Treasury bills, notes and bonds (including stripped
principal or interest obligations of such issuances), or any other obligation
or security issued by the United States Treasury or any other obligation
guaranteed as to principal and interest by the United States;
         B.   Bonds, notes, debentures or other obligations or securities
issued by any federal government agency or instrumentality (excluding stripped
principal or interest obligations of such issuances), including, but not
limited to, the Federal National Mortgage Association, Federal Home Loan Bank,
Federal Farm Credit Bank, Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation and Government
National Mortgage Association; provided that such securities shall be direct
issuances of federal government agencies or instrumentalities;
         C.   Bonds and notes of the state rated in not less than the third-
highest rating category by a nationally-recognized rating agency with respect
to such bonds or notes, as to which there is no default of principal, interest
or coupons;
         D.   Bonds and notes of any municipal corporation, including the City
of Solon, or any county, township or other political subdivisions of the state
rated in not less than the third-highest rating category either directly or
through an enhancement via the State of Ohio by a nationally-recognized rating
agency with respect to such bonds or notes as to which there is no default of
principal, interest or coupons, the bonds or notes must be payable from the
general revenues of the political subdivision and backed by the full faith and
credit of the political subdivision, the city is not the sole purchaser of the
bonds or notes at original issue provided, however, that bonds and notes of the
city shall not be required to have a rating in order to be an eligible
investment hereunder;
         E.   A written repurchase agreement between the Director of Finance or
such Director of Finance’s designee and any eligible depository or any
qualified securities dealer if, and only if, under the terms of such agreement,
the Director of Finance or such Director of Finance’s designee purchases for
the city, and such institution agrees unconditionally to repurchase within a
period of not more than 30 days, securities described in division (c)(1)A. or
B. hereof that will mature or are redeemable within five years from the date of
purchase. However, the market value of such securities subject to a repurchase
agreement that matures on the business day immediately succeeding the business
day on which such repurchase agreement was entered into shall be at least 102%
of the principal amount of the repurchase agreement, and on any other business
day after the business day described in the immediately preceding item, shall
be at least 102% of the principal amount of the repurchase agreement. Further,
the repurchase agreement shall contain the requirement that for each
transaction pursuant to such agreement the eligible depository or qualified
securities dealer shall provide all of the following information: the par value
of the securities subject to such agreement; the type, coupon rate, if any, and
maturity date of the securities; and a numerical identifier generally accepted
in the securities industry that designates the securities.
         F.   Certificates of deposit of eligible depositories which may
provide (and, if so, it shall be shown on their face) that the amount of such
deposit is payable upon written notice a specified period before the date of
the scheduled maturity, provided that security for the repayment of any such
certificates of deposit is provided in accordance with R.C. § 135.18; This
includes investments in certificates of deposit administered through the
Certificate of Deposit Account Registry Service (“CDARS”). Eligibility of this
investment is outlined in R.C. § 135.144 and would also apply to any other
program that is deemed to meet the requirements of such statute.
Additionally, negotiable certificates of deposit will be deemed an eligible
investment if both the investment of the principal and accrued interest amount
is fully covered under the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) and/or
the National Credit Unions Association (NCUA).
         G.   Commercial paper issued by an entity as outlined in R.C. § 135.14
(B)(7)(a) rated at the time of acquisition in the single highest classification
by at least two nationally-recognized rating agencies with a term to maturity
of 270 days or less such that the investment in commercial paper of a single
issuer shall not exceed in the aggregate five percent of the city's interim
monies available for investment at time of acquisition:
         H.   Corporate bonds or notes with a maturity of three years or less
issued by corporations that are incorporated under the laws of the United
States and that are operating within the United States, or by depository
institutions that are doing business under authority granted by the United
States or any state and that are operating with the United States provided that
such obligations are rated in the second highest or higher category by at least
two nationally recognized standard rating services at the time of acquisition;
         I.   Bankers’ acceptances drawn on and accepted by banks that are
insured by the federal deposit insurance corporation with a remaining term to
maturity of 180 days or less;
         J.   No-load money market mutual funds registered by the Securities
and Exchange Commission consisting exclusively of obligations described in
divisions (c)(1)A. and B. hereof; and
         K.   The Ohio Subdivision’s Fund created pursuant to R.C. § 135.45.
      (2)   The Director of Finance and his or her designee, the Mayor and the
members of Council shall not be held accountable or personally liable for any
loss occasioned by the sale of any eligible investment authorized pursuant to
division (c)(1) hereof at prices lower than its cost or balance. Any loss or
expense in making such sale shall be payable as other expenses of the city.
      (3)   The members of Council, the Mayor, and the Director of Finance and
the Director of Finance’s designees shall not be personally liable for or with
respect to the purchase of any eligible investments authorized as investments
pursuant to division (c)(1) hereof, and the members of Council and the Mayor
shall not be personally liable for any unauthorized deposit or investment by
the Director of Finance or such Director of Finance’s designee.
      (4)   Upon the expiration of the term of office of the Director of
Finance, or in the event of a vacancy in the office of the Director of Finance
by reason of death, resignation, removal from office or otherwise, the Director
of Finance or his or her legal representative shall transfer and deliver to his
or her successor all eligible investments held by him or her. For the eligible
investments so transferred and delivered, such Director of Finance shall be
credited with, and his or her successor shall be charged with, the amount of
money invested in such eligible investments. Records regarding the investments
held by the city shall be communicated to the successor in the certificate of
transition as provided for in the requirements of R.C. § 117.171.
      (5)   Whenever eligible investments acquired under this section mature
and become due and payable, the Director of Finance shall present them for
payment according to their tenor and shall collect the monies payable thereon.
The monies so collected shall be treated as interim deposits subject to the
provisions of this section, with respect to their reinvestment, and the Uniform
Depository Act, with respect to their deposit.
      (6)   The Director of Finance or his or her designee shall maintain
accounts in which he or she shall make appropriate entries of all transactions
relating to the investment of deposits.
      (7)   Interest earned on any eligible investments authorized by this
section shall be collected by the Director of Finance and credited by him or
her to the proper fund of the city as required by law.
(Ord. 1996-234, passed 1-6-1997; Ord. 2014-184, passed 9-15-2014; Ord. 2019-59,
passed 4-15-2019; Ord. 2021-79, passed 4-19-2021; Ord. 2024-104, passed 5-20-
2024)
§ 234.13 SUPERVISOR OF ACCOUNTING.
   There is hereby established the position of Supervisor of Accounting, to
serve as an assistant to the Director of Finance, pursuant to the terms of
Article VI, § 4, of the City Charter. Such position shall not be subject to
civil service examination.
(Ord. 1997-186, passed 8-18-1997)
§ 234.14 AUDIT COMMITTEE.
   (a)   There is hereby established an Audit Committee pursuant to the
Council’s authority set forth in
Article VI, § 1, of the City Charter. The Audit Committee shall review the most
recent year-end audited financial statements, the auditor’s comments and
recommendations, provide oversight of the work of independent auditors, and
evaluate the city’s internal controls. The Audit Committee shall provide an
annual report to the City Council on its findings and conclusions.
   (b)   The Audit Committee shall consist of the following:
      (1)   Five residents of the city with an appropriate financial and
business background, as recommended by the Finance Committee and approved by
the City Council, and who shall be considered resident Committee members;
      (2)   The Chairperson of the Finance Committee, or his or her designee;
and
      (3)   The Director of Finance.
   (c)   All resident members of the Audit Committee shall serve two-year terms
and a member may serve no more than two consecutive terms, a vacancy occurring
during the term of any members of the Audit Committee shall be filled for the
unexpired term in the manner authorized for an original appointment.
   (d)   The Audit Committee shall elect a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson
from the five resident members serving on the Committee. The five resident
Committee members shall be the only voting members.
   (e)   The Audit Committee shall meet at least twice a year. Additional
meetings may be scheduled when the Committee deems it necessary to review items
regarding the city's internal controls, audit findings, financial reporting, or
related matters. Three resident members must be present to constitute a quorum.
   (f)   The members of the Audit Committee will approve a committee charter
and develop an annual audit plan pursuant to the objectives as defined in the
approved charter.
   (g)   Each resident member of the Audit Committee shall be paid $50 for each
official meeting actually attended by each member, not to exceed four meetings
per audit year.
(Ord. 2004-272, passed 12-20-2004; Ord. 2005-169, passed 7-18-2005; Ord. 2022-
122, passed 5-2-2022)
§ 234.15 GENERAL FUND CASH RESERVE POLICY.
   There is hereby established a policy for the maintenance and use of
unencumbered cash reserves in the city’s General Fund for the purpose of
financial stability and to back-up future repayment of debt from the city’s
Bond Retirement Fund.
   (a)   The administration and Council shall attempt to maintain an
unencumbered General Fund cash reserve of at least 20% of each respective
year’s General Fund appropriations.
   (b)   If the General Fund cash reserves are near or at this threshold, the
administration and Council shall review austerity measures and revenue
enhancements.
   (c)   Cash reserves below the threshold may be used primarily for
emergencies as the administration and Council designate.
   (d)   Cash reserves above the threshold may be used primarily for the early
retirement of debt and for capital items or projects with a useful life of more
than five years and any other purpose that will not cause an annual reduction
of reserves.
(Ord. 2007-167, passed 7-2-2007; Ord. 2013-67, passed 5-6-2013)
§ 234.16 SELF INSURED WORKERS COMPENSATION FUND.
   (a)   There is hereby established an internal service fund, to be known as
the Self Insured Workers Compensation Fund, under the provisions of R.C. §
5705.12.
   (b)   All activity related to the city’s self insured workers compensation
system shall be accounted for in the Self Insured Workers Compensation Fund.
(Ord. 2007-224, passed 9-17-2007)
CHAPTER 238: DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY
Section
   
238.01   Establishment
   
238.02   Mayor to be Director
   
238.03   Composition
   
238.04   All Natural Hazards Mitigation Plan
   
238.05   Countywide emergency management agency
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Fire Department, see
Ch. 242
   General duties; records; contracts, see R.C. §§ 737.02 et seq.
   Police Department, see
Ch. 240
   Safety and Public Properties Committee, see §
220.06(a)(3)
   Safety Director’s traffic control powers, see §
406.03
§ 238.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby established a Department of Public Safety, which will have
such powers and perform such functions and duties as may be determined by
enactments of Council, or, unless a contrary intent appears in the enactments
of Council, as may now or hereafter be provided by the laws of the state.
(Ord. 1963-103, passed 7-11-1963)
§ 238.02 MAYOR TO BE DIRECTOR.
   The Mayor is hereby designated as the Director of Public Safety and he or
she is authorized to exercise all powers of such office, as prescribed by the
enactments of Council, or, unless a contrary intent appears in such enactments,
as may now or hereafter be provided by the laws of the state.
(Ord. 1963-103, passed 7-11-1963)
§ 238.03 COMPOSITION.
   The Department of Public Safety shall be composed of the Police Department
and the Fire Department and shall have charge of all personnel, buildings,
motor vehicles, facilities and equipment in such Departments.
(Ord. 1963-103, passed 7-11-1963)
§ 238.04 ALL NATURAL HAZARDS MITIGATION PLAN.
   The Cuyahoga County 2017-2022 All-Hazards Mitigation Plan is hereby adopted
as the official Hazard Mitigation Plan of the City of Solon, a copy of which
plan is on file in the office of the Clerk of Council.
(Ord. 2012-197, passed 7-16-2012; Ord. 2017-158, passed 9-18-2017)
§ 238.05 COUNTYWIDE EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY.
   The city does hereby establish the Cuyahoga County Department of Public
Safety and Justice Services, Office of Emergency Management to be its
countywide emergency management agency.
(Ord. 2012-144, passed 5-21-2012)
CHAPTER 240: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Editor’s note:
   Council, by Ordinance 1995-80, passed April 17, 1995, adopted revised Rules
and Regulations for the operation of the Police Department. Copies of these
Rules and Regulations and of any amendments thereto may be obtained, at cost,
from the Police Chief. The city enters into collective bargaining agreements,
from time to time, with the Ohio Patrolmen’s Benevolent Association, which
agreements provide for terms and conditions of employment. The provisions of
this chapter apply to those employees and those subjects not otherwise provided
for in such agreements. In the event of a conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter and a provision of any such agreement, the provision
of the agreement shall control. Copies of the latest relevant legislation and
of such agreements may be found in Appendix II following Title Ten of this
Administration Code or may be obtained, at cost, from the Clerk of Council.
Section
   
240.01   Composition
   
240.013   Police Chief
   
240.015   Police Captain
   
240.017   Assistant Chief
   
240.02   Special police officers
   
240.03   Auxiliary police officers
   
240.04   Work week; part-time employment
   
240.05   Liability insurance
   
240.06   Protection of land of Grantwood Recreational Park
   
240.07   Police Confidential Investigation Fund
   
240.11   Law Enforcement Trust Fund
   
240.12   Mandatory fines and bail forfeitures
   
240.13   Police officers’ service pistol
   
240.15   Charge for the hire of a police cruiser for traffic control
   
240.16   Fees and ancillary costs for the use of the Solon Police Department
jail facility
   
240.17   Disposition of police canine
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Assaulting police dog or horse, see §
642.08
   Chief, see R.C. § 737.06
   Composition and control, see R.C. §§ 715.05, 737.05
   Disposition of property by Police Department, see §
606.24
   Enforcement of Traffic Code, see §
404.01
   General duties, see R.C. § 737.11
   Pick-up of Police and Firemen’s Disability and Pension Fund, see §
260.19
   Safety and Public Properties Committee, see §
220.06(a)(3)
§ 240.01 COMPOSITION.
   Pursuant to
Article VI, § 1, of the City Charter, the Police Department may consist of not
more than a Police Chief, an Assistant Chief, not more than four Lieutenants,
not more than eight Sergeants, not more than 37 patrol officers, not more than
one Jail Administrator and one Corrections Supervisor,, not more than 15
Corrections Officers, and not more than 11 full-time dispatchers. Such
personnel shall be appointed by the Mayor pursuant to the provisions of the
City Charter, the ordinances of the city and, to the extent applicable, the
rules of the Civil Service Commission, but appointments of new members of the
Department shall not be made without prior approval of the Finance and Safety
Committees of Council and the Civil Service Commission.
(Ord. 1999-47, passed 3-29-1999; Ord. 2003-12, passed 1-22-2003; Ord. 2003-290,
passed 12-1-2003; Ord. 2005-222, passed 11-7-2005; Ord. 2006-144, passed 6-19-
2006; Ord. 2008-55, passed 3-17-2008; Ord. 2011-35, passed 3-7-2011; Ord. 2025-
169, passed 9-15-2025)
§ 240.013 POLICE CHIEF.
   There is hereby established the position of Police Chief. The Police Chief
shall be appointed by the Mayor pursuant to
Article V, § 5, of the City Charter. The Police Chief shall report directly to
the Mayor and shall perform such duties as may be required by the Mayor
pursuant to the position’s job description on file in the Human Resource
Department.
(Ord. 2001-123, passed 6-4-2001)
§ 240.015 POLICE CAPTAIN.
   Council, pursuant to Civil Service Commission Rule 4(h), hereby declares its
intent that the position of Captain in the Police Department shall be an
exempt, non-civil service classified position. The Mayor, pursuant to
Article V, § 5(b), of the City Charter, shall appoint the Captain upon the
recommendation of the Police Chief and the Safety Committee of Council. The
Police Captain may be terminated for just cause by the Mayor pursuant to
Article V, § 5(b), of the City Charter, with recommendation for termination by
the Police Chief. The Police Captain may also be transferred or reduced by the
Mayor, with recommendation for such transfer or reduction by the Police Chief.
If transferred or reduced, the Police Captain shall revert to the classified
civil service status held by him or her at the time of his or her appointment.
(Ord. 1992-116, passed 8-17-1992)
§ 240.017 ASSISTANT CHIEF.
   Council, pursuant to Civil Service Commission Rule 4(h), hereby declares its
intent that the position of the Assistant Chief in the Police Department shall
be an exempt, non-civil service classified position. The Mayor, pursuant to
Article V, § 5(b), of the City Charter, shall appoint the Assistant Chief upon
the recommendation of the Police Chief. The Assistant Chief may be terminated
for just cause by the Mayor pursuant to
Article V, § 5(b), of the City Charter with recommendation for termination by
the Police Chief. The Assistant Chief may also be transferred or reduced by the
Mayor with recommendation for such transfer or reduction by the Police Chief.
If the Assistant Chief was appointed to the position from the classified civil
service status in the Police Department, the Assistant Chief shall revert to
the classified civil service status held by him or her at the time of his or
her appointment if he or she is transferred or reduced.
(Ord. 2000-349, passed 12-18-2000)
§ 240.02 SPECIAL POLICE OFFICERS.
   The Mayor shall have authority to appoint special police officers during
emergencies and to relieve regular police officers when necessary, for periods
of less than six months.
(Ord. 1960-83, passed 9-19-1960)
§ 240.03 AUXILIARY POLICE OFFICERS.
   (a)   There is hereby established an auxiliary police unit within the Police
Department to consist of one Captain, two Sergeants and not more than 24 patrol
officers. The Mayor shall appoint the members of the unit and shall be the
executive head thereof. Auxiliary police officers shall be called to duty
during periods of emergency or other times requiring the protection of the
health and welfare of the residents by the Mayor or the Police Chief. The
Police Chief shall have exclusive control of the stationing of all auxiliary
police officers and specifying their duties under such general rules and
regulations as may be prescribed by the Mayor and Council. Further, auxiliary
police officers, while on duty, are subject to the classified orders of the
Police Department as established by the Chief, and are under the immediate
authority of the Police Department shift officer (OIC). Auxiliary police
officers working uniform part-time jobs are subject to scheduling by the
Captain of auxiliary police or the officer in charge of part-time jobs for the
Police Department or the Police Department Liaison Officer. No auxiliary police
officer shall appear in public in uniform unless so scheduled or called to duty
as prescribed above. Auxiliary police officers shall be compensated for their
services according to the provisions of Chapter 260 of these Codified
Ordinances, and, in addition thereto, upon terms available, the city shall
provide and pay for professional liability insurance and liability insurance
for members of the unit. Members of the auxiliary police unit are not eligible
for membership in the Police and Firemen’s Disability and Pension Fund. Members
of the auxiliary police unit shall not be in the classified service of the
city.
   (b)   During periods of emergency callout, auxiliary police officers shall
assist members of the Police Department by performing whatever functions are
necessary to protect life and property as may be assigned by the Police
Department Shift Officer. Auxiliary police officers may work other,
nonemergency jobs only as approved and scheduled through the Police Department.
Auxiliary police officers shall not work in place of or perform the same
assigned duties of regular officers of the City Police Department in
nonemergency situations.
(Ord. 1984-182, passed 12-3-1984)
§ 240.04 WORK WEEK; PART-TIME EMPLOYMENT.
   (a)   The regular work week of police officers in the Police Department
shall be an average of 44 hours per calendar week, effective January 1, 1965,
and 40 hours per week, effective September 1, 1965. All members of the Police
Department shall be subject to call by the Mayor or by the Police Chief during
periods of emergencies.
   (b)   Members may be employed part-time by others so long as such employment
is consistent with and in no manner interferes with their duties as police
officers. Police uniforms, insignia and other paraphernalia used by police
officers in the performance of their duties on behalf of the city shall not be
used in such part-time employment unless within the city with prior approval of
the Police Chief, and during such employment the police officer shall be
subject to the authority of the officer in charge of the Police Department. Any
part-time employment of the Police Chief shall be subject to prior approval of
the Mayor, and any employment of other members of the Department shall be
subject to prior approval of the Police Chief.
(Ord. 1973-66, passed 5-7-1973)
§ 240.05 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   Upon terms available, the city shall provide and pay for professional
liability insurance for members of the Police Department.
(Ord. 1974-45, passed 4-1-1974)
§ 240.06 PROTECTION OF LAND OF GRANTWOOD RECREATIONAL PARK.
   Pursuant to the provisions of R.C. § 715.50, the Police Department shall
have the jurisdiction, power and authority to enforce all laws of the state and
ordinances of the city on the land of Grantwood Recreational Park located
outside the limits of the city to the same extent that such laws and ordinances
are enforced within the limits of the city.
(Ord. 1974-104, passed 7-1-1974)
§ 240.07 POLICE CONFIDENTIAL INVESTIGATION FUND.
   There is hereby created a fund, to be designated as the Police Confidential
Investigation Fund, in the amount of $3,000 for the use of the Police
Department to be appropriated in and included as a part of the annual
appropriation for the General Fund to the Police Department. In addition to
investigation expenses, the Police Chief, with the approval of the Mayor, may
pay rewards up to $500 each from such Fund to persons furnishing information
which leads to the arrest and conviction of persons violating any misdemeanor
set forth in
Chapter 624 of the General Offenses Code or any statute set forth in R.C.
Chapter 3719.
(Ord. 1974-182, passed 11-4-1974)
§ 240.11 LAW ENFORCEMENT TRUST FUND.
   Pursuant to R.C. § 2981.13, a Law Enforcement Trust Fund is hereby
established, which Fund shall consist of the proceeds of the sale of contraband
which has been lawfully seized and forfeited to the Police Department pursuant
to R.C. § 2981.13. Proceeds distributed to the Fund shall be allocated from the
Fund by Council to the Police Department and shall be expended only for the
following purposes: to pay the cost of specialized equipment, to pay the costs
of protracted or complex investigations or prosecutions; to provide reasonable
technical training or expertise; to provide matching funds to obtain federal
grants to aid law enforcement; or for such other law enforcement purposes as
Council deems appropriate. The Fund shall not be used to meet the operating
costs of the city that are unrelated to law enforcement.
(Ord. 1987-82, passed 4-20-1987)
§ 240.12 MANDATORY FINES AND BAIL FORFEITURES.
   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and directed to receive monies
made available by mandatory fines and bail forfeitures pursuant to R.C. §§
2925.03(J) and (K), and, in consultation with the Police Chief, to allocate
these monies between the Police Confidential Investigation Fund, established
pursuant to §
240.07, and the Law Enforcement Trust Fund, established pursuant to §
240.11.
(Ord. 1987-83, passed 4-20-1987)
§ 240.13 POLICE OFFICERS’ SERVICE PISTOL.
   Upon full service retirement of 25 years or more with the City Police
Department, each police officer shall be permitted to retain one service pistol
in inoperable condition for his or her own personal use. The pistol shall be
designated by the Police Chief. The officer shall register the serial number of
the pistol with the Police Chief who shall maintain a list of such serial
numbers.
(Ord. 1990-190, passed 8-6-1990; Ord. 2006-83, passed 4-17-2006)
§ 240.15 CHARGE FOR THE HIRE OF A POLICE CRUISER FOR TRAFFIC CONTROL.
   There is hereby established a charge of $200 per eight-hour day or $300 per
12-hour day for the hire of a police cruiser for traffic control.
(Ord. 2002-7, passed 1-7-2002)
§ 240.16 FEES AND ANCILLARY COSTS FOR THE USE OF THE SOLON POLICE DEPARTMENT
JAIL FACILITY.
   (a)   The Solon Police Department jail facility may, at the sole discretion
of the Chief of Police or his designee, be used by outside law enforcement
agencies in a mutual aid status and be subject to the following fees and
ancillary costs for any prisoner so incarcerated:
      (1)   $225 per day or any part of a day for prisoner housing and
services,
      (2)   $50 for each Breath Alcohol Content (BAC) Test provided,
      (3)   $75 for each video arraignment session,
      (4)   100% of all medical, dental, vision, psychological, or prescription
medication costs or other health care expense, and
      (5)   Full reimbursement for the hourly costs of any posted guard at an
outside medical facility for longer than two hours at the top overtime rate
under the current police collective bargaining unit agreement.
   (b)   Agencies requesting such mutual aid shall provide all transportation
to and from the facility; shall provide all necessary information and
appropriate legal documentation justifying the incarceration including service
on the incarcerated defendant; and, shall pay all accumulated fees and costs
directly to the city as billed monthly.
   (c)   In the event that any incarcerated defendant requires transport to or
admission to a hospital or other medical facility, the involved agency will be
notified immediately and expected to take custody of the prisoner at the
facility within two hours, or arrange for the prisoner's legal release or
furlough.
   (d)   The city may, at any time, and at its sole discretion refuse to house
prisoners due to available space, the medical or psychological condition of any
proposed prisoner, or for any other operational reason including non-payment of
past invoiced services.
   (e)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the
city to enter into mutually negotiated contracts for the provision of jail
services with or without different terms and as authorized by the legislature.
(Ord. 2015-163, passed 7-20-2015; Ord. 2021-20, passed 2-16-2021; Ord. 2024-
204, passed 11-18-2024)
§ 240.17 DISPOSITION OF POLICE CANINE.
   (a)   As used in this section, POLICE CANINE shall mean any domestic dog
that has been purchased by the city, has been trained by or for the city's use,
and may be used to assist the Police Department in the performance of its
official duties.
   (b)   If a police canine becomes unfit for duty due to age, disability or
injury, or if the Police Department disbands an active canine unit, the police
canine handler of the animal shall have the first opportunity to purchase the
police canine from the city for $1.00.
   (c)   If A police canine handler chooses not to purchase a police canine
pursuant to division (b) of this section, the disposition of the dog shall be
as determined by the Chief of Police and the Director of Finance.
   (d)   Any handler who purchases a police canine under the provisions of this
section shall assume all responsibility and liability for the dog thereafter,
including all care, medical expenses, insurance and any other costs associated
with the purchase of the police canine from the city and the ownership of the
police canine from the date of purchase.
   (e)   Any police officer who leaves an active canine unit while the police
canine assigned to the unit is still fit for duty forfeits the right to
purchase the dog under this section.
(Ord. 2019-136, passed 7-15-2019)
CHAPTER 242: FIRE DEPARTMENT
Editor’s note:
   The Rules and Regulations for the government of the Fire Department were
approved by Council by Resolution 1969-12, passed February 17, 1969. Copies may
be obtained, at cost, from the Fire Chief.
   The city enters into collective bargaining agreements, from time to time,
with the International Association of Firefighters, Local 2079, which
agreements provide for terms and conditions of employment. The provisions of
this chapter apply to those employees and those subjects not otherwise provided
for in such agreements. In the event of a conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter and a provision of any such agreement, the provision
of the agreement shall control. Copies of the latest relevant legislation and
of such agreements may be found in Appendix II following Title Ten of this
Administration Code or may be obtained, at cost, from the Clerk of Council.
Section
   
242.01   Composition
   
242.02   Hours of work; vacations; sick leave; uniform allowances
   
242.03   Fire Chief
   
242.035   Assistant Fire Chief
   
242.04   Charge for and regulation of alarm systems (Repealed)
   
242.05   Petty Cash Fund (Repealed)
   
242.06   Emergency medical service (EMS) billing procedure and fees
   
242.07   Emergency Medical Service Revenue Fund
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Disability and Pension Fund, see R.C. Ch. 742
   Establishment, see
Charter Art. VI, § 1
   Fire lanes, see §
1660.02
   Fire permits, see §
1610.09
   General duties, see R.C. § 737.11
   Pick-up of Police and Firemen’s Disability and Pension Fund, see §
260.19
   Safety and Public Properties Committee, see §
220.06(a)(3)
§ 242.01 COMPOSITION.
   Pursuant to Article VI, § 1, of the Charter, the Fire Department shall
consist of not more than one full-time Fire Chief, one full-time Assistant Fire
Chief, one full-time department head Secretary, a combination of 19 full-time
Battalion Chiefs and Lieutenants and 46 full-time firefighters. Such personnel
shall be appointed by the Mayor pursuant to the provisions of the Charter and
subject to the rules of the Civil Service Commission, but appointments of new
members of the Department shall not be made without prior approval of the
Safety and Public Properties Committee and the Finance Committee of Council.
(Ord. 2000-339, passed 12-18-2000; Ord. 2002-20, passed 1-23-2002; Ord. 2007-
172, passed 7-16-2007; Ord. 2012-62, passed 3-19-2012; Ord. 2024-57, passed 3-
18-2024; Ord. 2025-1, passed 1-21-2025)
§ 242.02 HOURS OF WORK; VACATIONS; SICK LEAVE; UNIFORM ALLOWANCES.
   The full-time Fire Chief and the full-time Assistant Fire Chief shall be on
active duty in the performance of his or her duties not less than eight hours
per day and not less than five days in each calendar week. All other full-time
firefighters shall be on active duty in the performance of their duties in
shifts of not less than 24 hours on and 48 hours off, except that all such
other full-time firefighters shall be allowed additional time off of four 24-
hour periods during each calendar year, known as Kelley Days. All Kelley Days
shall be taken during the calendar year of entitlement, shall not accrue from
year to year and may be scheduled by the member entitled thereto, subject to
the approval of the Chief. All full-time members of the Fire Department shall
remain on call for the performance of their duties during emergencies on a 24
hour per day basis. They shall be entitled to the same vacation and sick leave
rights as are afforded all other full-time regular employees of the city and
the same uniform allowances as are afforded members of the Police Department.
Personnel assigned by the Fire Chief to fire prevention duties shall be
required to work no less than 40 hours nor more than 72 hours per calendar
week.
(Ord. 2000-339, passed 12-18-2000)
§ 242.03 FIRE CHIEF.
   There is hereby established the position of Fire Chief. The Fire Chief shall
be appointed by the Mayor pursuant to
Article V, § 5, of the City Charter. The Fire Chief shall report directly to
the Mayor and shall perform such duties as may be required by the Mayor
pursuant to the position’s job description on file in the Human Resource
Department.
(Ord. 2000-339, passed 12-18-2000; Ord. 2001-123, passed 6-4-2001)
§ 242.035 ASSISTANT FIRE CHIEF.
   Council, pursuant to Civil Service Commission Rule 4(h), hereby declares its
intent that the position of the Assistant Chief in the Fire Department shall be
an exempt, non-civil service classified position. The Mayor, pursuant to
Article V, § 5(b), of the City Charter, shall appoint the Assistant Fire Chief
upon the recommendation of the Fire Chief. The Assistant Fire Chief may be
terminated for just cause by the Mayor pursuant to
Article V, § 5(b), of the City Charter, with recommendation for termination by
the Fire Chief. The Assistant Fire Chief may also be transferred or reduced by
the Mayor with recommendation for such transfer or reduction by the Fire Chief.
If the Assistant Fire Chief was appointed to the position from the classified
civil service status in the Fire Department, the Assistant Fire Chief shall
revert to the classified civil service status held by him or her at the time of
his or her appointment if he or she is transferred or reduced.
(Ord. 2000-339, passed 12-18-2000)
§ 242.04 CHARGE FOR AND REGULATION OF ALARM SYSTEMS (REPEALED).
Editor’s note:
   Section 242.04 was repealed by Ordinance 2001-12, passed January 16, 2001.
§ 242.05 PETTY CASH FUND (REPEALED).
Editor’s note:
   Section 242.05 was repealed by Ordinance 2006-49, passed March 6, 2006,
please see §
234.07 regarding Petty Cash Funds.
§ 242.06 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE (EMS) BILLING PROCEDURE AND FEES.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT SERVICES. Any pre-hospital intervention by
personnel certified at the level of EMT-Paramedic employed by the city or
another political subdivision responding to a call for emergency medical
service in the city. These interventions include, but are not limited to,
cardiac monitoring and interpretation, external cardiac pacing, cardioversion,
endotracheal intubation, intravenous cannulation, medication administration,
needle decompression of the chest and intraosseous infusion.
      (2)   BASIC LIFE SUPPORT SERVICES. Any pre-hospital non-invasive
intervention by personnel certified at the levels of EMT-Basic or EMT-paramedic
employed by the city or another political subdivision responding to a call for
emergency medical service in the city. These interventions include, but are not
limited to, non-invasive methods of airway maintenance, oxygen administration,
bleeding control, treatment of shock, splinting of fractures and patient
assessment including taking and recording of patient vital signs.
      (3)   TRANSPORT. To carry or convey a person by publicly owned or
operated motor vehicle being used in response to a call for emergency medical
service from one location to another.
   (b)   Each person receiving emergency medical service from the city shall
pay a utilization charge as follows.
      (1)   For basic life support services without transport, there shall be
no fee.
      (2)   For basic life support services with transport, the fee shall be
$550, plus $12 per mile.
      (3)   For advanced life support services without transport, there shall
be no fee.
      (4)   For advanced life support services with transport, the fee shall be
$750, plus $12 per mile.
      (5)   The Director of Finance shall waive the aforesaid fee or a portion
thereof, where he or she finds and determines that the person receiving the
services is indigent or otherwise unable to pay for such service, and there is
no other source for the payment thereof. The Director of Finance and/or Fire
Chief shall notify each party billed of the terms of this division (b) in
conjunction with the billing for the fee.
   (c)   Insurance information shall be provided to EMS personnel at the time
of service. EMS services provided by the city shall be reimbursed by insured
users to the extent of coverage.
   (d)   The city shall waive all co-payments and/or deductibles otherwise owed
by city residents who have medical insurance, Medicare or Medicare HMO coverage
as a source of health insurance.
   (e)   The city may engage a private contractor to collect EMS fees. This
contract shall be reviewed as necessary by the administration and Council to
determine if services and costs are beneficial to the city.
   (f)   The charges herein shall be in addition to any other charges payable
for such services, including, but not limited to, any tax levied, all or part
of which pays any portion of the cost of emergency medical services, and/or any
charges for services rendered by others.
   (g)   The revenues generated by the charges for emergency medical services
herein may be deposited into one or more funds established by the Council for
the purposes of the acquisition of emergency medical services vehicle(s) and
equipment, including the payment of the costs of financing thereof, EMS
supplies, fees and wages (including overtime) for paramedic service and any
costs incurred in the collection of such fees.
(Ord. 2005-50, passed 6-7-2005; Ord. 2009-31, passed 2-2-2009; Ord. 2016-15,
passed 2-1-2016)
§ 242.07 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE REVENUE FUND.
   (a)   There is hereby established a special fund, to be known as the
Emergency Medical Service Revenue Fund, under the provisions of R.C. § 5705.12.
   (b)   All revenue derived from the collection for emergency medical service
billing either by the city or a collection service will be credited to the
Emergency Medical Service Revenue Fund and the revenue shall be used solely for
the operational costs and capital purchases related to the provision of
emergency medical services provided by the City Fire Department.
(Ord. 2005-229, passed 10-5-2005)
CHAPTER 244: SERVICE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
244.01   Establishment
   
244.02   Director of City Services/Service Director; Cemetery Sexton
   
244.03   Manager of Streets and Landscape
   
244.04   Manager of Fleet Maintenance
   
244.05   Manager of City Sewers and Drainage
   
244.06   Manager Administration
   
244.07   Manager of Solid Waste
   
244.08   Manager Second Shift
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Cemeteries, see
Ch. 1064
   Establishment, see
Charter Art. VI, § 1
   Overtime, see §
260.05(c)
   Recycling; sale of materials, see §
234.10
   Safety and Public Properties Committee, see §
220.06(a)(3)
   State law provisions, see R.C. §§ 735.01 et seq.
§ 244.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   Pursuant to
Article VI, § 1, of the City Charter, there is hereby established in the city a
Service Department and the office of Director of City Services/Service
Director. In addition to the Director of City Services/Service Director, the
Department may consist of the following full-time positions and are not to
exceed the listed number of positions:
   (a)   Assistant Service Director;
   (b)   Manager of Streets and Landscape;
   (c)   Manager of Fleet Maintenance;
   (d)   Manager of City Sewers and Drainage;
   (e)   Manager Administration;
   (f)   Manager of Solid Waste;
   (g)   Manager Second Shift;
   (h)   Department head Secretary;
   (i)   Secretary I, City Sewers and Drainage Division; and
   (j)   Administrative Coordinator/Dispatcher; and a maximum of 65 permanent
civil service employees and such number of nonpermanent, nonfull-time employees
as may be necessary as determined by the Mayor. Such nonpermanent, nonfull-time
employees shall fall under civil service guidelines for “seasonal and part-
time;” shall not be included in the classified civil service; shall be hired
only to the extent funds have been appropriated therefor; and shall not receive
those fringe benefits which are reserved for only permanent full-time
employees.
(Ord. 2000-350, passed 12-18-2000; Ord. 2001-127, passed 5-7-2001; Ord. 2002-
205, passed 9-18-2002; Ord. 2006-32, passed 2-21-2006; Ord. 2006-143, passed 6-
19-2006; Ord. 2008-203, passed 7-21-2008; Ord. 2016-169, passed 10-4-2016)
§ 244.02 DIRECTOR OF CITY SERVICES/SERVICE DIRECTOR; CEMETERY SEXTON.
   There is hereby established the position of Director of City Services/
Service Director. The Director of City Services/Service Director shall be
appointed by the Mayor pursuant to
Article V, § 5, of the City Charter. The Director of City Services/Service
Director shall report directly to the Public Works Commissioner and shall
perform such duties as may be required pursuant to the position’s job
description on file in the Human Resource Department or such duties as deemed
necessary by the Public Works Commissioner. The Director of City Services/
Service Director shall also serve as Cemetery Sexton and shall perform the
duties of that office as prescribed by the laws of the state.
(Ord. 2000-350, passed 12-18-2000; Ord. 2001-123, passed 6-4-2001; Ord. 2006-
32, passed 2-21-2006; Ord. 2006-143, passed 6-19-2006; Ord. 2010-120, passed 5-
17-2010; Ord. 2020-170, passed 11-16-2020)
§ 244.03 MANAGER OF STREETS AND LANDSCAPE.
   Pursuant to
Article V, § 5, of the City Charter, there is hereby established the position
of Manager of Streets and Landscape, to be appointed by the Mayor. The Manager
of Streets and Landscape, shall work under and be subject to the supervision of
the Director of City Services/Service Director and shall perform such duties as
may be delegated to him or her by the Director of City Services/Service
Director. He or she shall attend meetings as deemed necessary by the Mayor or
the Director of City Services/Service Director.
(Ord. 2000-350, passed 12-18-2000; Ord. 2006-32, passed 2-21-2006; Ord. 2006-
143, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 244.04 MANAGER OF FLEET MAINTENANCE.
   Pursuant to
Article V, § 5, of the City Charter, there is hereby established the position
of Manager of Fleet Maintenance, to be appointed by the Mayor. The Manager of
Fleet Maintenance, shall work under and be subject to the supervision of the
Director of City Services/Service Director and shall perform such duties as may
be delegated to him or her by the Director of City Services/Service Director.
He or she shall attend meetings as deemed necessary by the Mayor or the
Director of City Services/Service Director.
(Ord. 2000-350, passed 12-18-2000; Ord. 2006-32, passed 2-21-2006; Ord. 2006-
143, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 244.05 MANAGER OF CITY SEWERS AND DRAINAGE.
   Pursuant to
Article V, § 5, of the City Charter, there is hereby established the position
of Manager of City Sewers and Drainage, to be appointed by the Mayor. The
Manager of City Sewers and Drainage, shall work under and be subject to the
supervision of the Director of City Services/Service Director. The Manager of
City Sewers and Drainage, shall attend all meetings as deemed necessary by the
Mayor or the Director of City Services/Service Director.
(Ord. 2000-350, passed 12-18-2000; Ord. 2006-32, passed 2-21-2006; Ord. 2006-
143, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 244.06 MANAGER ADMINISTRATION.
   Pursuant to
Article V, § 5, of the City Charter, there is hereby established the position
of Manager Administration, to be appointed by the Mayor. The Manager
Administration, shall work under and be subject to the supervision of the
Director of City Services/Service Director. The Manager Administration, shall
attend all meetings as deemed necessary by the Mayor or the Director of City
Services/Service Director.
(Ord. 2006-143, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 244.07 MANAGER OF SOLID WASTE.
   Pursuant to
Article V, § 5, of the City Charter, there is hereby established the position
of Manager of Solid Waste, to be appointed by the Mayor. The Manager of Solid
Waste shall work under and be subject to the supervision of the Director of
City Services/Service Director. The Manager of Solid Waste shall attend all
meetings as deemed necessary by the Mayor or the Director of City Services/
Service Director.
(Ord. 2006-143, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 244.08 MANAGER SECOND SHIFT.
   Pursuant to
Article V, § 5, of the City Charter, there is hereby established the position
of Manager Second Shift, to be appointed by the Mayor. The Manager Second
Shift, shall work under and be subject to the supervision of the Director of
City Services/Service Director. The Manager of Solid Waste, shall attend all
meetings as deemed necessary by the Mayor or the Director of City Services/
Service Director.
(Ord. 2006-143, passed 6-19-2006)
CHAPTER 246: PUBLIC WORKS DIVISION
Section
   
246.01   Establishment of Division
   
246.02   Public Works Commissioner
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Construction of sidewalks, driveway aprons and tree lawns, see
Ch. 1026
   Excavations, see
Ch. 1020
   Holidays, see §
260.07
   Improvement of public land, see §
1222.04(a)
   Public service in cities, see R.C. §§ 735.01 et seq.
   Public Works Commissioner, see §
230.04
   Public Works Committee, see §
220.06(a)(2)
§ 246.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF DIVISION.
   There is hereby established the Division of Public Works. The Public Works
Division shall provide oversight, direction, supervision and coordination to
the departments falling within the Public Works Division including; the
Engineering Department, the Construction Department, the Service Department and
the Water Reclamation Department.
(Ord. 2010-116, passed 5-17-2010)
§ 246.02 PUBLIC WORKS COMMISSIONER.
   There is hereby established the position of Public Works Commissioner to be
appointed by the Mayor pursuant to
Article V, § 5(b), of the City Charter. The Public Works Commissioner shall
work under and be subject to the supervision of the Mayor in conjunction with
the Departments of Service, Engineering, Water Reclamation and the Construction
Department and shall perform such duties as may be delegated to him or her by
the Mayor. Among other duties which may be delegated to him or her, the Public
Works Commissioner shall have principal authority for coordinating the
construction and supervision of capital improvement projects throughout the
city.
(Ord. 2010-116, passed 5-17-2010; Ord. 2014-268, passed 12-15-2014)
CHAPTER 248: ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT
Section
   
248.01   City Engineer; composition of Department
   
248.02   Duties of City Engineer; appointment; qualifications
   
248.03   Assistant City Engineer(s)
   
248.04   Project Engineer(s)
   
248.05   Assistant(s) to the Engineer
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Approval of streets proposed in plats, see R.C. § 711.08
   Assistance to regional and county planning commissions, see R.C. § 713.26
   City Engineer generally, see
Charter Art. VI, § 7
   Compensation, see R.C. § 733.80
   Overtime, see §
260.05(c)
   Surveys preceding construction, see R.C. § 743.29
§ 248.01 CITY ENGINEER; COMPOSITION OF DEPARTMENT.
   Pursuant to
Article VI, § 7, of the City Charter, the head of the Engineering Department
shall be the City Engineer. In addition to the City Engineer, the Engineering
Department may consist of the following full-time positions and are not to
exceed the listed number of positions:
   (a)   Assistant City Engineer(s);
   (b)   Assistant(s) to the Engineer;
   (c)   Department head Secretary; and
   (d)   Secretary.
(Res. 2000-154, passed 7-5-2000; Ord. 2010-118, passed 5-17-2010)
§ 248.02 DUTIES OF CITY ENGINEER; APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATIONS.
   The City Engineer shall be the head of the Engineering Department and shall
be appointed by the Mayor as provided in
Article V, § 5(c), of the City Charter. The City Engineer shall serve the
Mayor, Council, the administrative departments of the city and city officials,
in connection with all civil engineering matters of the city. The City Engineer
shall perform all duties now or hereafter imposed upon city engineers under the
laws of the state and such other duties as prescribed by the ordinance(s) of
Council. No person shall act as the City Engineer unless he or she is duly
registered as a professional engineer in civil engineering in the state. The
City Engineer shall report to the Public Works Commissioner.
(Res. 2000-154, passed 7-5-2000; Ord. 2010-118, passed 5-17-2010; Ord. 2020-
167. Passed 11-2-2020.)
§ 248.03 ASSISTANT CITY ENGINEER(S).
   (a)   There is hereby established the position of Assistant City Engineer
(s), which position(s) may be filled by approval of the Mayor.
   (b)   The Assistant City Engineer(s) shall work under and be subject to the
supervision of the City Engineer and shall perform such duties as may be
delegated to him or her by the City Engineer.
   (c)   No person shall act as an Assistant City Engineer unless he or she is
duly registered as a professional engineer in civil engineering in the state
within one year of appointment as an Assistant City Engineer.
(Res. 2000-154, passed 7-5-2000; Ord. 2010-118, passed 5-17-2010)
§ 248.04 PROJECT ENGINEER(S).
   (a)   There is hereby established the position of Project Engineer(s), which
position(s) shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor pursuant to
Article V, § 5(b), of the City Charter.
   (b)   The Project Engineer(s) shall work under and be subject to the
supervision of the City Engineer and shall perform such duties as may be
delegated to him or her by the City Engineer.
   (c)   No person shall act as a Project Engineer unless he or she is duly
registered as a professional engineer in civil engineering in the state within
one year of appointment as a Project Engineer for the city.
§ 248.05 ASSISTANT(S) TO THE ENGINEER.
   (a)   There is hereby established the position of Assistant(s) to the City
Engineer, which position(s) shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor
pursuant to
Article V, § 5(b), of the City Charter.
   (b)   The Assistant(s) to the City Engineer shall work under and be subject
to the supervision of the City Engineer and shall perform such duties as may be
delegated to him or her by the City Engineer.
(Res. 2000-154, passed 7-5-2000; Ord. 2010-118, passed 5-17-2010)
CHAPTER 249: CONSTRUCTION DEPARTMENT
Section
   
249.01   Establishment; purpose
   
249.02   Construction Project Administrator
   
249.03   Assistant to the Construction Project Administrator
   
249.04   Inspectors
§ 249.01 ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSE.
   There is hereby established the Construction Department. The Construction
Department shall provide independent administration and inspection of all
projects as contracted and/or performed by the city.
(Ord. 2010-117, passed 5-17-2010)
§ 249.02 CONSTRUCTION PROJECT ADMINISTRATOR.
   (a)   There is hereby established the position of Construction Project
Administrator. The Construction Project Administrator shall be appointed by the
Mayor, pursuant to
Article V, § 5(b), of the City Charter. The Construction Project Administrator
shall report to the City Engineer.
   (b)   The Construction Project Administrator shall have full responsibility
for all administrative aspects of construction projects performed in the city
or such duties as deemed necessary by the City Engineer or his designee, and
ensure proper adherence to plans and specifications. He or she shall approve
all construction project invoices submitted to the City Engineer for payment as
work is completed and accounted for.
(Ord. 2010-117, passed 5-17-2010; Ord. 2020-167. Passed 11-2-2020.)
§ 249.03 ASSISTANT TO THE CONSTRUCTION PROJECT ADMINISTRATOR.
   (a)   There is hereby established the position of the Assistant to the
Construction Project Administrator, which position shall be filled by
appointment of the Mayor pursuant to
Article V, § 5(b), of the City Charter.
   (b)   The Assistant to the Construction Project Administrator shall be
responsible for various administrative duties as assigned by the Construction
Project Administrator and work under the supervision of the Construction
Project Administrator.
(Ord. 2010-152, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 249.04 INSPECTORS.
   (a)   There is hereby established the position(s) of Inspector(s), which
position(s) may be filled by approval of the Mayor.
   (b)   The Inspector(s) shall work under and be subject to the supervision of
the Construction Project Administrator and shall perform such duties as may be
delegated to him or her by the same.
(Ord. 2010-117, passed 5-17-2010; Ord. 2010-152, passed 6-21-2010)
CHAPTER 250: BUILDING DEPARTMENT
Editor’s note:
   Provisions relating to the Building Department are codified in
Chapter 1420 of Part Fourteen, the Building and Housing Code.
CHAPTER 252: WATER RECLAMATION DEPARTMENT
Editor’s note:
   This chapter, previously entitled “Pollution Control Department,” was
repealed and re-enacted in its entirety under its present title by Ordinance
2000-61, passed March 20, 2000.
Section
   
252.01   Director of Water Reclamation
   
252.02   Placement of full-time employees on general pay schedule
   
252.03   Protective gear allowance; call-out pay; reimbursement for cost of CDL
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Air pollution, see §§
660.08,
660.084,
660.086
   Dumping of refuse, see R.C. §§ 1531.131, 1531.14
   Litter control and recycling, see R.C. Ch. 1502
   Overtime, see §
260.05(c)
   Pollution control program, see R.C. § 1501.20
   Pollution in subdivisions, see §
1250.20
   Water pollution, see §
660.04
§ 252.01 DIRECTOR OF WATER RECLAMATION.
   There is hereby established the position of Director of Water Reclamation,
who shall be appointed by the Mayor under the provisions of
Article V, § 5, of the Charter. The Director of Water Reclamation shall report
directly to the Public Works Commissioner and shall perform such duties as may
be required pursuant to the position’s job description on file in the Human
Resource Department or such duties as deemed necessary by the Public Works
Commissioner.
(Ord. 2000-61, passed 3-20-2000; Ord. 2001-123, passed 6-4-2001; Ord. 2010-119,
passed 5-17-2010; Ord. 2020-171, passed 11-16-2020)
§ 252.02 PLACEMENT OF FULL-TIME EMPLOYEES ON GENERAL PAY SCHEDULE.
   Effective January 1, 2001, full-time employees of the Water Reclamation
Department shall be placed on the city’s general pay schedule.
(Ord. 2000-325, passed 11-20-2000; Ord. 2010-119, passed 5-17-2010)
§ 252.03 PROTECTIVE GEAR ALLOWANCE; CALL-OUT PAY; REIMBURSEMENT FOR COST OF
CDL.
   An employee whose job description requires a CDL shall be required to
possess or obtain (within 12 months) said license and the city shall reimburse
the cost associated with obtaining and renewing such license.
(Ord. 2000-326, passed 11-20-2000; Ord. 2004-25, passed 2-2-2004; Ord. 2010-
119, passed 5-17-2010)
CHAPTER 253: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
Section
   
253.01   Establishment; purpose
   
253.02   Economic Development Department; composition
   
253.03   Economic Development Committee
   
253.04   Tax Incentive Review Council
   
253.05   Sale or lease of property for economic development purposes
§ 253.01 ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSE.
   There is hereby established an Economic Development Department, a department
of the city, pursuant to the Council's authority set forth in
Article VI, Section 1, of the City Charter. The purpose of the Economic
Development Department is to oversee all aspects of the city’s business
attraction and retention program, focusing on modern needs and realities of the
community.
(Ord. 2018-59, passed 5-21-2018; Ord. 2021-18, passed 2-1-2021)
§ 253.02 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT; COMPOSITION.
   There is hereby established the position of Director of Economic
Development. The Director of Economic Development shall be appointed by the
Mayor pursuant to
Article V, Section 5 of the City Charter. The Director of Economic Development
shall report directly to the Mayor and shall perform such duties as are
required by the Mayor pursuant to the position’s job description on file in the
Human Resources Department. The Director of Economic Development shall be
responsible for implementing all aspects of the city’s business attraction and
retention program including the proactive marketing of the city's office,
industrial and retail areas and serving as the ombudsman to the business
community.
(Ord. 2018-59, passed 5-21-2018; Ord. 2021-18, passed 2-1-2021)
§ 253.03 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE.
   (a)   There is hereby established an Economic Development Committee. The
Committee shall be comprised of three members of Council (who shall be the
voting members), one alternate member of Council who shall vote only in the
absence of any regular member, three members of the Solon City School District
Board of Education, the Mayor and one member who shall be the Executive
Director of the Solon Chamber of Commerce. An additional ex-officio member of
the Committee shall be the Economic Development Manager. Council members of the
Committee shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the confirmation of
Council, for a term to commence on December 1 of each odd-numbered year.
Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor with the approval of
Council.
   (b)   The Committee shall have the authority to administer the Urban Jobs
and Economic Development Program in the city pursuant to R.C. §§ 5709.61
through 5709.66, as amended; the Job Creation Grant Program in the city
pursuant to Resolution 2003-76; the Community Reinvestment Area Program in the
city pursuant to Ordinance 2004-48 as amended by Ordinance 2018-215; and the
Growth and Revitalization Incentive Program pursuant to Ordinance 2006-132 as
amended by 2008-246, 2012-54 and 2012-158. To this extent the Committee may
perform the following duties and responsibilities:
      (1)   Meet with proposed industrial and commercial firms requesting tax
and/or financial incentives;
      (2)   Seek to achieve orderly industrial and commercial growth within the
city while at the same time preserving and enhancing the tax base for the Solon
City School District and the city;
      (3)   Make recommendations to Council on the granting of tax and/or
financial incentives to various industrial and commercial firms;
      (4)   Recommend to Council the hiring of any consultants or studies as it
may feel would be necessary to perform its duties; and
      (5)   Prepare an annual report to Council, the Board of Education of the
Solon City School District and the Solon Chamber of Commerce of its activities
throughout the year.
   (c)   For any Job Creation Grant Program or Growth and Revitalization
Incentive Program incentive, the membership of the Economic Development
Committee shall exclude the Solon City School District Board of Education
members, resulting in a total Committee membership of six for such program
matters.
(Ord. 2021-76, passed 4-19-2021)
§ 253.04 TAX INCENTIVE REVIEW COUNCIL.
   There is hereby created a Tax Incentive Review Council, pursuant to R.C. §
5709.85, to be composed as follows:
   (a)   Three members appointed by the County Executive;
   (b)   Two electors of the city appointed by the Mayor with the concurrence
of a majority of the duly elected or appointed members of Council;
   (c)   The County Fiscal Officer or his or her designee; and
   (d)   A member of the Board of Education of the Solon School District.
(Ord. 2021-76, passed 4-19-2021)
§ 253.05 SALE OR LEASE OF PROPERTY FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PURPOSES.
   (a)   The requirements set forth in R.C. § 721.03 requiring advertising for
competitive bids shall not be applicable to the sale or lease of city-owned
property or interests therein in furtherance of the economic development
purposes of Article VIII, Section 13 of the Constitution of the State of Ohio;
and any agreement or such sale or lease may be entered into without any bids
being taken or considered.
   (b)   Council shall, by ordinance and by a two-thirds vote of the members
elected thereto, approve the terms and conditions of such sale, exchange of or
lease and authorize the proper city official to enter into an agreement with
the proposed purchaser(s) or lessee(s). Such terms and conditions shall include
non-monetary considerations for the sale, exchange or lease, such as
commitments to develop the property, creation or retention of jobs, and other
applicable public purposes.
   (c)   The procedure for sale or lease of city-owned properties under this
section shall be as follows:
      (1)   The property must be of no municipal use or purpose as determined
by City Council;
      (2)   An appraisal must be conducted and the report provided to all
members of City Council and the Mayor;
      (3)   A development agreement must be entered into with any party
purchasing or leasing any city-owned land, with the value to the city in any
sale, lease, land exchange, jobs created, green space created or any other
consideration being greater than the appraised value of any city property being
sold or leased.
(Ord. 2021-209, passed 10-18-2021)
CHAPTER 254: PLANNING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
Editor’s note:
   The provisions previously codified as § 254.02, “Growth and Revitalization
Incentive Program (GRIP),” were removed from the code during the 2014
recodification, and the remaining sections of Chapter 254 were renumbered
accordingly.
Section
   
254.01   Planning and Community Development Department; composition
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Community improvement corporations, see R.C. §§ 1724.01 et seq.
   Community reinvestment areas, see R.C. §§ 3735.65 et seq.
   Community urban redevelopment corporations, see R.C. §§ 1728.01 et seq.
   Economic Development Program, see R.C. Ch. 166
§ 254.01 PLANNING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT; COMPOSITION.
   (a)   Pursuant to
Article VI, § 9, of the City Charter, the head of the Planning and Community
Development Department shall be the Director of Planning and Community
Development. In addition to the Director of Planning and Community Development,
there are hereby established the following positions which may be filled by
approval of the Mayor:
      (1)   Economic Development Manager;
      (2)   Geographic Information System Coordinator;
      (3)   Senior Planner;
      (4)   Planner I or II;
      (5)   Zoning Inspector; and
      (6)   Department Head Secretary.
   (b)   The Planning and Community Development Department positions shall work
under and be subject to the supervision of the Director of Planning and
Community Development and shall perform such duties as may be delegated to him
or her by the Director pursuant to the position’s job description on file in
the Human Resource Department.
(Ord. 2003-75, passed 4-7-2003; Ord. 2014-208, passed 11-3-2014; Ord. 2016-167,
passed 10-4-2016; Ord. 2021-77, passed 4-19-2021)
CHAPTER 255: INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY DEPARTMENT
Section
   
255.01   Establishment; purpose
   
255.02   Director of Information Technology
   
255.03   Network and Support Services Senior Analyst
   
255.04   Network and Support Services Analyst
   
255.05   Budgetary duties
§ 255.01 ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSE.
   There is hereby established the Information Technology Department. The
Information Technology Department shall be dedicated to provide, manage,
support and promote the use of cost effective, reliable and secure, data
communications, telecommunications and other systems to assure fullest use of
available technologies and resources. The Information Technology Department
shall perform such functions and duties as may be determined by the Mayor and
Council, or, unless a contrary intent appears in any action of Council, as may
now or hereafter be provided by law.
(Ord. 2007-305, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 255.02 DIRECTOR OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY.
   There is hereby established the position of Director of Information
Technology. The Director of Information Technology shall be appointed by the
Mayor, subject to the confirmation by the majority of the members of Council,
pursuant to
Article V, § 5, of the City Charter. The Director of Information Technology
shall report directly to the Mayor and shall perform such duties as may be
delegated to him or her, by the Mayor pursuant to the position’s job
description on file in the Human Resource Department.
(Ord. 2007-305, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 255.03 NETWORK AND SUPPORT SERVICES SENIOR ANALYST.
   There is hereby established the position of Network and Support Services
Senior Analyst. The Network and Support Services Senior Analyst shall be
appointed by the Mayor. The Network and Support Services Senior Analyst shall
report directly to the Director of Information Technology and shall perform
such duties as may be required by the Director pursuant to the position’s job
description on file in the Human Resource Department.
(Ord. 2007-305, passed 12-17-2007; Ord. 2014-240, passed 11-17-2014)
§ 255.04 NETWORK AND SUPPORT SERVICES ANALYST.
   There is hereby established the position of Network and Support Services
Analyst, which position may be filled by approval of the Mayor. The Network and
Support Services Analyst shall report directly to the Director of Information
Technology and shall perform such duties as may be delegated to him or her by
the Director or the Network and Support Services Senior Analyst pursuant to the
position’s job description on file in the Human Resource Department.
(Ord. 2007-305, passed 12-17-2007; Ord. 2014-240, passed 11-17-2014)
§ 255.05 BUDGETARY DUTIES.
   The Director shall be responsible for planning and preparation of a proposed
budget for the Information Technology Department to be submitted to the Mayor
or his or her designee on or before a date determined by the Director of
Finance. Such budget shall take into consideration the obligations of
maintenance, operation, upkeep, protection of buildings, lands and other
facilities devoted to Information Technology Department uses.
(Ord. 2007-305, passed 12-17-2007)
CHAPTER 256: RECREATION DEPARTMENT
Section
   
256.01   Recreation Department; composition
   
256.02   Programming; fees
   
256.03   Budgetary duties
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Land appropriation for parks, see R.C. §§ 715.21, 719.01
   Parks and playgrounds, see R.C. Ch. 755
§ 256.01 RECREATION DEPARTMENT; COMPOSITION.
   (a)   There is hereby established the position of Director of Recreation.
The Director of Recreation shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the
confirmation by a majority of the members of Council, pursuant to
Article V, § 5, of the City Charter. The Director of Recreation shall report
directly to the Mayor and shall perform such duties as may be required by the
Mayor pursuant to the position’s job description on file in the Human Resource
Department. In addition to the Director of Recreation, there are hereby
established the following full-time positions that are not to exceed the listed
number of positions, which may be filled by appointment of the Mayor.
      (1)   Manager of Community Center;
      (2)   Manager of Parks and Recreation;
      (3)   Supervisor of Recreation Programs; and
      (4)   Department Head Secretary.
   (b)   In addition, there are hereby established the following full-time
positions that are not to exceed the listed number of positions, which may be
filled by approval of the Mayor.
      (1)   Banquet Coordinator;
      (2)   Program Coordinator;
      (3)   Activities Coordinator;
      (4)   Aquatics Coordinator;
      (5)   Facility Administrator;
      (6)   Maintenance Coordinator;
      (7)   Front Desk Coordinator; and
      (8)   Maintenance Worker(5).
   (c)   In addition, the Director of Recreation and/or the managers may hire
part-time or seasonal assistants when deemed necessary in accordance with the
annual budgetary appropriations authorized by City Council for the Recreation
Department.
(Ord. 2001-123, passed 6-4-2001; Ord. 2007-300, passed 12-17-2007; Ord. 2014-
241, passed 11-17-2014; Ord. 2016-16, passed 2-1-2016)
§ 256.02 PROGRAMMING; FEES.
   (a)   All various programming for the Recreation Department, Grantwood Golf
Course and Solon Center for the Arts will be set forth by the Director of
Recreation and/or the appropriate manager and shall be subject to review,
change, addition and elimination at the Director’s discretion.
   (b)   In addition, fees for all city recreation programs, Grantwood Golf
Course programs and Solon Center for the Arts programs shall be set forth by
the Director of Recreation and/or the appropriate manager and shall be subject
to change as the Mayor or his or her designee deems necessary in accordance
with the annual budgetary appropriations authorized by City Council for the
Recreation Department.
(Ord. 2007-300, passed 12-17-2007; Ord. 2012-117, passed 5-7-2012; Ord. 2014-
241, passed 11-17-2014)
§ 256.03 BUDGETARY DUTIES.
   The Director of Recreation shall be responsible for planning and preparation
of a proposed budget for the Recreation Department to be submitted to the Mayor
on or before a date to be determined by the Director of Finance. Such budget
shall take into consideration the obligations of maintenance, operation,
upkeep, protection of buildings, lands and other facilities devoted to
recreational uses.
(Ord. 2007-300, passed 12-17-2007)
CHAPTER 257: SENIOR SERVICES DEPARTMENT
Section
   
257.01   Establishment; purpose
   
257.02   Senior Service Department; composition
   
257.03   Budgetary duties
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Homestead Exemption Program for senior citizens, see §
1046.12
   Senior Citizen Residential Districts, see Zoning Code
   Snow removal services for senior citizens, see
Ch. 1072
§ 257.01 ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSE.
   There is hereby established a Senior Services Department pursuant to
Council’s authority set forth in
Article VI, § 1, of the City Charter. The Senior Services Department shall
enrich, assist and engage the lives of older adults in order to maintain and
enhance their dignity and strength, both as individuals and groups, and shall
provide services that foster independence for adults 60 years of age and over
or who provide proof satisfactory to the Director of Senior Services of
clinically significant conditions or physical limitations that affect movement,
deeming their participation appropriate in the Department of Senior Center
Health and Wellness programming. The Senior Services Department shall perform
such functions and duties as may be determined by the Mayor and Council, or,
unless a contrary intent appears in any action of Council, as may now or
hereafter be provided by the laws of the state.
(Res. 2000-45, passed 4-17-2000; Ord. 2007-298, passed 12-13-2007)
§ 257.02 SENIOR SERVICE DEPARTMENT; COMPOSITION.
   (a)   There is hereby established the position of Director of Senior
Services. The Director of Senior Services shall be appointed by the Mayor,
subject to the confirmation by a majority of the members of Council, pursuant
to
Article V, § 5, of the City Charter. The Director of Senior Services shall
report directly to the Mayor and shall perform such duties as may be required
by the Mayor pursuant to the position’s job description on file in the Human
Resource Department. In addition to the Director of Senior Services, there are
hereby established the following full-time positions and are not to exceed the
listed numbers of positions which may be filled by approval of the Mayor:
      (1)   Program Coordinators;
      (2)   Social Worker;
      (3)   Department Head Secretary;
      (4)   Activities Assistants/Receptionist; and
      (5)   Van drivers.
   (b)   The Senior Services Department positions shall work under and be
subject to the supervision of the Director of Senior Services and shall perform
such duties as may be delegated to such positions by the Director and which are
substantially consistent with the position’s job description on file in the
Human Resource Department.
   (c)   In addition, fees for all City Senior Services Programs shall be set
forth by the Director of Senior Services and shall be subject to change as the
Mayor or his or her designee deems necessary in accordance with the annual
budgetary appropriations authorized by City Council for the Senior Services
Department.
(Ord. 2003-104, passed 5-5-2003; Ord. 2007-298, passed 12-13-2007)
§ 257.03 BUDGETARY DUTIES.
   The Director shall be responsible for planning and preparation of a proposed
budget for the Department of Senior Services to be submitted to the Mayor on or
before a date to be determined by the Director of Finance of each year. Such
budget shall take into consideration the obligations of maintenance, operation,
upkeep, protection of buildings, lands and other facilities and vehicles
devoted to senior uses.
(Res. 2000-45, passed 4-17-2000; Ord. 2007-298, passed 12-13-2007)
CHAPTER 258: GRANTWOOD DEPARTMENT
Section
   
258.01   Establishment; purpose
   
258.02   Definition
   
258.03   Grantwood; composition
   
258.04   Compensation for golf instructors
   
258.05   Fees and budgetary duties
   
258.06   Park regulations
   
258.99   Penalty
§ 258.01 ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSE.
   (a)   There is hereby established Grantwood Recreational Park and Golf
Course, a department of the city, created pursuant to Ordinance 2008-104 as
approved by the voters on November 4, 2008. Grantwood Recreational Park and
Golf Course shall be dedicated to the operation, maintenance, control and
development of the Grantwood Recreational Park and Golf Course and the
activities conducted in connection therewith. The Council may, by ordinance,
create an Advisory Board to assist the city with any matter related to
Grantwood Recreational Park and Golf Course. Grantwood Recreational Park and
Golf Course shall perform such functions and duties as may be determined by the
Mayor and the Council.
   (b)   No part of the land of the Grantwood Recreational Park shall be
leased, sold, transferred or exchanged without approval of the electors of the
city; but this shall not prohibit the leasing of buildings or concessions for
terms of less than two years to be operated within the Grantwood Recreational
Park. The undeveloped area, exclusive of the golf course, shall be preserved in
its natural state to the extent reasonable and practical, and the entire park
shall be used exclusively for recreational purposes.
(Ord. 2013-91, passed 6-3-2013)
§ 258.02 DEFINITION.
   GRANTWOOD RECREATIONAL PARK AND GOLF COURSE is hereby defined as a tract of
land owned by the city located on the northern side of Pettibone Road and
Aurora Road adjoining and overlapping the Geauga County line and consisting of
approximately 407 acres which includes golf course property and undeveloped
park land referred to as “Timberlake Park”.
(Ord. 2013-91, passed 6-3-2013)
§ 258.03 GRANTWOOD; COMPOSITION.
   (a)   In addition to the Director of Recreation, the Mayor shall have the
power, subject to the other provisions of the City Charter to appoint, promote,
transfer, reduce or remove any Grantwood Recreational Park and Golf Course
employee who shall work under and be subject to the supervision of the Director
of Recreation.
   (b)   The following full-time positions are hereby established and are not
to exceed the listed number of positions, and may be filled by approval of the
Mayor.
      (1)   Golf Professional;
      (2)   Grantwood Supervisor(s) (2);
      (3)   Mechanic;
      (4)   Maintenance Worker(s) (2);
      (5)   Golf Assistant.
   (c)   The Director of Recreation may hire part-time or seasonal employees
when deemed necessary in accordance with the annual budgetary appropriations
authorized by City Council for Grantwood Recreational Park and Golf Course.
(Ord. 2013-91, passed 6-3-2013; Ord. 2014-242, passed 11-17-2014; Ord. 2016-2,
passed 1-19-2016; Ord. 2021-78, passed 4-19-2021)
§ 258.04 COMPENSATION FOR GOLF PROFESSIONAL AND INSTRUCTORS.
   Compensation for golf instructors providing golf instructions at Grantwood
Golf Course shall be as follows:
   (a)   The rate of compensation for golf clinics or other instructional
sessions involving multiple students shall be at a rate not to exceed 75% of
clinic revenues. The rates of such clinics and sessions shall be determined and
set by the Director of Recreation based upon the number of participating
registrants.
   (b)   The rate of compensation for individuals not covered under a contract
(not to exceed 75% in total) shall be within the specified ranges detailed
below as determined and approved by the Director of Recreation:
      (1)   Golf Instructor - $15 - $45 per hour for individual without a PGA
card; and
      (2)   Golf Instructor - $30 - $60 per hour for individuals with a PGA
card.
(Ord. 2011-81, passed 5-2-2011; Ord. 2013-92, passed 5-6-2013; Ord. 2016-2,
passed 1-19-2016)
§ 258.05 FEES AND BUDGETARY DUTIES.
   (a)   All revenue derived from the operation of the Grantwood Recreational
Park and Golf Course shall be used exclusively for daily operations of the
Grantwood Recreational Park and Golf Course. To the extent reasonable and
practical, the Grantwood Recreational Park and Golf Course shall be operated so
as to be financially self-sustaining. However, capital expenditures for
projects or items with useful lives of five years or more and debt service
payments for Grantwood Recreational Park and Golf Course may be made from other
city funds established for those purposes.
   (b)   Fees for all Grantwood Recreational Park and Golf Course programs
shall be set forth by the Director of Recreation and shall be subject to change
as the Mayor or his or her designee deems necessary in accordance with the
annual budgetary appropriations authorized by City Council for the Grantwood
Recreational Park and Golf Course.
   (c)   The Director of Recreation shall be responsible for planning and
preparation of a proposed budget for Grantwood Recreational Park and Golf
Course to be submitted to the Mayor on or before a date to be determined by the
Director of Finance. Such budget shall take into consideration the obligations
of maintenance, operation, upkeep and protection of buildings, lands and other
facilities devoted to Grantwood Recreational Park and Golf Course.
(Ord. 2013-91, passed 6-3-2013; Ord. 2014-242, passed 11-17-2014; Ord. 2021-78,
passed 4-19-2021)
§ 258.06 PARK REGULATIONS.
   No person shall violate any of the regulations of Grantwood Recreational
Park. The regulations are as follows:
   (a)   With the exception of the golf course, Grantwood Recreational Park is
open daily from 7:00 a.m. to sunset, weather permitting. The hours for the golf
course shall be established by the Director of Recreation and shall be posted.
   (b)   No alcoholic beverages are allowed in the park.
   (c)   No dirt bikes, motor bikes or off-road vehicles are allowed on trails,
grassed or on wooded areas.
   (d)   Fires are permitted only in the grills provided. No open or ground
fires are allowed.
   (e)   Fishing is permitted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and sunset. No ice
fishing is permitted.
   (f)   All persons fishing must comply with all State of Ohio fishing
regulations.
   (g)   Swimming and boating are not allowed.
   (h)   Pets must be on a leash at all times in the park.
   (i)   Firearms, air guns or bows and arrows are not allowed in the park at
any time.
   (j)    Overnight camping is prohibited unless prior approval is granted by
the Recreation Department.
   (k)   All trash is to be deposited in designated containers.
   (l)   Defacing of park property, vandalism and any other violation of these
regulations is subject to prosecution and penalties pursuant to these Codified
Ordinances.
(Ord. 2013-91, passed 6-3-2013; Ord. 2021-78, passed 4-19-2021)
§ 258.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree and shall be fined not more than $250 or
imprisoned not more than thirty days, or both, for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(Ord. 2013-91, passed 6-3-2013)
CHAPTER 259: SOLON CENTER FOR THE ARTS
Section
   
259.01   Establishment; purpose
   
259.02   Solon Center for the Arts; composition
   
259.03   Fees and budgetary duties
§ 259.01 ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSE.
   There is hereby established Solon Center for the Arts, a department of the
city, pursuant to Council’s authority set forth in
Article VI, § 1, of the City Charter. Solon Center for the Arts shall be
dedicated and strive to be recognized as an effective and unique teaching and
learning arts resource in the Solon community. The Center will be a leader in
cultural enrichment and artistic quality, characterized by continuous
improvement, innovation and community responsiveness. Through its programming,
the Center will provide opportunities and reinforce appreciation of the arts
for its residents of all ages, with the intent of maximizing the potential and
enjoyment for all individuals. Solon Center for the Arts shall perform such
functions and duties as may be determined by the Mayor and Council.
(Ord. 2007-301, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 259.02 SOLON CENTER FOR THE ARTS; COMPOSITION.
   (a)   There is hereby established the position of Director of Community and
Cultural Enrichment. The Director of Community and Cultural Enrichment shall be
appointed by the Mayor subject to the confirmation of a majority of the members
of Council, pursuant to Article V, Section 5 of the City Charter. The Director
of Community and Cultural Enrichment shall report directly to the Mayor and
shall perform such duties as may be required by the Mayor pursuant to the
position’s job description on file in the Human Resource Department.
   (b)   In addition to the Director of Community and Cultural Enrichment, the
composition of the Solon Center for the Arts will not exceed the hiring of five
full-time positions. Any full-time hire will receive the approval of the Mayor.
   (c)   In addition, the Director of Community and Cultural Enrichment may
hire part-time coordinators and part-time or seasonal faculty when deemed
necessary in accordance with the annual budgetary appropriations authorized by
City Council for Solon Center for the Arts.
(Ord. 2007-301, passed 12-17-2007; Ord. 2008-105, passed 8-4-2008; Ord. 2008-
288, passed 10-6-2008; Ord. 2013-256, passed 12-2-2013; Ord. 2013-258, passed
12-16-2013; Ord. 2014-243, passed 11-17-2014; Ord. 2016-1, passed 1-19- 2016;
Ord. 2020-53, passed 3-16-2020; Ord. 2023-77, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 259.03 FEES AND BUDGETARY DUTIES.
   (a)   Fees for all Solon Center for the Arts programs shall be set forth by
the Director of Community and Cultural Enrichment and shall be subject to
change as the Mayor or his or her designee deems necessary in accordance with
the annual budgetary appropriations authorized by City Council for Solon Center
for the Arts.
   (b)   The Director of Community and Cultural Enrichment shall be responsible
for planning and preparation of a proposed budget for Solon Center for the Arts
to be submitted to the Mayor on or before a date to be determined by the
Director of Finance. Such budget shall take into consideration the obligations
of maintenance, operation, upkeep and protection of buildings, lands and other
facilities devoted to Solon Center for the Arts uses.
(Ord. 2007-301, passed 12-17-2007; Ord. 2013-256, passed 12-2-2013; Ord. 2013-
258, passed 12-16-2013; Ord. 2014-243, passed 11-17-2014; Ord. 2020-53, passed
3-16-2020)
CHAPTER 260: EMPLOYEES GENERALLY
Editor’s note:
   Provisions relating to regular compensation are not codified. Copies of the
latest relevant legislation may be found in Appendix I following Title Ten of
this Administration Code or may be obtained, at cost, from the Clerk of
Council.
   The city enters into agreements from time to time with representatives of
various classes of municipal employees, which agreements provide for
compensation, benefits and other incidents of employment. The provisions of
this chapter, therefore, apply only to those employees and to those benefits
and other incidents of employment not otherwise provided for in such
agreements. Copies of the latest relevant legislation and of such agreements
may be found in Appendix II following Title Ten of this Administration Code or
may be obtained, at cost, from the Clerk of Council.
   Reference should also be made to Ordinance 1995-18, passed January 30, 1995,
which provided for pay ranges for employees and memoranda of understanding
between representatives of the city and of sergeants, lieutenants and
dispatchers in the Police Department and employees of the Pollution Control
Department, the Service Department, the Building Department, the Engineering
Department and Administration. These memoranda summarize revisions to existing
terms and conditions of employment for such employees for the period January 1,
1995, through December 31, 1997.
   Council executes memoranda of understanding with certain employees and
classes of employees from time to time by ordinance, which memoranda of
understanding constitute the complete employment contract between the city and
such employees or classes of employees. Copies of the latest relevant
legislation and memoranda may be obtained, at cost, from the Clerk of Council.
   This chapter was repealed in its entirety and re-enacted by Ordinance 1998-
25, passed May 18, 1998.
Section
   
260.01   Application of chapter
   
260.02   Types of employees
   
260.03   Exempt and non-exempt employees
   
260.035   Classified and unclassified employees
   
260.04   Compensation
   
260.05   Overtime compensation; call-out pay
   
260.055   Overtime on-call pay
   
260.06   Vacations
   
260.07   Holidays
   
260.08   Sick leave
   
260.09   Funeral leave
   
260.10   Longevity pay
   
260.11   Travel allowance
   
260.115   Use of city vehicles
   
260.12   Group hospitalization and other insurance
   
260.13   Protective gear, uniform and other allowances
   
260.14   Re-employment rights
   
260.15   Immunizations
   
260.16   National Guard and Reserve duty (Repealed)
   
260.165   Service in the uniformed services
   
260.17   Jury duty
   
260.18   Education and tuition reimbursement
   
260.19   Pension; salary reduction; pick-up plan
   
260.20   Bonds and indemnification
   
260.21   Performance-based bonus system
   
260.22   Use of city computers
   
260.23   Use of city-issued cellular telephones
   
260.24   Use of city-issued credit cards (Repealed)
   
260.25   Additional fringe benefits and public purpose expenditures
   
260.26   Drug and alcohol testing policy
   
260.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Authority of Council, see
Charter Art. IV, § 8
   Dereliction of duty, see §
606.19
   Improper compensation, see §
606.18
   Interfering with civil rights, see §
606.20
   Qualification of, see
Charter Art. VIII, § 2
   Welfare, see Ohio Const., Art. II, § 34
   Workers’ Compensation, see Ohio Const., Art. II, § 35; R.C. Ch. 4123
§ 260.01 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   This chapter is applicable to all employees except those covered by a
collective bargaining agreement.
(Ord. 1998-25, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 260.02 TYPES OF EMPLOYEES.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the types of employees, are defined as
follows:
   (a)   Full-time employees.  FULL-TIME EMPLOYMENT STATUS is defined as
employees who are scheduled in an active pay status for not less than 2,080
hours annually or regularly scheduled for 40 hours per week. For the purpose of
this provision, ACTIVE PAY STATUS is defined as conditions under which an
employee is eligible to receive pay, and included, but is not limited to,
vacation leave, sick leave, bereavement leave, administrative leave,
compensatory time, holidays and personal leave.
   (b)   Part-time employment.
      (1)   PART-TIME EMPLOYMENT STATUS is defined as employees who are in an
active pay status and not regularly scheduled for more than 56 hours per pay
period. Employment in a part-time position that does not normally require a
person to work more than 28 hours per week. Employees in these positions are
not allowed to work more than 1,456 hours in a calendar year, meaning they
shall work only 28 hours per week.
      (2)   Part-time employees must not work more than 28 hours in a calendar
week without permission of the Mayor or the Mayor’s designee and no part-time
employee can work more than 1,456 hours in a calendar year. If this is a
rehired city employee, the employee’s total hours in a 12-month calendar year
back and forward, cannot exceed 1,456 hours. Part-time to seasonal change of
status is permissible provided the employee’s hours worked in a 12-month
calendar year does not exceed 1,456 hours.
   (c)   Other types of employees.
      (1)   Temporary employees. Are defined as individuals appointed by the
Mayor without regard to the provisions of R.C. §§ 124.01 through 124.64 to
address an immediate or limited service need within the city. Except as
otherwise provided in R.C. § 124.30(A), the temporary appointment may not
continue longer than 120 days. Where a position is vacant for a temporary
period by reason of sickness, disability or other approved leave of absence of
a regular employee, a temporary appointment may be made for a period longer
than 120 days and may continue during the period of sickness, disability or
other approved leave of absence.
      (2)   Seasonal employment.
         A.   A seasonal employee is an employee that works a certain regular
season or period of the year performing some work or activity limited to that
season or period of the year. Seasonal employment is temporary work to meet the
city's short-term needs during certain times of the year, such as summer
lifeguarding, summer camp staff, or fall leaf collection.
         B.   A seasonal employee shall not work more than 1,456 hours in a
calendar year, including overtime. A seasonal employee may work up to 40 hours
per week. Any overtime must have prior approval from department director.
         C.   Upon the completion of their seasonal employment in a calendar
year, a seasonal employee shall have their employment with the city terminated.
(Ord. 1998-25, passed 5-18-1998; Ord. 1999-64, passed 4-19-1999; Ord. 2012-46,
passed 2-21-2012; Ord. 2012-61, passed 3-5-2012; Ord. 2014-37, passed 4-7-2014;
Ord. 2014-87, passed 5-5-2014; Ord. 2015-148, passed 7-6-2015; Ord. 2025-83,
passed 4-21-2025)
§ 260.03 EXEMPT AND NON-EXEMPT EMPLOYEES.
   For the purposes of this chapter, all employees shall be defined and/or
classified as either exempt or non-exempt pursuant to the Fair Labor Standards
Act. Final determination of such status will be made by the Director of Human
Resources for all employees in the unclassified and/or classified services.
(Ord. 1998-25, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 260.035 CLASSIFIED AND UNCLASSIFIED EMPLOYEES.
   (a)   The unclassified service of the city shall comprise the following
positions, which shall not be included in the classified service:
      (1)   All officers elected by popular vote, or persons appointed to fill
vacancies in such offices;
      (2)   The members of all boards and commissions;
      (3)   Heads of departments appointed by the Mayor of the city, including:
         A.   Director of Finance;
         B.   Director of Law;
         C.   City Engineer;
         D.   Director of City Services;
         E.   Police Chief;
         F.   Fire Chief;
         G.   Director of Planning and Community Development;
         H.   Chief Building Official;
         I.   Director of Water Reclamation;
         J.   Director of Recreation;
         K.   Grantwood Park Manager;
         L.   Public Works Commissioner;
         M.   Director of Human Resources;
         N.   Director of Senior Services;
         O.   Director of Solon Center for the Arts;
         P.   Director of Information Technology; and
         Q.   Clerk of Council.
      (4)   Any person employed by the City Council;
      (5)   Clerk of Mayor Court;
      (6)   Mayor’s Secretary;
      (7)   Assistant heads of departments;
      (8)   Secretaries to heads of departments;
      (9)   Assistants to the Director of Law and the Director of Finance;
      (10)   Deputies and assistants of elective or principal executive
officers authorized to act for and in the place of their principals or holding
a fiduciary relation to their principals;
      (11)   Professional staff and other employees who possess such
specialized skills or training that testing for requisite merited fitness would
be impracticable, as determined by the Civil Service Commission, including but
not limited to:
         A.   Manager Second Shift;
         B.   Manager of Fleet Maintenance;
         C.   Manager of City Sewers and Drainage;
         D.   Manager of Information Technology;
         E.   Manager Administration;
         F.   Manager of Streets and Landscape;
         G.   Manager of Solid Waste;
         H.   Manager of Monitoring Division;
         I.   Manager of Maintenance;
         J.   Manager of Operations;
         K.   Supervisor of Accounting;
         L.   Construction Project Administrator;
         M.   Economic Development Manager;
         N.   Planner II;
         O.   Docket Clerk;
         P.   Assistant to the Clerk of Council;
         Q.   Animal Warden;
         R.   Assistant Supervisor Recreation Department;
         S.   Golf Pro;
         T.   Supervisor Recreation Programs;
         U.   Grounds Supervisor of Golf Course;
         V.   Contract Compliance Officer;
         W.   Systems Records Manager;
         X.   Deputy Tax Auditor;
         Y.   Administrative Coordinator;
         Z.   Facility Manager;
         AA.   Golf Course Manager;
         BB.   Clerk of Council.
      (12)   In addition to the employees listed above, up to four clerical and
administrative support employees for each of the principal appointive executive
officers, boards, or commissions of the city authorized to appoint the same,
except the Civil Service Commission of the city;
      (13)   Employees appointed to administrative staff positions for which
the appointing authority is given specific statutory authority to set
compensation;
      (14)   Such students in normal schools, colleges, and universities of the
State of Ohio who are employed by the city in student or intern
classifications;
      (15)   Such unskilled labor positions as the Civil Service Commission may
find it impracticable to include in the competitive classified service;
provided such exemptions shall be by order of the Commission, duly entered on
the record of the Commission with the reasons for each such exemption;
      (16)   Employees who receive temporary or intermittent appointments, per
R.C. § 124.30 or city ordinance or City Civil Service Rule;
      (17)   Seasonal employees;
      (18)   Auxiliary Police Officers;
      (19)   Auxiliary Firefighters;
      (20)   Part-time employees;
      (21)   Persons who lose their classified status due to a conviction of a
felony within the meaning of R.C. § 124.34;
      (22)   Other positions designated as unclassified by ordinance or charter
provision or other law.
   (b)   Omission of any unclassified position or person from the foregoing
specific list(s) of unclassifieds shall not be construed as an intention to
render that person or position classified.
   (c)   There mere failure of an employee’s appointing authority to file a
statement with the Commission indicating that the employee is in the
unclassified civil service, or the mere late filing of such a statement, does
not prevent the employee from being in the unclassified service.
§ 260.04 COMPENSATION.
   (a)   The rates of pay for all employees shall be defined in the city’s Wage
and Salary Schedule. Said Schedule shall provide for a minimum, midpoint and
maximum amount of compensation, as well. The Mayor is hereby authorized to fix
the compensation for an employee based upon said schedule dependent upon the
efficiency, merit and seniority of an employee, or any other consideration
which is deemed pertinent. In the event that the Mayor determines that an
employee, newly hired and/or promoted, should be paid at a rate beyond the
midpoint, approval of the Council Finance Committee shall be required.
   (b)   Commencing January 1, 2003, all employees of the city shall be paid on
the same bi-weekly payday or every other Friday. The amount of pay shall be for
what each employee earns in the two-week pay period concluding or ending the
week before each payday. In the case of salaried and/or modified salaried
employees, their bi-weekly earnings shall equate to the annual amount for their
respective grade and step in the current pay scale, for the period between and
including the dates of January 1 to December 31 each year.
   (c)   Effective January 1, 2003, the annual appropriation for payroll shall
be based upon the amount earned and payable (not paid) to employees between and
including the date of January 1 to December 31.
(Ord. 1998-25, passed 5-18-1998; Ord. 2002-219, passed 10-7-2002)
§ 260.05 OVERTIME COMPENSATION; CALL-OUT PAY.
   (a)   Generally. Except as otherwise provided in this section, and except
for those employees defined as exempt, employees shall be compensated for hours
in excess of 40 scheduled hours worked per calendar week at the rate of one and
one-half times their established hourly compensation. For computation purposes,
the basis for 40 scheduled hours of work shall include any approved paid leave
time for vacation, sick, holiday, personal and compensatory time.
   (b)   Compensatory time. In lieu of overtime compensation, and with the
concurrence of an employee’s department head, an employee may accumulate not
more than 40 hours of compensatory paid time off. Such time shall be calculated
at the rate of one and one-half hours of compensatory time for each hour of
overtime worked.
   (c)   Employees in Departments of Police Service, Engineering, Building,
Water Reclamation and Information Systems. Non-exempt employees in the
Departments of Police Service, Engineering, Building, Water Reclamation and
Information Systems who are required to work on an emergency basis on
Christmas, Thanksgiving and New Year’s Day shall be compensated for such
service at the rate of two times their hourly rate of compensation for hours
worked. Employees in these Departments who are called out to perform services
on behalf of the city shall be paid for not less than three hours, provided
that such call-out service is not contiguous with regularly scheduled work
hours.
   (d)   Other full-time employees.
      (1)   Hourly paid employees assigned to clerical duties at evening
meetings shall be paid a minimum of one hour at a rate of time and one-half for
such meeting provided the meeting is not part of regularly scheduled work day
hours.
      (2)   For time in excess of one hour at such meetings, payment shall be
made in increments of 15 minutes (rounded upwards) at time and one-half.
   (e)   Approved flexible work schedule exception. If the Mayor or the Mayor’s
designee and the employee’s department head approve, and a non-exempt full-time
employee elects to work a 40 hour per week work schedule other than five,
eight-hour days, then such an employee shall be compensated at the rate of one
and one-half times their established hourly compensation only for those hours
worked in excess of 40 hours per week.
(Ord. 1998-25, passed 5-18-1998; Ord. 2001-185, passed 7-16-2001; Ord. 2002-
106, passed 5-6-2002; Ord. 2004-238, passed 11-1-2004; Ord. 2010-281, passed
12-20-2010; Ord. 2012-201, passed 8-20-2012)
§ 260.055 OVERTIME ON-CALL PAY.
   (a)   Employees of the Service Department shall be compensated for their
standby status from the beginning of their assigned 12-hour shift on Saturday
or Sunday for snow and ice removal at a rate to be determined annually for time
in on-call status.
   (b)   Policies and procedures will be approved by the Director of Finance,
the Director of Human Resources and the Director of City Services.
(Ord. 2018-02, passed 1-16-2018)
§ 260.06 VACATIONS.
   (a)   Generally. For purposes of vacation, each full-time employee of the
city shall be entitled to vacation pursuant to this section based upon his or
her total years of service with the city. Eligibility for vacation shall
commence no sooner than one year from an employee’s date of hire as a full-time
employee, provided that such employee has worked a minimum of 1,040 hours in
the preceding 12 months of his or her anniversary date.
   (b)   Calculation of prior service. For purposes of computing an employee’s
service time for vacation entitlement, those employees hired prior to July 5,
1987 shall be given credit for service time with the state or any of its
political subdivisions. For those employees hired on or after July 5, 1987,
they shall be entitled to service time with the city only, except for the
following:
      (1)   The Mayor may grant service credit in a negotiated amount not to
exceed the years of prior similar service, either public or private, to newly
hired department heads with the title of Director or Chief. Independent
documentation of prior service from a previous employer must be provided to the
Mayor and Finance Department before such vacation time is added to the
employee’s vacation entitlement. Effective January 1, 2024, and thereafter,
newly hired Directors and Chiefs may begin accruing vacation leave immediately
upon hire and may begin using such vacation after a 90 day waiting period. No
payment shall be made for any unused portion of this vacation time if the newly
hired department head resigns before the completion of 90 days of service with
the City of Solon.
      (2)   In instances where full-time employees had prior service credit
with the city on a part-time basis, credit shall be given for such part-time
service with the city based upon the number of hours actually worked as a part-
time employee in relation to 2,080 hours for a full year of credit.
   (c)   Eligibility.
      (1)   A.   Effective January 1, 1998, and thereafter, each eligible full-
time employee of the city shall be entitled to vacation based upon his or her
total years of service on the anniversary date of hire, provided that the
employee has worked or was paid compensated absence time for a full year prior
to his or her anniversary date, as follows:
Years of Service Vacation Time (Weeks)
Years of Service Vacation Time (Weeks)
1 to 4           2
5 to 11          3
12 to 14         4
15 to 16         4 and 1 additional day
17 to 18         4 and 2 additional days
19 to 20         4 and 3 additional days
21 to 22         4 and 4 additional days
23 to 25         5
26 to 30         5 and 1 additional day for each year from 26-30 years*
30 or more       6
 
*Effective on the anniversary date of each individual employee beginning in
2016 calendar year
         B.   If an employee was not paid for a full year prior to his or her
vacation anniversary date, and was on unpaid leave of absence, he or she shall
not earn or accrue vacation time during their unpaid leave. An employee that
has unpaid leave shall have his or her vacation entitlement adjusted
accordingly on his or her following vacation anniversary date only, and not
future vacation anniversary dates following a fully paid year.
      (2)   The position of Mayor shall receive three weeks of vacation per
year during the first term in office, and four weeks vacation per year for each
term thereafter.
   (d)   Unused vacation. All vacation shall be taken during the 12-month
period following the employee’s anniversary date of hire, and shall be
forfeited if not used by the next anniversary date, unless the Mayor approves
the carryover of unused vacation time. The request to carryover unused vacation
time must be made to the Mayor’s office prior to the anniversary date on which
it would have been forfeited. City Council shall be informed annually of
employees who had vacation carryover approved and the amount.
   (e)   Vacation due upon termination. In the event of termination of
employment with the city for any reason except disciplinary discharge, each
full-time employee of the city shall be entitled to payment for unused and
accrued vacation in proportion to the days actually worked if he or she had
been continuously employed.
(Ord. 1998-25, passed 5-18-1998; Ord. 2001-17, passed 2-5-2001; Ord. 2001-126,
passed 5-7-2001; Ord. 2002-102, passed 7-1-2002; Ord. 2007-74, passed 4-16-
2007; Ord. 2015-215, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. 2025-170, passed 9-15-2025)
§ 260.07 HOLIDAYS.
   (a)   Full-time employees. All full-time employees of the city, who are not
covered by a collective bargaining agreement, shall be entitled to the
following paid holidays: New Year’s Day, Martin Luther King, Jr. Day,
President’s Day, Good Friday, Memorial Day, Juneteenth, Independence Day, Labor
Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day, the day after Thanksgiving, Christmas Day
and two personal days. In the event that the service demands of a particular
department require that an employee work on any of these holidays, the employee
shall be permitted equivalent paid time off for each such holiday worked. If an
employee is not afforded paid time off for a holiday worked, he or she shall be
paid for such holiday at his or her regular rate of pay in effect when the
holiday occurs, after the end of the calendar year in which the holiday
occurred, provided that no more than three such holidays are permitted in any
calendar year.
   (b)   Part-time employees. Only individuals in part-time positions who are
currently receiving holiday pay and hired prior to February 1, 2012, shall
receive compensation for the following holidays commensurate with their average
weekly hours worked: New Year’s Day, Good Friday, Memorial Day, Independence
Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas. (Example: an employee averages
20 hours a week would be paid for four hours on the holiday.)
(Ord. 2000-282, passed 10-16-2000; Ord. 2002-106, passed 5-6-2002; Ord. 2006-
311, passed 12-18-2006; Ord. 2012-46, passed 2-21-2012; Ord. 2012-61, passed 3-
5-2012; Ord. 2018-253, passed 12-17-2018; Ord. 2022-32, passed 2-7-2022)
§ 260.08 SICK LEAVE.
   (a)   Sick leave credit generally. Each full-time employee and individuals
in part-time positions who are currently receiving sick time and hired prior to
February 1, 2012, shall accrue, for each 80 hours of service, a sick leave
credit in the amount of four and six-tenths hours with pay. The use of such
credit shall be permitted for any of the following: personal illness;
pregnancy; injury; exposure to contagious disease and/or illness or injury in
the employee’s immediate family.
   (b)   Immediate family defined. For the purpose of this section, IMMEDIATE
FAMILY shall be defined as follows: an employee’s children or the employee’s
spouse, step-children, parents or children of employees designated as legal
guardians. Proof of such relationship may be required by the city.
   (c)   Accumulation and use of sick leave credit. Sick leave credit shall be
cumulative, limited as noted herein. When sick leave is used, it shall be
deducted from the employee’s accrued balance on an hour-for-hour basis for
every hour of absence from previously scheduled work, except that absence from
previously scheduled work because of death in the immediate family, with the
approval of the department head, not exceeding three days, shall not be so
deducted. The appointing authority and/or the department head for each
employing unit may require an employee to furnish satisfactory documentation
upon request to justify the use of sick leave by an employee. However, in all
instances where medical attention was required or when an absence is for three
or more consecutive scheduled work days, the employee may be required to
furnish written documentation stating the nature of the illness or injury to
justify the use of sick leave. Falsification of any such documentation, or
falsely using sick leave, shall be grounds for disciplinary action, including
dismissal.
   (d)   Temporary disability. In the event that an employee is temporarily
disabled and uses all of his or her accumulated sick leave, said employee may
request that the city continue to provide group hospitalization coverage for
the duration of said disability. Such request shall be made in writing to the
Mayor for consideration by the Council Finance Committee.
   (e)   Prior service; sick leave credit. Previously accumulated and unused
sick leave credit of an employee who has been separated from public service
shall be placed to his or her credit upon re-employment in public service,
provided that such re-employment takes place within ten years from the date of
separation. Newly hired employees with prior service from other governmental
agencies shall be allowed to transfer 40 hours of sick leave to Solon and those
hours shall not be subject to payment to the employee in the event of
retirement as defined in division (h) below.
   (f)   Certain employees excluded. All part-time employees not included in
division (a) above, temporary, and seasonal employees, or those rendering
intermittent or per diem service, shall be excluded from the benefits of this
section.
   (g)   Compensation for unused, accumulated sick leave. Upon the retirement
or death of an eligible employee, the employee, or his or her spouse and/or
legal representative shall, upon written notification to the city, be entitled
to a lump sum payment for the accumulated and unused sick leave credit subject
to the limits as detailed in this chapter. For the purposes of this section, an
employee shall be deemed to be retired when he or she applies for and obtains a
retirement pension under pension plans afforded employees as a result of their
public employment. When giving the city written notification, the employee
shall request payment either immediately after retirement or at a later date
within one year after retirement. In either case, only one payment will be
made. If the employee elects payment at a later date, it will be at the hourly
rate at retirement and no interest earnings will be accrued or added to the
payment.
   (h)   Limits on payment of unused; accumulated sick leave credit. In the
event of the retirement or death of an employee, payment of accumulated and
unused sick leave credit shall be determined as follows.
      (1)   Employees hired prior to January 1, 1989, shall be paid for the
first 960 hours of accumulated and unused sick leave credit on an hour-for-hour
basis. All sick leave credit in excess of 960 hours shall be paid on the basis
of one hour for every three hours accumulated and unused.
      (2)   Employees hired on or after January 1, 1989, shall be paid for the
first 500 hours of accumulated and unused sick leave credit on an hour-for-hour
basis. All sick leave credit in excess of 500 hours shall be paid on the basis
of one hour for every four hours accumulated and unused.
   (i)   Sick leave credit; cash conversion option. On or before December 15,
and each year thereafter, a full-time employee of the city credited with sick
leave credit up to a maximum of 120 hours per calendar year may elect to
convert such credit into a cash benefit, or carry forward such credit to his or
her balance. The conditions for the cash conversion shall be as follows.
      (1)   An employee must have at least 360 hours of sick leave credit at
the end of each calendar year, exclusive of the 120 hours of sick leave credit
earned for the current year in which the election is made.
      (2)   An employee may convert all sick leave credit earned and unused
during a calendar year of election to a cash benefit at the rate of three-
eighths, payable at the employee’s current hourly rate in the year earned,
excluding longevity, differentials, bonuses, premium payments, regularly
scheduled overtime and all other forms of additional or supplemental
compensation. Absent such an election by an employee, the sick leave credit
earned and unused in a calendar year will be added to the total accrued sick
leave credit balance of the employee.
   (j)   Voluntary sick leave donations. In the event an employee has exhausted
his or her accumulated sick leave due to an extended use as described in
division (a) hereof, the Mayor may approve the transfer of sick leave to this
employee from other employees who wish to voluntarily donate a portion of his
or her unused accumulated sick leave. A list with the donor’s name, the number
of hours donated and the donor’s signature shall be presented to the Mayor for
his or her approval and forwarded to the Finance Department. Employees may
donate no less than eight hours and up to a maximum of 40 hours per employee
per a 12-month period. The donated sick leave shall be proportionately applied
and any unused sick leave shall be returned proportionately to the donating
employees once the employee that received the donations has returned to work.
(Ord. 1998-25, passed 5-18-1998; Ord. 2007-142, passed 5-21-2007; Ord. 2009-
108, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2012-46, passed 2-21-2012; Ord. 2012-61, passed 3-5-
2012; Ord. 2018-252, passed 12-17-2018)
§ 260.09 FUNERAL LEAVE.
   Funeral leave shall be granted for all full-time employees, up to a maximum
of three scheduled work days off with pay for attendance of the funeral of an
employee’s family. For purposes of this section, the family members shall
include the following: an employee’s children or the employee’s spouse, step-
children or parents, stepparents, brother, sister, father-in-law, mother-in-
law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, aunts, uncles, cousins, grandparents,
grandparents-in-law, and grandchildren. Proof of such relationship may be
required by the city.
(Ord. 2000-74, passed 4-3-2000; Ord. 2012-46, passed 2-21-2012; Ord. 2012-61,
passed 3-5-2012; Ord. 2022-33, passed 2-7-2022)
§ 260.10 LONGEVITY PAY.
   All full-time employees of the city shall be entitled to compensation for
longevity, to be paid in equal installments coinciding with the employee’s
normal pay. Such compensation shall be determined as follows.
   (a)   Eligibility. Employees hired prior to January 1, 1989, shall be
entitled to longevity pay which shall be calculated as an additional 0.5% of
the base salary for each full year of service. Employees hired on or after
January 1, 1989, shall be entitled to longevity pay which shall be calculated
as an additional 0.25% of the base salary for each full year of service. For
employees hired after December 31, 1986, the payment of longevity shall begin
on January 1 following five full years of service.
   (b)   Years of service. Full years of service shall be calculated on the
employee’s anniversary date of hire year and the compensation shall be adjusted
to reflect any increased amount on the first pay following January 1, 1998,
using the salary in effect at that time, and each subsequent January 1. An
employee shall be credited for time served during his or her probationary
period for purposes of calculating longevity pay. With the exception of allowed
absences, including vacation, holidays, sick leave, disciplinary suspension and
authorized leaves of absence, any other absences shall be deemed a termination
of an employee’s eligibility for the purposes of determining his or her
eligibility for longevity.
   (c)   Maximum allowable compensation. For employees hired prior to January
1, 1989, the maximum longevity pay shall be 10%. For employees hired on or
after January 1, 1989, the maximum longevity pay shall be 5%.
(Ord. 1998-25, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 260.11 TRAVEL ALLOWANCE.
   When an employee of the city is authorized to travel on official city
business, the city shall provide for mileage reimbursement and for related
expenses, as follows.
   (a)   Mileage allowance. All employees of the city who are authorized to
travel on official business with the written approval of their department head
shall be compensated in an amount equal to the current amount permitted to be
deducted by the Internal Revenue Service for such use. Such compensation will
not be afforded an employee when he or she has available to him or her a city-
owned vehicle.
   (b)   Daily travel allowance. An employee or elected official of the city
who is authorized to travel on official business shall be reimbursed with a
valid itemized receipt or have the city pay expenses directly for the
following.
      (1)   Lodging. At an amount not to exceed the per diem allowance rates in
effect per Internal Revenue Service Code or publications (currently #1542). The
only exception to this limit is when the employee or official is staying at the
same hotel or lodging facility where the conference or seminar is being held.
      (2)   Meals. At an amount not to exceed the per diem allowance rates in
effect per Internal Revenue Service Code or publications (currently #1542). The
federal standard meal allowance shall be allocated based on the following
limits and the amount reimbursed for meals may include tips of 15% or less and
sales tax, and will be included as part of the allowance:
         A.   Breakfast: 20%;
         B.   Lunch: 30%; and
         C.   Dinner: 50%.
      (3)   Incidentals. For expenses directly related to the conference or
seminar. This includes cab fares and tips not to exceed 15% to cab drivers for
transportation between a hotel and the conference and books or supplies for use
at the conference or seminar.
   (c)   Lost wages. All elected officials of the city, excluding the Mayor,
and all non-employee members of boards and commissions, shall be entitled to
lost wages of up to $150 per day when required to travel overnight on official
business, provided that such travel has been approved by the Council Finance
Committee.
   (d)   Procedures for reimbursement. The Director of Finance is hereby
authorized to establish procedures for reimbursement relating to this section.
   (e)   Personal benefits. No personal benefits such as frequent flyer miles,
rewards, prizes and the like shall be procured by a city official/employee when
traveling at the city’s expense.
(Ord. 2000-236, passed 9-5-2000; Ord. 2001-29, passed 2-5-2001; Ord. 2007-284,
passed 12-3-2007; Ord. 2010-44, passed 2-16-2010; Ord. 2010-244, passed 11-1-
2010)
§ 260.115 USE OF CITY VEHICLES.
   The purpose of this section is to provide a clear set of policies and
guidelines regulating the use of city-owned vehicles by city employees and to
avoid and conflicts or misunderstandings regarding their use. Any violations of
this section may result in disciplinary action including, but not limited to,
verbal warning, written reprimand, time off without pay (suspension), loss of
use of vehicle, termination or fine. The city vehicle policy and guidelines are
as follows.
   (a)   City-owned vehicles are to be utilized exclusively for city business
and matters relating to the operation of the services provided by the city to
the community. This policy covers all vehicles owned by the city.
   (b)   No city vehicle shall be used or operated for the daily purpose of
transporting any city employee to and from work unless one or both of the
following conditions apply:
      (1)   The operator of the vehicle is on a 24-hour call to meet valid
emergency situations; or
      (2)   The department head to which the vehicle is assigned can provide
justification to the Mayor that such take home use is in the best financial
interest of the city.
   (c)   The Mayor, with the advice of the department head, may grant temporary
use of city vehicles for commute purposes when deemed appropriate or necessary,
subject to the restrictions set forth in divisions (a) and (b) of this section.
   (d)   The Director of Finance shall report the use of vehicles in accordance
with the guidelines of the Internal Revenue Service Code. The vehicles are not
an inducement for employment nor should they be considered as compensation.
   (e)   A vehicle is purchased or leased on an annual basis for use by the
Mayor. This vehicle is considered a necessity for the performance of the duties
of the Mayor/Safety Director. The Mayor/Safety Director’s use of this vehicle
shall be at his or her discretion.
   (f)   City employees in the following positions will be provided with a
vehicle to be used for city business only and commuting privileges while in and
outside the corporate limits of the city:
      (1)   Police Chief;
      (2)   Assistant Police Chief;
      (3)   Fire Chief;
      (4)   Assistant Fire Chief;
      (5)   Fire Lieutenant (Administrative Head of Fire Prevention Bureau);
      (6)   Service Director;
      (7)   Director of Water Reclamation;
      (8)   D.A.R.E. Officer (during the school year); and
      (9)   Police Department Canine Officer.
   (g)   Additional proposals for vehicles to be used for commuting privileges
shall be subject to the approval of the Mayor and submitted in ordinance form
for Council’s subsequent approval or rejection.
   (h)   The Mayor, at his or her discretion, may authorize extended use of the
vehicles being used by the Police and Fire Chiefs for the health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the city.
   (i)   No employee shall operate a city vehicle or heavy equipment or
machinery if any of the following apply:
      (1)   The person is under the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse,
or the combined influence of alcohol and any drug of abuse;
      (2)   The person has a concentration of 0.04% or more by weight of
alcohol in his or her blood;
      (3)   The person has a concentration of .04 of one gram or more by weight
of alcohol per 210 liters of his or her breath; or
      (4)   The person has a concentration of .06 of one gram or more by weight
of alcohol per 100 milliliters of his or her urine.
   (j)   Non-employees are not permitted to ride in a city vehicle except for
business related reasons (i.e., carpooling to a permitted function). Only in
extreme emergency (i.e., safety) would a non-employee minor under the age of 18
years old, be permitted to ride in a city vehicle. Activities such as routinely
dropping children off at school or picking them up from daycare are strictly
forbidden.
   (k)   Seatbelts are to be used at all times when driving or riding in a city
vehicle.
   (l)   All vehicles owned or leased by the city are to be operated and
maintained in a safe and efficient manner. The operator of any such vehicle
shall be responsible for reporting any defect, damage or unsuitable condition
of any city vehicle to their department head. All operators of city vehicles
must be properly licensed in accordance with state law to operate the class of
city vehicle so operated and shall provide to their department head proof of
being so licensed upon request and in any event each time his or her license is
renewed. Each employee who operates a city vehicle must provide a copy of his
or her license to their department head who shall be responsible for
maintaining a current list of all employee’s licenses who may operate a city
vehicle.
   (m)   Any employee who sustains or causes injury or damage to any property
while in possession or being assigned a city vehicle shall report such damage
or injury immediately to any governmental authority as is required by law and
thereafter promptly report in writing, the details of such occurrence to their
department head. Failure to promptly report the details of any occurrence to
the employee’s department head may result in disciplinary action up to and
including termination.
   (n)   In the event an employee’s driver’s license expires or is revoked,
suspended, forfeited or restricted in any manner, the employee shall be
required to report that information with 72 hours of its occurrence to their
department head, or within 24 hours of returning from vacation or other
authorized leave if the expiration, revocation, suspension, forfeiture or
restriction occurred during such leave.
   (o)   De minimis personal use of city vehicles by administrative officials
or employees is permitted where such personal use is de minimis and incidental
to his or her use of the city vehicle for the city’s business, and does not
result in:
      (1)   A significant deviation from the course of travel on city business;
      (2)   Exposure of the city vehicle to substantial additional risk of loss
or damage; and
      (3)   Exposure of the city to substantial additional risk of liability.
   (p)   City owned gas and other vehicle fluids and parts shall be placed into
city vehicles only. No employee is permitted to place city-owned gas or other
fuel in his or her personal or other private vehicle under any circumstances.
   (q)   Employees who operate their personal vehicle for city business shall
be paid a mileage allowance in accordance with established city code.
   (r)   All vehicles owned or leased by the city shall display the city emblem
and vehicle number as set forth in §
204.01.
   (s)   It is the responsibility of the department heads to provide, keep and
maintain mileage logs regarding use of vehicles.
   (t)   Unmarked vehicles and covert license plates (tags) used by the city in
undercover investigatory operations are prohibited unless authorized by the
Mayor and Police Chief.
   (u)   In order to provide for an appropriate adjustment period, all city
employees previously allowed to use a city vehicle for commuting purposes shall
continue to be allowed to use the vehicle for commuting purposes until April 1,
2003. This adjustment period should give the affected departments and employees
an opportunity to prepare for the new policy.
(Ord. 2003-5, passed 2-3-2003; Ord. 2003-215A, passed 9-15-2003; Ord. 2005-167,
passed 7-18-2005; Ord. 2014-244, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 260.12 GROUP HOSPITALIZATION AND OTHER INSURANCE.
   (a)   Health care coverage. 
      (1)   The city shall provide health insurance coverage to all properly
appointed permanent full-time employees of the city not currently covered by a
collective bargaining agreement. Below is a list of the health care plans
offered to eligible employees:
         A.   Medical with prescription and hearing coverage;
         B.   Dental insurance plan;
         C.   Vision insurance plan; and
         D.   Life insurance plan.
      (2)   City Council shall determine contributory amounts/percentages for
employees to pay towards their health care coverage.
   (b)   Medical insurance opt-out plan. 
      (1)   Full time employees may choose to not be part of the city’s medical
insurance plan (opt-out) and receive a payment in lieu of city medical
insurance coverage if the following conditions are met:
         A.   The employee provides evidence to the Human Resource Department
and the Director of Finance that they have, or will have, other medical
insurance coverage from another employer, spouse’s employer or elsewhere.
         B.   Full-time employees hired prior to February 1, 2007, must
currently be enrolled in the city’s medical insurance plan to be eligible for
this opt-out.
         C.   Full-time employees hired after February 1, 2007, will receive
the option of participating in the city’s medical insurance coverage or may
choose the opt-out plan if they meet requirement of subsection (1) stated
above.
      (2)   Full-time employees qualifying for the opt-out plan will be paid an
amount equivalent to 15% of the COBRA equivalency rate for medical coverage
(medical, drug and vision). The Director of Finance shall determine the manner
in which payments are made to participants. Payments shall be made in
accordance with IRS and State of Ohio Pension Board regulations.
   (c)   Life insurance. Every full-time employee shall be eligible for a term
life insurance policy in a minimum amount of $25,000 subject to the limitations
and provisions of the selected carrier. Terms and conditions of eligibility for
coverage shall be determined by the carrier. The cost of procuring the
aforementioned term life insurance shall be the sole responsibility of the
city.
(Ord. 2000-319, passed 11-20-2000; Ord. 2004-22, passed 2-2-2004; Ord. 2007-8,
passed 1-18-2007; Ord. 2010-27, passed 1-19-2010; Ord. 2014-4, passed 1-21-
2014; Ord. 2018-251, passed 12-17-2018)
§ 260.13 PROTECTIVE GEAR, UNIFORM AND OTHER ALLOWANCES.
   Employees shall be entitled to an annual clothing allowance and other
allowances for certain safety equipment as follows.
   (a)   Protective gear allowance. Effective January 1, 2016, employees will
not receive a protective gear allowance, but will receive a reimbursement for
each calendar year upon the city receiving the original itemized receipt(s) for
protective gear purposes. The amount of the reimbursement rate per each City
department shall be set by the Director of Finance and approved by the Mayor.
Requests for reimbursement and receipts shall be reviewed by the Department of
Finance prior to any proper payment being issued to the employee for the
reimbursement. In addition, each department head shall list/define the
protective gear required for each position eligible to receive protective gear
reimbursement per City policy as determined by the Director of Finance:
      (1)   Engineering Department:
         A.   City Engineer;
         B.   Assistant City Engineer;
         C.   Assistant(s) to the Engineer; and
         D.   Project Engineer.
      (2)   Building Department: Chief Building Official.
      (3)   Planning Department: Zoning Inspector.
      (4)   City Hall Custodian Department:
         A.   Full-time custodian(s); and
         B.   Part-time custodian(s) 50% of allowance.
      (5)   Water Reclamation Department:
         A.   Director; and
         B.   Managers.
      (6)   Construction Department:
         A.   Construction Project Administrator;
         B.   Assistant to the Construction Project Manager; and
         C.   Inspectors.
      (7)   Service Department:
         A.   Director;
         B.   Managers;
         C.   All Service Department employees who are required to perform
safety sensitive functions in the line of duty.
      (8)   Recreation Department:
         A.   Full-time Recreation Ground Crew Member(s);
         B.   Full-time Recreation/Community Center Maintenance Employee(s).
      (9)   Grantwood Department:
         A.   Full-time Superintendent;
         B.   Full-time Small Mechanic;
         C.   Full-time Irrigation Specialist.
   (b)   Uniform allowance. The following employees shall be entitled to an
annual allowance in the amount indicated to be used for the purchase of
uniforms and/or protective gear. The allowance shall be made by lump sum
payment on or before March 1 of each year. Effective January 1, 2015, the
following employees will not be entitled to an annual allowance to be used for
the purchase of uniforms and/or protective gear, but will receive reimbursement
in the amount indicated for each employee each calendar year upon the city
receiving the original itemized receipt(s) for the purchase of uniforms and/or
protective gear. In addition, each department head shall list/define the
uniforms and/or protective gear required for each position eligible to receive
uniform and/or protective gear reimbursement:
      (1)   Police Department.
Position Allowance
Position                       Allowance
Chief                          $1,750
Assistant Chief                $1,275
Systems Records Manager        $700
Secretarial Staff              $625
Animal Warden                  $500
Building Maintenance           $350
Auxiliary Officers             $150
Jail Supervisor                $925
Part-time correction officers  $300
Part-time Violations Clerk     $300
Part-time Building Maintenance $150
 
      (2)   Fire Department.
 
Position          Allowance
Chief             $1,750
Assistant Chief   $1,275
Secretarial Staff $700
 
   (c)   Commercial driver’s license bonus.  
      (1)   The following employees shall receive a bonus of $400 for
maintaining a commercial driver’s license (CDL) in good standing for the period
November 1 (year one) through and including October 31 (year two) to be paid
before December 1 (year two) of each calendar year:
         A.   All full-time Service Department employees (effective January 1,
2006);
         B.   Full-time Senior Services employees with Senior Service bus
driving duties; and
         C.   Full time employees in the Water Reclamation Department.
      (2)   Employees eligible for a complete CDL bonus shall possess and
maintain the CDL license for the duration of the measurable period as defined
in (d)(1) above. Employees obtaining an initial or reinstated CDL during the
measurable period shall be compensated at a bonus rate of $200 if the CDL was
obtained or reinstated for the period November 1 (year one) through March 31
(year two) or $100 if obtained or reinstated at any point after March 31 (year
two) within the measurable period.
(Ord. 2000-22, passed 2-7-2000; Ord. 2004-34, passed 3-1-2004; Ord. 2004-98,
passed 6-7-2004; Ord. 2009-30, passed 2-2-2009; Ord. 2009-108, passed 6-1-2009;
Ord. 2010-45, passed 2-16-2010; Ord. 2010-280, passed 12-20-2010; Ord. 2014-38,
passed 4-7-2014; Ord. 2015-214, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. 2016-52, passed 3-21-
2016; Ord. 2016-168, passed 10-4-2016; Ord. 2019-116, passed 6-17-2019; Ord.
2019-195, passed 12-16-2019)
§ 260.14 RE-EMPLOYMENT RIGHTS.
   A full-time employee of the city whose employment is terminated for any
reason except discharge for cause, and who is subsequently re-employed by the
city in any capacity, where such re-employment is for a continuous period of
not less than two years, shall be entitled to longevity pay, vacation pay and
sick leave credit based upon his or her previously accumulated total years of
employment by the city. Such entitlement shall commence no sooner than the
above-referenced period of two years of continuous re-employment.
(Ord. 1998-25, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 260.15 IMMUNIZATIONS.
   The city shall, where appropriate, provide immunizations for employees at no
cost to the employees.
(Ord. 1998-25, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 260.16 NATIONAL GUARD AND RESERVE DUTY (REPEALED).
Editor’s note:
   Section 260.16 was repealed by implication by Ordinance 2001-237, passed
December 17, 2001. See §
260.165.
§ 260.165 SERVICE IN THE UNIFORMED SERVICES.
   Commencing with the effective date of this section, there is hereby
established a policy of maintaining the wages, benefits and other terms and
conditions of employment for all full-time municipal employees of the city,
when he or she is performing service in the uniformed services under R.C. §§
5923.05 and 5903.02, and any amendments thereto. The Director of Finance is
specifically authorized to continue paying the employee’s base wages and other
benefits during his or her service in the uniformed services as defined in R.C.
§§ 5903.02, and any amendments thereto, and as set forth in R.C. §§ 5923.05(A),
(B) and (C), and any amendments thereto. If a full-time employee remains in the
uniformed services beyond any period entitling them to full pay provided by the
Ohio Revised Code, which is currently 22 eight-hour work days or 176 hours in
any one calendar year, the Director of Finance is then authorized to continue
to compensate the employee the difference between his or her gross base
military pay while the employee remains in military service. In addition, the
employee shall be entitled to receive all his or her respective benefits during
both the initial period and extended period of pay while in military service.
Said sections of the Ohio Revised Code are hereby incorporated by reference as
if fully set forth in these Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. 2001-237, passed 12-17-2001; Ord. 2003-136, passed 6-16-2003)
§ 260.17 JURY DUTY.
   A full-time employee of the city who is called to jury duty, and who is
actually engaged in such duty, during regularly scheduled work hours, shall be
paid his or her regular compensation. Any compensation received from such court
for jury duty will be assigned to the City of Solon. Documentation of
attendance and proof of compensation shall be required.
(Ord. 1998-25, passed 5-18-1998; Ord. 2018-254, passed 12-17-2018)
§ 260.18 EDUCATION AND TUITION REIMBURSEMENT.
   (a)   Employees of the city who are required to attend a school or formal
training session during their normal working hours shall receive their full
pay, and the city shall pay for all required tuition, fees and related
expenses. If an employee attends such program at times other than normal
working hours, at the direction of his or her department head, the employee
shall be compensated for such time at the rate of one and one-half times his or
her hourly rate, or be provided with equivalent time off at the discretion of
the employer. In this instance, the city shall cover the cost of tuition, fees
and related expenses.
   (b)   In the event that an employee attends a school or formal training at
times other than his or her normal working hours, and when not required by his
or her department head, the city may, at its discretion, reimburse the employee
for any required tuition, fees and related expenses, provided that the employee
has obtained advanced written approval for said training from his or her
department head and the Mayor.
   (c)   Employees who receive tuition reimbursement and voluntarily leave
employment prior to three years from the date of their last reimbursement will
be required to pay back all tuition reimbursement received within three years
from the date of their resignation. Voluntary leave does not include disability
retirement. The city may deduct amounts for this purpose from the departing
employee’s final paycheck(s). The Director of Law may institute legal
proceedings to collect any remaining unpaid tuition reimbursement.
   (d)   The administration is authorized to approve up to $31,500 annually in
reimbursements for undergraduate courses and $10,500 annually for graduate
courses at accredited colleges and universities located in the state.
   (e)   Employees requesting reimbursements for graduate courses/degrees must
obtain the approval of the Finance Committee, Director of Finance and Director
of Human Resources, in addition to the approvals required in division (b)
above.
   (f)   City employees registering to participate in the Ohio Certified Public
Management Degree is limited to two per semester.
(Ord. 1998-25, passed 5-18-1998; Ord. 2003-203, passed 9-15-2003; Ord. 2011-52,
passed 5-16-2011)
§ 260.19 PENSION; SALARY REDUCTION; PICK-UP PLAN.
   The city shall make contributions of covered employees to the Police and
Firemen’s Disability and Pension Fund of Ohio and to the Public Employees
Retirement System of Ohio, whichever the case may be, consistent with the
salary reduction plan requirements of § 414(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code.
The pick-up is mandatory and no covered employee shall have the option of
choosing to receive the contributed amounts directly instead of having them
paid by the city to the Police and Firemen’s Disability and Pension Fund of
Ohio or to the Public Employees Retirement System of Ohio, whichever the case
may be.
   (a)   The city specifically acknowledges that the contributions, although
designated as employee contributions for purposes of the Police and Firemen’s
Disability and Pension Fund of Ohio and for purposes of the Public Employees
Retirement System of Ohio, are to be paid by the city in lieu of contributions
by its covered employees.
   (b)   The city shall pay to the Police and Firemen’s Disability and Pension
Fund of Ohio and to the Public Employees Retirement System of Ohio the
contributions designated as employee contributions, and it shall pay the same
from the same source of funds used in paying salaries and/or wages to the
covered employee.
   (c)   The Director of Finance is hereby directed to implement all procedures
necessary in the administration of the pay of all persons to effect the salary
reduction of all statutorily required contributions to the Police and Firemen’s
Disability and Pension Fund of Ohio and to the Public Employees Retirement
System of Ohio so as to enable the aforementioned covered employees to obtain
the resulting federal and state tax deferments and other attendant benefits.
   (d)   The pick-up plan, as set forth in this section, may be amended from
time to time to satisfy any additional requirements which may arise as a result
of any future amendment to § 414(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code.
   (e)   The amount of the covered employees’ mandatory contributions to be
picked-up by the city may be changed from time to time by legislation adopted
by Council.
(Ord. 1998-25, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 260.20 BONDS AND INDEMNIFICATION.
   (a)   All officers and employees of the city not specifically required to
furnish an individual bond shall be covered by a uniform and/or blanket bond,
which shall indemnify against losses through one of the following conditions:
      (1)   Failure of officers and employees covered thereunder to faithfully
perform their duties or to account properly for all monies or property received
by virtue of their positions or employment; and/or
      (2)   Fraudulent or dishonest acts committed by officers and employees
covered thereunder.
   (b)   Any such blanket bond shall be approved as to its form and sufficiency
of the surety by the Director of Law. The premium of any such blanket bond
shall be paid by the city. When an elected or appointed official, while in the
good faith discharge of his or her duties imposed by law or ordinance, is sued
as a result of those duties, the Director of Law shall defend the official or
require the Mayor to contract for outside legal counsel to defend said elected
or appointed official.
(Ord. 1998-25, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 260.21 PERFORMANCE-BASED BONUS SYSTEM.
   The Director of Finance shall allow payment to be made under a bonus system
for employees who cannot progress on the pay schedule, but who have earned a
performance-based increase as recommended by their department head, with final
determination by the Mayor. This bonus system may not exceed 3% of the
employee’s annual base pay. The bonus shall be paid in part every payday in an
amount divided by 24 or 26, depending on how many paydays the particular
employee has per year and shall be paid for work performed in the pay period to
each such payday.
(Res. 2000-320, passed 11-20-2000)
§ 260.22 USE OF CITY COMPUTERS.
   (a)   City officials and employees shall be entitled to use city-owned
computers to perform their duties as approved by the Mayor and/or department
heads. All computers and applications, including software, e-mail, internet and
the like shall be used for city business only. Using computers for sexually
oriented material, gambling or anything that is disruptive to city business is
strictly prohibited and may result in disciplinary action, including
termination.
   (b)   The Director of Information Technology shall assign passwords to each
employee after approval by the Mayor and/or department heads. In addition, he
or she shall also approve the installation of any software on computers for the
purpose of compatibility. Use of e-mail or the internet is not personal,
confidential or subject to any privacy consideration, and all computers shall
be monitored by the Director of Information Technology.
   (c)   Each department head may adopt and implement additional or
supplemental rules and regulations on the use of computers in their department.
This may include what websites are accessible to employees to perform their
duties, what programs (software) each employee may use, disaster recovery plans
and the like.
(Ord. 2004-243, passed 11-1-2004)
§ 260.23 USE OF CITY-ISSUED CELLULAR TELEPHONES.
   City officials and employees may use city-issued cellular telephones in the
performance of their duties for the city in accordance with the following.
   (a)   The Mayor shall approve to whom a cellular telephone is issued.
   (b)   The Mayor and Director of Finance shall be responsible for selecting a
cellular telephone program that will minimize the cost to the city.
   (c)   All charges for cellular telephones shall be made to the respective
department’s expenditures budget account for telephones.
   (d)   City-issued cellular telephones shall be used for city business only.
If a city-issued cellular telephone is used for personal use, and such use
causes additional charges to the city because of the billing plan in effect,
the employee causing additional charges shall immediately reimburse the city
for those charges.
   (e)   The Director of Finance and department heads shall establish a system
to ensure that city-owned cellular telephones are being used only for city
business.
   (f)   Officials and employees using city-issued cellular telephones contrary
to the above provisions may have their use of such telephone revoked and
possibly be subject to further disciplinary action.
   (g)   Employees choosing to use their personal cell phone for city business
in lieu of receiving a city-issued cell phone shall be eligible to receive a
stipend of $25 per month for a regular plan, $35 per month for an extended plan
or $60 per month for a smart phone plan, however, such stipend shall be limited
to the discretion of the department head and the Mayor.
(Ord. 2005-76, passed 5-2-2005; Ord. 2011-208, passed 11-7-2011)
§ 260.24 USE OF CITY-ISSUED CREDIT CARDS (REPEALED).
§ 260.25 ADDITIONAL FRINGE BENEFITS AND PUBLIC PURPOSE EXPENDITURES.
   The Council of the city hereby approves the purchase of the following items
for officials, employees and the general public, and designates their purchase
and use as public purpose:
   (a)   Beverages, meals and/or refreshments for:
      (1)   Staff and/or department head meetings conducted by the Mayor at a
cost not to exceed $10 per expected attendee;
      (2)   Holiday gatherings, Recreation, Seniors and Arts Center events
where program fees assist with the cost;
      (3)   Council meetings and Council work sessions at a cost not to exceed
$10 per expected attendee; and
      (4)   Special events recognizing an official or employee at a cost not to
exceed $5 per expected attendee.
   (b)   Breakfast, lunch or dinner meetings conducted by the Mayor, or member
(s) of Council or department head(s) with business and/or community
representatives;
   (c)   Awards and other items of appreciation presented by the Mayor or
Council to city officials, employees and the general public not to exceed $100;
   (d)   Flowers and other items related to condolences or get-well wishes sent
by the Mayor or Council to officials, employees or the public not to exceed
$100; and
   (e)   Alcoholic beverages are prohibited. The purchase of alcoholic beverage
with public funds received by the city is strictly prohibited. This prohibition
does not apply to city operations where a liquor license is required and has
been obtained.
(Ord. 2006-90, passed 6-19-2006; Ord. 2010-43, passed 2-16-2010)
§ 260.26 DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING POLICY.
   Drug and alcohol testing programs applicable to employees who are not
covered by a collective bargaining agreement will be administered in accordance
with the most recent policy approved in legislation, a copy of which shall be
maintained in the Office of the Clerk of Council in addition to the Human
Resources Department.
(Ord. 2010-3, passed 1-19-2010)
§ 260.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree and, in addition to any other penalty provided
by law, shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned for not more than 60
days, or both.
(Ord. 1998-25, passed 5-18-1998)
TITLE EIGHT - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
            Chap.
270.   City Planning Commission
            Chap.
282.   Records Commission
            Chap.
294.   Civil Service Commission
CHAPTER 270: CITY PLANNING COMMISSION
Editor’s note:
   Provisions relating to the City Planning Commission are codified in
Chapter 1202 of Part Twelve - the Planning and Zoning Code.
CHAPTER 282: RECORDS COMMISSION
Section
   
282.01   Establishment; membership; meetings
   
282.02   Duties
   
282.03   Disposal of records
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Charges for municipal documents, see §
234.06
   City Records Commission, see R.C. § 149.39
   Documents, reports and records, see R.C. Ch. 149
   Securing writings by deception, see §
642.19
   Tampering with records, see §
642.18
§ 282.01 ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP; MEETINGS.
   There is hereby established a Records Commission composed of the Mayor or
his or her appointed representative, as Chairperson, and the Director of
Finance, the Director of Law, the Director of Information Technology and a
citizen appointed by the Mayor. The Commission shall appoint a Secretary, who
may or may not be a member of the Commission and who shall serve at the
pleasure of the Commission. The Commission may employ an archivist to serve
under its direction. The Commission shall meet at least two times per year, and
upon call of the Chairperson.
(Ord. 1986-12, passed 3-3-1986; Ord. 2019-115, passed 7-15-2019)
§ 282.02 DUTIES.
   The functions of the Records Commission shall be to provide rules for
retention and disposal of records of Solon and to review records disposal lists
submitted by municipal offices as required by the Records Commission. The
disposal lists shall contain those records which have been microfilmed or no
longer have administrative, legal or fiscal value to the city or to its
citizens. Such records may be disposed of pursuant to the procedure outlined in
this chapter.
(Ord. 1986-12, passed 3-3-1986; Ord. 2019-115, passed 7-15-2019)
§ 282.03 DISPOSAL OF RECORDS.
   Municipal records may be disposed of pursuant to rules promulgated by the
Commission and as approved through any current requirements of the Auditor of
State and the State Archives, Ohio Historical Society on forms so provided.
(Ord. 1986-12, passed 3-3-1986; Ord. 2019-115, passed 7-15-2019)
CHAPTER 294: CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
Section
   
294.01   Compensation
   
294.02   Exclusion of City School District Board
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Authority of Council re employment of officers and employees, see
Charter Art. IV, § 8
   Civil service commissions, see R.C. §§ 124.40 et seq.
   Civil service, see R.C. Ch. 124
   Civil Service Commission, see
Charter Art. VI, §§ 1,
4
   Officers and employees, see
Ch. 260
   Qualification of municipal employees, see
Charter Art. VIII, § 2
§ 294.01 COMPENSATION.
   Each member of the Civil Service Commission shall be paid $50 for any and
all meetings attended for not more than 40 meetings in any calendar year and
any other time and expense approved by the Mayor.
(Ord. 1989-126, passed 6-5-1989; Ord. 2022-167, passed 7-18-2022)
§ 294.02 EXCLUSION OF CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT BOARD.
   The School District and its employees are hereby excluded from the
jurisdiction of the City Civil Service Commission. The City Civil Service
Commission shall not take any action related to examinations, applications,
eligibility, appointment, transfer, layoff, reinstatement, discipline, removal
or any other matter with respect to the School District or its employees.
(Ord. 2003-253, passed 10-20-2003)
TITLE TEN - JUDICIARY
            Chap.
298.   Mayor’s Court
CHAPTER 298: MAYOR’S COURT
Editor’s note:
   R.C. § 1905.01 provides that the Mayor of Solon has jurisdiction to hear and
determine any prosecution for the violation of a Solon ordinance, and has
jurisdiction in all criminal causes involving moving traffic violations
occurring on state highways located within the corporate limits of Solon,
subject to the limitations of R.C. §§ 2937.08 and 2938.04. In keeping his or
her docket and file, the Mayor shall be governed by the laws pertaining to
county courts.
   R.C. § 2937.08 provides that if the court in which a defendant is charged
with an offense is not a court of record (the Mayor’s Court), and the charge is
such that a right to a jury trial exists, such matter shall not be tried before
him or her unless the accused, by writing subscribed by him or her, waives a
jury and consents to be tried by the magistrate. If the defendant, in such
event, does not waive his or her right to a jury trial, then the magistrate
shall require the accused to enter into a recognizance to appear before a court
of record in Cuyahoga County (the Bedford Municipal Court) and the magistrate
shall thereupon certify all papers filed, together with a transcript of
proceedings and accrued costs to date, and such recognizance, if given, to the
court of record.
    However, Rule 23(A) of the Ohio Rules of Criminal Procedure provides that
in petty offense cases, where there is a right to jury trial, the defendant
shall be tried by the court unless he or she demands a jury trial. The
jurisdiction of a Mayor’s Court, in such cases, is further limited by Rule 9 of
the Ohio Traffic Rules, which provides that if a jury demand is not made
pursuant to Criminal Rule 23, and the defendant waives his or her right to jury
trial in writing, a Mayor may try the case only if (1) his or her compensation
as a judge is not directly dependent upon criminal case convictions, or (2) he
or she is not the chief executive and administrative officer of the
municipality and as such responsible for the financial condition of the
municipality. Guilty and no contest pleas may be taken by any Mayor.
   R.C. §§ 1901.24 and 2938.04 provide that the right to trial by jury shall be
claimed by making demand in writing therefor and filing the same with the clerk
of the court of record not less than three days prior to the date set for trial
or on or before the day following receipt of notice of the date set for trial,
whichever is later. However, Rule 23(A) of the Ohio Rules of Criminal
Procedure, which presumptively supersedes R.C. § 2938.04, provides that right
to trial by jury shall be claimed by making demand in writing therefor and
filing the same with the clerk of court not less than ten days prior to the
date set for trial, or on or before the third day following receipt of notice
of the date set for trial, whichever is later. Failure to claim a jury trial as
provided herein is a complete waiver of the right thereto. R.C. § 2938.04
provides, further, that a jury trial may not be had in courts not of record,
but failure to waive a jury in writing where the right to a jury trial may be
asserted shall require the magistrate to certify such case to a court of record
as provided in R.C. § 2937.08. R.C. § 2945.17 provides that an accused has a
right to be tried by a jury at any trial in any court for the violation of any
Ohio statute or of any Solon ordinance, except in cases in which the penalty
involved does not exceed a fine of $100.
   The Supreme Court of Ohio, on December 4, 1967, promulgated Rules of
Practice and Procedure in Traffic Cases For All Courts Inferior to Common
Pleas, the adoption of which became mandatory prior to March 2, 1969. Amended
Rules, referred to as the Ohio Traffic Rules, became effective on January 1,
1976. Effective October 20, 1987, Mayors of Mayor’s Courts were authorized to
suspend the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege of any person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19 or §
434.01 of the Traffic Code (OVI), in accordance with R.C. § 4507.16(B).
Section
   
298.01   Docket Clerk
   
298.02   Deposit at filing of complaint
   
298.03   Court costs
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Contempt of court, see R.C. §§ 1905.28, 1907.37, 2935.11
   Detection and arrest, see R.C. Ch. 2935
   Mayor’s Court jurisdiction, see R.C. §§ 1905.01 et seq.
   Mayor’s powers and duties, see R.C. §§ 1905.20 et seq.
   Peace and search warrants, see R.C. Ch. 2933
   Preliminary examination; bail, see R.C. Ch. 2937
   Suspension of driver’s license, see §§
408.04;
698.07
   Using sham legal process, see §
606.27
§ 298.01 DOCKET CLERK.
   There is hereby established the position of Docket Clerk for the Mayor’s
Court. The Docket Clerk shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of
Council, shall aid in the maintenance of all records pertaining to the Mayor’s
Court and shall perform such other services as may be required by the Mayor.
(Ord. 1956-90, passed 8-20-1956)
§ 298.02 DEPOSIT AT FILING OF COMPLAINT.
   A person desiring to file a complaint against another person, firm or
corporation for any violation of any section of these Codified Ordinances, or
any statute of the state, shall be required to deposit at the time of the
filing of the complaint the sum of $15 to ensure the payment of costs, which
sum shall be refunded when the court costs are imposed and collected.
(Ord. 1968-211, passed 10-7-1968)
§ 298.03 COURT COSTS.
   The Docket Clerk of the Mayor’s Court is hereby authorized and directed to
impose and collect court costs in the sum of $50 for each waiverable non-
parking case processed.
(Ord. 2000-149, passed 6-5-2000; Ord. 2014-245, passed 11-17-2014)
APPENDIX I: COMPENSATION SCHEDULES
Editor’s note:
   Because of the frequency of change, regular compensation schedules for
municipal officers and employees are not codified in the body of this
Administration Code. Copies of the latest relevant legislation may, however, be
hole-punched and inserted behind this page for the convenience of the user of
these Codified Ordinances.
APPENDIX II: EMPLOYMENT AGREEMENTS
Editor’s note:
   The city enters into agreements from time to time with representatives of
various classes of municipal employees, which agreements provide for
compensation, benefits and other incidents of employment. In the event of a
conflict between any of the provisions of such agreements and a provision of
this Administration Code, the provision of the agreement shall control. Because
of the frequency of change, these agreements are not codified in the body of
this Administration Code.
   Copies of the latest relevant legislation and of such agreements may,
however, be hole-punched and inserted behind this page for the convenience of
the user of these Codified Ordinances.
PART FOUR - TRAFFIC CODE
      TITLE TWO - General Provisions
         Chap.
402.   Definitions
         Chap.
404.   Enforcement; Impounding
         Chap.
406.   Traffic Control
         Chap.
408.   Penalties
      TITLE FOUR - Public Ways and Traffic-Control Devices
         Chap.
412.   Obstruction and Special Uses of Public Ways
         Chap.
414.   Traffic-Control Devices
         Chap.
416.   Pedestrians
      TITLE SIX - Vehicles and Operation
         Chap.
432.   Operation Generally
         Chap.
434.   O.V.I.; Reckless Operation; Speed
         Chap.
436.   Licensing; Accidents
         Chap.
438.   Safety and Equipment
         Chap.
440.   Commercial and Heavy Vehicles
         Chap.
442.   Drivers of Commercial Vehicles
         Chap.
444.   Motor Transportation Companies
         Chap.
446.   Light Motor Vehicle Noise Control
      TITLE EIGHT - Parking
         Chap.
452.   Parking Generally
      TITLE TEN - Bicycles, Motorcycles and Snowmobiles
         Chap.
474.   Bicycles and Motorcycles Generally
         Chap.
476.   Snowmobiles, Off-Highway Motorcycles and All-Purpose Vehicles
TITLE TWO - GENERAL PROVISIONS
            Chap.
402.   Definitions
            Chap.
404.   Enforcement; Impounding
            Chap.
406.   Traffic Control
            Chap.
408.   Penalties
CHAPTER 402: DEFINITIONS
Section
   
402.01   Meaning of words and phrases
   
402.02   Agricultural tractor; multi-wheel agricultural tractor
   
402.03   Alley
   
402.04   Arterial street
   
402.045   Beacon
   
402.05   Bicycle
   
402.06   Bus
   
402.07   Business district
   
402.075   Chauffeured limousine
   
402.077   Child care center
   
402.08   Commercial tractor
   
402.09   Controlled-access highway
   
402.10   Crosswalk
   
402.11   Driver or operator
   
402.115   Electric bicycle
   
402.12   Emergency vehicle
   
402.13   Explosives
   
402.14   Expressway
   
402.15   Flammable liquid
   
402.16   Freeway
   
402.165   Funeral escort vehicle
   
402.17   Gross weight
   
402.174   Highway maintenance vehicle
   
402.175   Highway traffic signal
   
402.177   Hybrid beacon
   
402.18   Intersection
   
402.19   Laned highway
   
402.195   Local authorities
   
402.197   Low-speed micromobility device
   
402.199   Median
   
402.20   Motor vehicle
   
402.21   Motorcycle
   
402.22   Motorized bicycle
   
402.225   Motorized wheelchair
   
402.226   Natural resources officer
   
402.227   Operate
   
402.23   Parking
   
402.24   Pedestrian
   
402.25   Person
   
402.26   Pole trailer
   
402.27   Police officer
   
402.275   Predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense
   
402.277   Private road open to public travel
   
402.28   Private road or driveway
   
402.29   Public safety vehicle
   
402.30   Railroad
   
402.31   Railroad sign or signal
   
402.32   Railroad train
   
402.33   Residence district
   
402.335   Ridesharing arrangement
   
402.34   Right-of-way
   
402.345   Road service vehicle
   
402.35   Roadway
   
402.355   Rural mail delivery vehicle
   
402.36   Safety zone
   
402.37   School bus
   
402.38   Semitrailer
   
402.385   Shared-use path
   
402.39   Sidewalk
   
402.395   State highway
   
402.40   State route
   
402.41   Stop
   
402.42   Stop intersection
   
402.43   Stopping and standing
   
402.44   Street or highway
   
402.45   Through street or highway
   
402.46   Thruway
   
402.47   Traffic
   
402.48   Traffic-control device
   
402.49   Traffic-control signal
   
402.50   Trailer
   
402.51   Truck
   
402.515   Type A family child care home
   
402.52   Urban district
   
402.53   Vehicle
   
402.54   Waste collection vehicle
   
402.55   Wildlife officer
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Blind person defined, see §
416.02
   Commercial motor vehicle defined, see §
442.01
   Funeral procession defined, see §
432.21
   Snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle and all-purpose vehicle defined, see §
476.01
   Street racing defined, see §
434.07
§ 402.01 MEANING OF WORDS AND PHRASES.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided, the definitions set forth in R.C. §
4501.01 shall apply to this Traffic Code and the penal laws of the
municipality.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided, the following words and phrases, when
used in this Traffic Code, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them in this chapter.
§ 402.02 AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR; MULTI-WHEEL AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR.
   (a)   AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR means every self-propelled vehicle designed or
used for drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery, but having no provision
for carrying loads independently of such other vehicles, and used principally
for agricultural purposes.
(R.C. § 4511.01(J))
   (b)   MULTI-WHEEL AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR means a type of agricultural tractor
that has two or more wheels or tires on each side of one axle at the rear of
the tractor, is designed or used for drawing other vehicles or wheeled
machinery, has no provision for carrying loads independently of the drawn
vehicles or machinery, and is used principally for agricultural purposes.
(R.C. § 4511.01(GGG))
§ 402.03 ALLEY.
   ALLEY means a street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or
side of lots or buildings in urban districts, and not intended for the purpose
of through vehicular traffic, and any street or highway that has been declared
an ALLEY by the Council.
(R.C. § 4511.01(XX))
§ 402.04 ARTERIAL STREET.
   ARTERIAL STREET means any United States or state numbered route, controlled-
access highway or other major radial or circumferential street or highway
designated by local authorities within their respective jurisdictions as part
of a major arterial system of streets or highways.
(R.C. § 4511.01(CCC))
§ 402.045 BEACON.
   BEACON means a highway traffic signal with one or more signal sections that
operate in a flashing mode.
(R.C. § 4511.01(KKK))
§ 402.05 BICYCLE.
   BICYCLE means every device, other than a device that is designed solely for
use as a play vehicle by a child, that is propelled solely by human power upon
which a person may ride, and that has two or more wheels, any of which is more
than 14 inches in diameter.
(Ord. 2002-61, passed 4-1-2002)
Statutory reference:
   Definition of bicycle, see R.C. § 4511.01(G)
§ 402.06 BUS.
   BUS means every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than nine
passengers, and used for the transportation of persons other than in a
ridesharing arrangement, and every motor vehicle, automobile for hire or
funeral car, other than a taxicab or motor vehicle used in a ridesharing
arrangement, designed and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.
(R.C. § 4511.01(L))
§ 402.07 BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   The territory fronting upon a street or highway, including the street or
highway, between successive intersections within the municipality, where 50% or
more of the frontage between successive intersections is occupied by buildings
in use for business, or within or outside the municipality where 50% or more of
the frontage for a distance of 300 feet or more is occupied by buildings in use
for business, and the character of the territory is indicated by official
traffic-control devices.
(R.C. § 4511.01(NN))
§ 402.075 CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE.
   CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE. A motor vehicle that is designed to carry nine or
fewer passengers and is operated for hire pursuant to a prearranged contract
for the transportation of passengers on public roads and highways along a route
under the control of the person hiring the vehicle and not over a defined and
regular route. PREARRANGED CONTRACT means an agreement, made in advance of
boarding, to provide transportation from a specific location in a chauffeured
limousine. CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE does not include any vehicle that is used
exclusively in the business of funeral directing.
(R.C. § 4501.01(LL))
§ 402.077 CHILD CARE CENTER.
   CHILD CARE CENTER has the same meaning as set forth in R.C. § 5104.01.
(R.C. § 4511.01(FFF))
§ 402.08 COMMERCIAL TRACTOR.
   COMMERCIAL TRACTOR means every motor vehicle having motive power designed or
used for drawing other vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry any load
thereon, or designed or used for drawing other vehicles while carrying a
portion of the other vehicles, or the load thereon, or both.
(R.C. § 4511.01(I))
§ 402.09 CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY.
   CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY means every street or highway in respect to which
owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right or
access to or from the same except at certain points only and in a manner as may
be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over the street or
highway.
(R.C. § 4511.01(CC))
§ 402.10 CROSSWALK.
   CROSSWALK means:
   (a)   The part of a roadway at intersections ordinarily included within the
real or projected prolongation of property lines and curb lines or, in the
absence of curbs, the edges of the traversable roadway;
   (b)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere, distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface;
and
   (c)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this definition, there
shall not be a CROSSWALK where the legislative authority has placed signs
indicating no crossing.
(R.C. § 4511.01(LL))
§ 402.11 DRIVER OR OPERATOR.
   DRIVER or OPERATOR means any person who drives or is in actual physical
control of a vehicle.
(R.C. § 4511.01(Y))
§ 402.115 ELECTRIC BICYCLE.
   ELECTRIC BICYCLE means a "class 1 electric bicycle", a "class 2 electric
bicycle", or a "class 3 electric bicycle" as defined below.
      (1)   CLASS 1 ELECTRIC BICYCLE means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that
provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling and ceases to provide
assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 20 miles per hour.
      (2)   CLASS 2 ELECTRIC BICYCLE means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that may
provide assistance regardless of whether the rider is pedaling and is not
capable of providing assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 20 miles
per hour.
      (3)   CLASS 3 ELECTRIC BICYCLE means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that
provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling and ceases to provide
assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 28 miles per hour.
(R.C. § 4511.01(RRR) - (UUU))
§ 402.12 EMERGENCY VEHICLE.
   EMERGENCY VEHICLE means emergency vehicles of municipal, township or county
departments or public utility corporations, when identified as such as required
by law, the Director of Public Safety or local authorities, and motor vehicles
when commandeered by a police officer.
(R.C. § 4511.01(D))
§ 402.13 EXPLOSIVES.
   EXPLOSIVES means any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is
intended for the purpose of producing an explosion that contains any oxidizing
and combustible units or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities or
packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion or
by a detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause a sudden
generation of highly heated gases, such that the resultant gaseous pressures
are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects, or of
destroying life or limb. Manufactured articles shall not be held to be
EXPLOSIVES when the individual units contain explosives in limited quantities
of a nature or in such packing that it is impossible to procure a simultaneous
or a destructive explosion of the units, to the injury of life, limb or
property by fire, friction, concussion, percussion or by a detonator, such as
fixed ammunition for small arms, firecrackers or safety fuse matches.
(R.C. § 4511.01(T))
§ 402.14 EXPRESSWAY.
   Expressway means a divided arterial highway for through traffic with full or
partial control of access with an excess of 50% of all crossroads separated in
grade.
(R.C. § 4511.01(ZZ))
§ 402.15 FLAMMABLE LIQUID.
   FLAMMABLE LIQUID means any liquid which has a flash point of 70°F or less,
as determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closed cup test device.
(R.C. § 4511.01(U))
§ 402.16 FREEWAY.
   FREEWAY means a divided multi-lane highway for through traffic with
crossroads separated in grade and with full control of access.
(R.C. § 4511.01(YY))
§ 402.165 FUNERAL ESCORT VEHICLE.
   FUNERAL ESCORT VEHICLE means any motor vehicle, including a funeral hearse,
while used to facilitate the movement of a funeral procession.
(R.C. § 4511.01(WW))
§ 402.17 GROSS WEIGHT.
   GROSS WEIGHT means the weight of a vehicle plus the weight of any load
thereon.
(R.C. § 4511.01(V))
§ 402.174 HIGHWAY MAINTENANCE VEHICLE.
   HIGHWAY MAINTENANCE VEHICLE. A vehicle used in snow and ice removal or road
surface maintenance, including a snow plow, traffic line striper, road sweeper,
mowing machine, asphalt distributing vehicle, or other such vehicle designed
for use in specific highway maintenance activities.
(R.C. § 4511.01(QQQ))
§ 402.175 HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SIGNAL.
   HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SIGNAL means a power-operated traffic-control device by
which traffic is warned or directed to take some specific action. The term does
not include a power-operated sign, steadily illuminated pavement marker,
warning light or steady burning electric lamp.
(R.C. § 4511.01(MMM))
§ 402.177 HYBRID BEACON.
   HYBRID BEACON means a type of beacon that is intentionally placed in a dark
mode between periods of operation where no indications are displayed and, when
in operation, displays both steady and flashing traffic-control signal
indications.
(R.C. § 4511.01(LLL))
§ 402.18 INTERSECTION.
   INTERSECTION means:
   (a)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral
curb lines, or, if none, the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two
highways that join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the
area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways that join at any
other angle might come into conflict. The junction of an alley or driveway with
a roadway or highway does not constitute an INTERSECTION unless the roadway or
highway at the junction is controlled by a traffic-control device;
   (b)   If a highway includes two roadways that are 30 feet or more apart,
then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting
highway constitutes a separate intersection. If both intersecting highways
include two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of any two
roadways of such highways constitutes a separate intersection; and
   (c)   At a location controlled by a traffic-control signal, regardless of
the distance between the separate intersections as described in division (b) of
this definition:
      (1)   If a stop line, yield line or crosswalk has not been designated on
the roadway within the median between the separate intersections, the two
intersections and the roadway and median constitute one intersection;
      (2)   Where a stop line, yield line or crosswalk line is designated on
the roadway on the intersection approach, the area within the crosswalk and any
area beyond the designated stop line or yield line constitute part of the
intersection; and
      (3)   Where a crosswalk is designated on a roadway on the departure from
the intersection, the intersection includes the area that extends to the far
side of the crosswalk.
(R.C. § 4511.01(KK))
§ 402.19 LANED HIGHWAY.
   LANED HIGHWAY means a highway the roadway of which is divided into two or
more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
(R.C. § 4511.01(GG))
§ 402.195 LOCAL AUTHORITIES.
   LOCAL AUTHORITIES mean every county, municipal and other local board or body
having authority to adopt police regulations under the Constitution and laws of
this state.
(R.C. § 4511.01(AA))
§ 402.197 LOW-SPEED MICROMOBILITY DEVICE.
   LOW-SPEED MICROMOBILITY DEVICE means a device weighing less than 100 pounds
that has handlebars, is propelled by an electric motor or human power, and has
an attainable speed on a paved level surface of not more than 20 miles per hour
when propelled by the electric motor.
(R.C. § 4511.01(WWW))
§ 402.199 MEDIAN.
   MEDIAN means the area between two roadways of a divided highway, measured
from edge of traveled way to edge of traveled way, but excluding turn lanes.
The width of a median may be different between intersections, between
interchanges and at opposite approaches of the same intersection.
(R.C. § 4511.01(NNN))
§ 402.20 MOTOR VEHICLE.
   MOTOR VEHICLE means every vehicle propelled or drawn by power other than
muscular power or power collected from overhead electric trolley wires, except
motorized bicycles, electric bicycles, road rollers, traction engines, power
shovels, power cranes and other equipment used in construction work, and not
designed for or employed in general highway transportation, hole-digging
machinery, well-drilling machinery, ditch-digging machinery, farm machinery and
trailers designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of
storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a
street or highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25
mph or less.
(R.C. § 4511.01(B))
§ 402.21 MOTORCYCLE.
   MOTORCYCLE means every motor vehicle, other than a tractor, having a seat or
saddle for the use of the operator and designed to travel on not more than
three wheels in contact with the ground, including, but not limited to, motor
vehicles known as MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE, MOTOR SCOOTER, AUTOCYCLE, CAB-ENCLOSED
MOTORCYCLE,  or MOTORCYCLE without regard to weight or brake horsepower.
(R.C. § 4511.01(C))
§ 402.22 MOTORIZED BICYCLE.
   MOTORIZED BICYCLE or MOPED means any vehicle having either two tandem wheels
or one wheel in the front and two wheels in the rear, that may be capable of
being pedaled, and that is equipped with a helper motor of not more than 50
cubic centimeters piston displacement that produces not more than one brake
horsepower, and is capable of propelling the vehicle at a speed of not greater
than 20 mph on a level surface. The terms do not include an electric bicycle.
(R.C. § 4511.01(H))
§ 402.225 MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR.
   MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR means any self-propelled vehicle designed for, and used
by, a person with a disability and that is incapable of a speed in excess of
eight mph.
(R.C. § 4511.01(EEE))
§ 402.226 NATURAL RESOURCES OFFICER.
   NATURAL RESOURCES OFFICER means an officer appointed pursuant to R.C. §
1501.24.
(R.C. § 4511.01(XXX))
§ 402.227 OPERATE.
   OPERATE means to cause or have caused movement of a vehicle.
(R.C. § 4511.01(HHH))
§ 402.23 PARKING.
   PARKING or PARKED means the standing of a vehicle upon a street, road,
alley, highway or public ground, whether accompanied or unaccompanied by a
driver, but does not include the temporary standing of a vehicle for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or loading merchandise or
passengers.
§ 402.24 PEDESTRIAN.
   PEDESTRIAN means any natural person afoot. The term includes a personal
delivery device as defined in R.C. § 4511.513 unless the context clearly
suggests otherwise.
(R.C. § 4511.01(X))
§ 402.25 PERSON.
   PERSON means every natural person, firm, partnership, association or
corporation.
(R.C. § 4511.01(W))
§ 402.26 POLE TRAILER.
   POLE TRAILER means every trailer or semitrailer attached to the towing
vehicle by means of a reach, pole or by being boomed or otherwise secured to
the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregular
shaped loads such as poles, pipes or structural members capable, generally, of
sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections.
(R.C. § 4511.01(O))
§ 402.27 POLICE OFFICER.
   POLICE OFFICER means every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic,
or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
(R.C. § 4511.01(Z))
§ 402.275 PREDICATE MOTOR VEHICLE OR TRAFFIC OFFENSE.
   PREDICATE MOTOR VEHICLE or TRAFFIC OFFENSE mean any of the following:
   (a)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12, 4511.132, 4511.16,
4511.20, 4511.201, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25,
4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33,
4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41,
4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.451, 4511.452,
4511.46, 4511.47, 4511.48, 4511.481, 4511.49, 4511.50, 4511.511, 4511.53,
4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.56, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59, 4511.60, 4511.61,
4511.64, 4511.66, 4511.661, 4511.68, 4511.70, 4511.701, 4511.71, 4511.711,
4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, 4511.73, 4511.763, 4511.771, 4511.78 or 4511.84;
   (b)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.17(A)(2), 4511.51(A) through (D) or 4511.74
(A);
   (c)   A violation of any provision of R.C. §§ 4511.01 through 4511.76 for
which no penalty otherwise is provided in the section that contains the
provision violated; and
   (d)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.214;
   (e)   A violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent
to any section or provision set forth or described in division (a), (b), (c) or
(d) of this definition.
(R.C. § 4511.01(III))
§ 402.277 PRIVATE ROAD OPEN TO PUBLIC TRAVEL.
   PRIVATE ROAD OPEN TO PUBLIC TRAVEL means a private toll road or road,
including any adjacent sidewalks that generally run parallel to the road,
within a shopping center, airport, sports arena or other similar business or
recreation facility that is privately owned but where the public is allowed to
travel without access restrictions. The term includes a gated toll road but
does not include a road within a private gated property where access is
restricted at all times, a parking area, a driving aisle within a parking area
or a private grade crossing.
(R.C. § 4511.01(OOO))
§ 402.28 PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY.
   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY means every way or place in private ownership used
for vehicular travel by the owner, and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
(R.C. § 4511.01(DD))
§ 402.29 PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE.
   PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE means any of the following:
   (a)   Ambulances, including private ambulance companies under contract to a
municipality, township or county, and private ambulances and nontransport
vehicles bearing license plates issued under R.C. § 4503.49;
   (b)   Motor vehicles used by public law enforcement officers or other
persons sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state;
   (c)   Any motor vehicle when properly identified as required by the Director
of Public Safety, when used in response to fire emergency calls or to provide
emergency medical service to ill or injured persons, and when operated by a
duly qualified person who is a member of a volunteer rescue service or a
volunteer fire department, and who is on duty pursuant to the rules or
directives of that service. The State Fire Marshal shall be designated by the
Director of Public Safety as the certifying agency for all public safety
vehicles described herein;
   (d)   Vehicles used by fire departments, including motor vehicles when used
by volunteer firefighters responding to emergency calls in the fire department
service when identified as required by the Director of Public Safety;
   (e)   Any vehicle used to transport or provide emergency medical service to
an ill or injured person, when certified as a PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE, shall be
considered such a vehicle when transporting an ill or injured person to a
hospital, regardless of whether the vehicle has already passed a hospital; and
   (f)   Vehicles used by the Motor Carrier Enforcement Unit for the
enforcement of orders and rules of the Public Utilities Commission as specified
in R.C. § 5503.34.
(R.C. § 4511.01(E))
§ 402.30 RAILROAD.
   RAILROAD means a carrier of persons or property operating upon rails placed
principally on a private right-of-way.
(R.C. § 4511.01(P))
§ 402.31 RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL.
   RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL means any sign, signal or device erected by
authority of a public body or official or by a railroad, and intended to give
notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train.
(R.C. § 4511.01(SS))
§ 402.32 RAILROAD TRAIN.
   RAILROAD TRAIN means a steam engine or an electric or other motor, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated by a railroad.
(R.C. § 4511.01(Q))
§ 402.33 RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT means the territory, not comprising a business district,
fronting on a street or highway, including the street or highway, where, for a
distance of 300 feet or more, the frontage is improved with residences or
residences and buildings in use for business.
(R.C. § 4511.01(OO))
§ 402.335 RIDESHARING ARRANGEMENT.
   RIDESHARING ARRANGEMENT includes the transportation of persons in a motor
vehicle where the transportation is incidental to another purpose of a
volunteer driver, and includes RIDESHARING ARRANGEMENTS known as carpools,
vanpools and buspools.
(R.C. § 4511.01(DDD))
§ 402.34 RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY means either of the following, as the context requires:
   (a)   The right of a vehicle or pedestrian to proceed uninterruptedly in a
lawful manner in the direction in which it, he or she is moving, in preference
to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching from a different direction into
its, his or her path; or
   (b)   A general term denoting land, property or the interest therein,
usually in the configuration of a strip, acquired for or devoted to
transportation purposes. When used in this context, RIGHT-OF-WAY includes the
roadway, shoulders or berm, ditch and slopes extending to the right-of-way
limits under the control of the state or local authority.
(R.C. § 4511.01(UU))
§ 402.345 ROAD SERVICE VEHICLE.
   ROAD SERVICE VEHICLE mean wreckers, utility repair vehicles and state,
county and municipal service vehicles equipped with visual signals by means of
flashing, rotating or oscillating lights.
(R.C. § 4511.01(JJJ))
§ 402.35 ROADWAY.
   ROADWAY means that portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, except the berm or shoulder. If a highway includes
two or more separate roadways, the term ROADWAY means any roadway separately,
but not all the roadways collectively.
(R.C. § 4511.01(EE))
§ 402.355 RURAL MAIL DELIVERY VEHICLE.
   RURAL MAIL DELIVERY VEHICLE means every vehicle used to deliver United
States mail on a rural mail delivery route.
(R.C. § 4511.01(VV))
§ 402.36 SAFETY ZONE.
   SAFETY ZONE means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway
for the exclusive use of pedestrians, and protected or marked or indicated by
adequate signs so as to be plainly visible at all times.
(R.C. § 4511.01(MM))
§ 402.37 SCHOOL BUS.
   SCHOOL BUS means every bus designed for carrying more than nine passengers
which is owned by a public, private or governmental agency or institution of
learning, and operated for the transportation of children to or from a school
session or a school function, or owned by a private person and operated for
compensation for the transportation of children to or from a school session or
a school function; provided, SCHOOL BUS does not include a bus operated by a
municipally owned transportation system, a mass transit company operating
exclusively within the territorial limits of a municipality, or within those
limits and the territorial limits of municipalities immediately contiguous to
the municipality, nor a common passenger carrier certified by the Public
Utilities Commission unless the bus is devoted exclusively to the
transportation of children to and from a school session or a school function,
and SCHOOL BUS does not include a van or bus used by a licensed child care
center or type A family child care home to transport children from the child
care center or type A family child care home to a school if the van or bus does
not have more than 15 children in the van or bus at any time.
(R.C. § 4511.01(F))
§ 402.38 SEMITRAILER.
   SEMITRAILER means every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or
property with another and separate motor vehicle so that in operation a part of
its own weight or that of its load, or both, rests upon and is carried by
another vehicle.
(R.C. § 4511.01(N))
§ 402.385 SHARED-USE PATH.
   SHARED-USE PATH means a bikeway outside the traveled way and physically
separated from motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and
either within the highway right-of-way or within an independent alignment. A
SHARED-USE PATH also may be used by pedestrians, including skaters, joggers,
users of manual and motorized wheelchairs, and other authorized motorized and
non-motorized users. A shared-use path does not include any trail that is
intended to be used primarily for mountain biking, hiking, equestrian use, or
other similar uses, or any other single track or natural surface trial that has
historically been reserved for non-motorized use.
(R.C. § 4511.01(PPP))
§ 402.39 SIDEWALK.
   SIDEWALK means that portion of a street between the curb lines, or the
lateral line of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the
use of pedestrians.
(R.C. § 4511.01(FF))
§ 402.395 STATE HIGHWAY.
   STATE HIGHWAY means a highway under the jurisdiction of the Department of
Transportation, outside the limits of municipalities, provided that the
authority conferred upon the Director of Transportation in R.C. § 5511.01 to
erect state highway route markers and signs directing traffic shall not be
modified by R.C. §§ 4511.01 through 4511.79 and 4511.99.
§ 402.40 STATE ROUTE.
   STATE ROUTE means every highway which is designated with an official state
route number and so marked.
(R.C. § 4511.01(JJ))
§ 402.41 STOP.
   STOP when required, means a complete cessation of movement.
§ 402.42 STOP INTERSECTION.
   STOP INTERSECTION means any intersection at one or more entrances of which
stop signs are erected.
(R.C. § 4511.01(BBB))
§ 402.43 STOPPING AND STANDING.
   (a)   STOP and STOPPING, when prohibited, mean any halting of a vehicle,
even momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or traffic-control device.
   (b)   STAND and STANDING mean the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in receiving or discharging passengers.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
§ 402.44 STREET OR HIGHWAY.
   STREET or HIGHWAY means the entire width between the boundary lines of every
way open to the use of the public as a thoroughfare for purposes of vehicular
travel.
(R.C. § 4511.01(BB))
§ 402.45 THROUGH STREET OR HIGHWAY.
   THROUGH HIGHWAY means every street or highway as provided in R.C. § 4511.65,
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 4511.01(HH))
§ 402.46 THRUWAY.
   THRUWAY means a through highway whose entire roadway is reserved for through
traffic and on which roadway parking is prohibited.
(R.C. § 4511.01(AAA))
§ 402.47 TRAFFIC.
   TRAFFIC means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars
and other devices, either singly or together, while using for purposes of
travel any highway or private road open to public travel.
(R.C. § 4511.01(TT))
§ 402.48 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE.
   TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE means a flagger, sign, signal, marking or other
device used to regulate, warn or guide traffic, placed on, over or adjacent to
a street, highway, private road open to public travel, pedestrian facility or
shared-use path by authority of a public agency or official having
jurisdiction, or, in the case of a private road open to public travel, by
authority of the private owner or private official having jurisdiction.
(R.C. § 4511.01(QQ))
§ 402.49 TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL.
   TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL means any highway traffic signal by which traffic is
alternately directed to stop and permitted to proceed.
(R.C. § 4511.01(RR))
§ 402.50 TRAILER.
   TRAILER means every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or
property wholly on its own structure, and for being drawn by a motor vehicle,
including any vehicle when formed by or operated as a combination of a
semitrailer and a vehicle of the dolly type, such as that commonly known as a
trailer dolly, a vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural
production materials between a local place of storage or supply and the farm
when drawn or towed on a street or highway at a speed greater than 25 mph and a
vehicle designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of
storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a
street or highway for a distance of more than ten miles or at a speed of more
than 25 mph.
(R.C. § 4511.01(M))
§ 402.51 TRUCK.
   TRUCK means every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers, designed
and used to carry property.
(R.C. § 4511.01(K))
§ 402.515 TYPE A FAMILY CARE HOME.
   TYPE A FAMILY CARE HOME has the same meaning as set forth in R.C. § 5104.01.
(R.C. § 4511.01(FFF))
§ 402.52 URBAN DISTRICT.
   URBAN DISTRICT means the territory contiguous to and including any street or
highway which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry or
dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of
one-quarter of a mile or more, and the character of the territory is indicated
by official traffic-control devices.
(R.C. § 4511.01(PP))
§ 402.53 VEHICLE.
   VEHICLE means every device, including a motorized bicycle and an electric
bicycle, in, upon or by which any person or property may be transported or
drawn upon a highway, except that VEHICLE does not include any motorized
wheelchair, any electric personal assistive mobility device, any low-speed
micromobility device, any personal delivery device as defined in R.C. §
4511.513, any device that is moved by power collected from overhead electric
trolley wires or that is used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks or
any device, other than a bicycle, that is moved by human power.
(R.C. § 4511.01(A))
§ 402.54 WASTE COLLECTION VEHICLE.
   WASTE COLLECTION VEHICLE means a vehicle used in the collection of garbage,
refuse, trash, or recyclable materials.
(R.C. § 4511.01(RRR))
§ 402.55 WILDLIFE OFFICER.
   WILDLIFE OFFICER means an officer designated pursuant to R.C. § 1531.13.
(R.C. § 4511.01(YYY))
CHAPTER 404: ENFORCEMENT; IMPOUNDING
Section
   
404.01   Enforcement by Police Department
   
404.02   Resisting an enforcing official
   
404.03   Road workers, motor vehicles and equipment excepted
   
404.035   Emergency, public safety and coroners’ vehicles excepted
   
404.04   Application to persons riding, driving animals upon roadway
   
404.05   Impounding of vehicles; redemption
   
404.06   Traffic direction in emergencies; obedience to school guards
   
404.07   Application to drivers of government vehicles
   
404.08   Police may remove ignition key
   
404.09   Reporting repossessions of motor vehicles
   
404.10   Furnishing false information incident to traffic citation
   
404.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Arrest without warrant for misdemeanor, see R.C. § 2935.03
   Authority of arresting officer when radar, electrical or mechanical timing
device used, see R.C. 4511.091
   Burden of proof, see R.C. § 2901.05
   Dereliction of duty, see §
606.19
   Discharge for delay in trial, see R.C. § 2945.73
   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police Department,
see §
606.24
   Disposition of unclaimed vehicles, see R.C. §§ 737.32, 4513.61 et seq.
   Distinctive uniform required for traffic officers, see R.C. § 4549.15
   Exceptions for emergency or public safety vehicles, see §§
432.18,
434.06
   Extension of time for hearing or trial, see R.C. § 2945.72
   Failure to aid a law enforcement officer, see §
606.13
   Limitation on criminal prosecutions, see §
606.06
   Marking motor vehicles used by traffic officers, see R.C. § 4549.13
   Obstructing justice, see §
606.15
   Obstructing official business, see §
606.14
   Parking violations waiver, see §
452.17
   Power of trial court of record to suspend license for certain violations,
see R.C. §§ 4510.05, 4510.15
   Resisting arrest, see §
606.16
   Right of trial by jury, see R.C. § 2945.17
   Soliciting or receiving improper compensation, see §
606.18
   State point system suspension, see R.C. § 4507.021
   Suspension of riding privileges; impounding of bicycles, see §
474.11
   Time within which hearing or trial must be held, see R.C. § 2945.71
   Uniform application of Ohio Traffic Law, see R.C. § 4511.06
   Use of private property for vehicular travel, see R.C. § 4511.08
§ 404.01 ENFORCEMENT BY POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   The Police Department shall enforce the provisions of this Traffic Code. The
Police Chief shall assign such officers and members of the Department as he or
she may determine necessary, who shall be charged with the specific duty of
enforcing the provisions of this Traffic Code. In the event of fire or other
emergency, or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, members of the
Departments of Police and Fire may direct traffic as conditions may require,
notwithstanding any other provisions of this Traffic Code.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
§ 404.02 RESISTING AN ENFORCING OFFICIAL.
   (a)   No person shall resist, hinder, obstruct or abuse any sheriff,
constable or other official while that official is attempting to arrest
offenders under any provision of this Traffic Code. No person shall interfere
with any person charged under any provision of this Traffic Code with the
enforcement of the law relative to public highways.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.36)
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the hindrance,
obstruction, resistance or interference alleged consisted of constitutionally
protected speech only.
§ 404.03 ROAD WORKERS, MOTOR VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT EXCEPTED.
   (a)   The provisions of this Traffic Code, except for §
434.01, do not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles and other equipment
while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a highway within an area
designated by traffic-control devices, but apply to those persons and vehicles
when traveling to or from that work.
   (b)   The driver of a highway maintenance vehicle owned by this state or any
political subdivision of this state, while the driver is engaged in the
performance of official duties upon a street or highway, provided the highway
maintenance vehicle is equipped with flashing lights and any other markings as
are required by law and the lights are in operation when the driver and vehicle
are so engaged, shall be exempt from criminal prosecution for violations of
R.C. §§ 4511.22, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.33,
4511.35, 4511.66, 4513.02 and 5577.01 to 5577.09, and any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (c)   (1)   This section does not exempt a driver of a highway maintenance
vehicle from civil liability arising from a violation of R.C. § 4511.22,
4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.66
or 4513.02 or 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
      (2)   This section does not exempt a driver of a vehicle who is not a
state employee and who is engaged in the transport of highway maintenance
equipment from criminal liability for a violation of R.C. §§ 5577.01 through
5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (d)   As used in this section, ENGAGED IN THE PERFORMANCE OF OFFICIAL DUTIES
includes driving a highway maintenance vehicle to and from the manufacturer or
vehicle maintenance provider and transporting a highway maintenance vehicle,
equipment, or materials to and from a work location.
(R.C. § 4511.04)
§ 404.035 EMERGENCY, PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORONERS’ VEHICLES EXCEPTED.
   (a)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 4511.12, 4511.13, 4511.131, 4511.132,
4511.14, 4511.15, 4511.202, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25,
4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33,
4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41,
4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.57, 4511.58,
4511.59, 4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.62, 4511.66, 4511.68, 4511.681 and 4511.69, and
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, do not apply to the driver
of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle if the emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and
displaying at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the
vehicle and if the driver of the vehicles is giving an audible signal by siren,
exhaust whistle or bell. This section does not relieve the driver of an
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
(R.C. § 4511.041)
   (b)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29,
4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38 and
4511.66, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, do not apply to
a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator operating a motor vehicle
in accordance with R.C. § 4513.171 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance. This division (b) does not relieve a coroner, deputy coroner or
coroner’s investigator operating a motor vehicle from the duty to drive with
due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
(R.C. § 4511.042)
§ 404.04 APPLICATION TO PERSONS RIDING, DRIVING ANIMALS UPON ROADWAY.
   Every person riding, driving or leading an animal upon a roadway is subject
to the provisions of this Traffic Code, applicable to the driver of a vehicle,
except those provisions of this Traffic Code which by their nature are
inapplicable.
(R.C. § 4511.05)
§ 404.05 IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES; REDEMPTION.
   (a)   Police officers are authorized to provide for the removal and
impounding of a vehicle under the following circumstances:
      (1)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any street, bridge or
causeway and is so illegally parked so as to constitute a hazard or obstruction
to the normal movement of traffic, or so as to unreasonably interfere with
street cleaning or snow removal operations;
      (2)   When any motor vehicle, including an abandoned junk motor vehicle,
as defined in R.C. § 4513.63, is left on private residential property, as
defined in R.C. § 4513.60, or on private agricultural property, for at least
four consecutive hours without the permission of the person having the right to
the possession of the property, or on a public street or other property open to
the public for purposes of vehicular travel, or upon or within the right-of-way
of any road or highway, for 48 consecutive hours or longer, without
notification to the Police Chief of the reasons for leaving such vehicle in
such place, except that when such a motor vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
traffic, it may be ordered into storage immediately;
      (3)   When any vehicle has been stolen or operated without the consent of
the owner;
      (4)   When any vehicle displays illegal license plates or fails to
display the current lawfully required license plates;
      (5)   When any vehicle has been used in or connected with the commission
of a felony;
      (6)   When any vehicle has been damaged or wrecked so as to be inoperable
or violates equipment provisions of this Traffic Code whereby its continued
operation would constitute a condition hazardous to life, limb or property;
      (7)   When any vehicle is left unattended due to the removal of an ill,
injured or arrested operator;
      (8)   When any vehicle has been operated by any person who has failed to
stop in case of an accident or collision;
      (9)   When any vehicle has been operated by any person who is driving
without a lawful license or while his or her license has been suspended or
revoked; and
      (10)   When any vehicle is found for which two or more citation tags for
violations of this Traffic Code have been issued and the owner or operator
thereof has failed to respond to such citation tags as lawfully required.
   (b)   The Police Department shall forthwith notify the registered vehicle
owner of the fact of such removal and impounding, reasons therefor and the
place of storage. Any person desiring to redeem an impounded vehicle shall
appear at the Police Department to furnish satisfactory evidence of identity
and ownership or right to possession. Prior to issuance of a release form, the
claimant, owner or operator shall either pay the amount due for any fines for
violations on account of which such vehicle was impounded or, as the court may
require, post a bond in an amount set by the court, to appear to answer to such
violations. The pound operator shall release such vehicle upon the receipt of
the release form and payment of all towing and storage charges.
   (c)   Unclaimed motor vehicles ordered into storage pursuant to R.C. §
4513.60(A)(1) shall be disposed of at the order of the Police Chief to a motor
vehicle salvage dealer or scrap metal processing facility as defined in R.C. §
4737.05, or to any other facility owned by or under contract with the city for
the disposal of such motor vehicles, or shall be sold by the Police Chief or a
licensed auctioneer at public auction after giving notice thereof by
advertisement, published once a week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of
general circulation in the county. Any monies accruing from the disposition of
an unclaimed motor vehicle that are in excess of the expenses resulting from
the removal and storage of the vehicle shall be credited to the General Fund.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
Statutory reference:
   Disposal of unclaimed vehicles ordered into storage, see R.C. § 4513.62
§ 404.06 TRAFFIC DIRECTION IN EMERGENCIES; OBEDIENCE TO SCHOOL GUARDS.
   (a)   Police officers shall direct or regulate traffic in accordance with
the provisions of this Traffic Code, provided that, in the event of fire or
other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, they are
authorized to direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the
provisions of this Traffic Code. Firefighters, when at the scene of a fire, may
direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity. The direction of traffic may be by word or audible signal, by gesture
or visible signal or by any combination thereof. No person shall fail to comply
with any lawful order or direction of any police officer or firefighter issued
pursuant to this section.
   (b)   No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of
any school crossing guard invested with authority to direct, control or
regulate traffic in the vicinity of the school to which the guard may be
assigned.
§ 404.07 APPLICATION TO DRIVERS OF GOVERNMENT VEHICLES.
   The provisions of this Traffic Code applicable to the drivers of vehicles
shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United
States, any state or any political subdivision thereof, including this
municipality, except as may be otherwise provided by law and subject to such
specific exceptions as are set forth with reference to authorized emergency and
public safety vehicles.
§ 404.08 POLICE MAY REMOVE IGNITION KEY.
   A law enforcement officer may remove the ignition key left in the ignition
switch of an unlocked and unattended motor vehicle parked on a street, highway
or private property assessed by the public at large for the public use. The
officer removing such key shall place notification upon the vehicle detailing
his or her name and badge number, the place where the key may be reclaimed, and
the procedure for reclaiming such key. The key shall be returned to the owner
of the motor vehicle upon presentation of proof of ownership.
(Ord. 1995-266, passed 1-15-1996)
§ 404.09 REPORTING REPOSSESSIONS OF MOTOR VEHICLES.
   No person engaged in the business of making loans, purchasing notes secured
by mortgages, conditional sales agreements or any other liens upon motor
vehicles, or engaged in any other business involving the repossession of motor
vehicles, shall fail to notify the Police Department of any repossession of a
motor vehicle and to give such additional information as may be required within
one hour after repossession of any motor vehicle when the same is taken without
the owner’s consent or knowledge.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
§ 404.10 FURNISHING FALSE INFORMATION INCIDENT TO TRAFFIC CITATION.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly present, display or orally communicate a
false name, Social Security number or date of birth to a law enforcement
officer who is in the process of issuing to the person a traffic ticket or
complaint.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4513.361)
§ 404.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and 408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.
CHAPTER 406: TRAFFIC CONTROL
Section
   
406.01   Conformity with State Manual
   
406.02   Authority to place traffic-control devices; standards
   
406.03   Temporary traffic rules and regulations
   
406.04   Traffic Control Map
   
406.05   Traffic Control File
   
406.06   Incorporation, maintenance and amendments
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See sectional histories for similar state law
   Alteration of prima facie speed limits, see R.C. §§ 4511.21, 4511.22(A),
4511.23
   Designation of through streets and erection of stop or yield signs, see R.C.
§ 4511.65
   Local traffic-control devices, see R.C. § 4511.11
   Power to designate highway as a freeway, expressway or thruway, see R.C. §
4511.011
   Power to enact local traffic regulations, see R.C. § 4511.07
   Traffic-control devices defined, see §
402.48
§ 406.01 CONFORMITY WITH STATE MANUAL.
   All traffic-control devices placed pursuant to the provisions of this
Traffic Code shall conform to the Ohio Manual and Specifications for a Uniform
System of Traffic-Control Devices, as set forth in R.C. § 4511.09.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
Statutory reference:
   Local conformity to manual for uniform system of traffic-control devices,
see R.C. § 4511.11
§ 406.02 AUTHORITY TO PLACE TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES; STANDARDS.
   Council is hereby authorized to place and maintain traffic-control devices
upon any street under its jurisdiction as are necessary to effectuate the
provisions of this Traffic Code, or to regulate, warn or guide traffic, and
such other traffic-control devices as it deems necessary for the proper control
of traffic. Council shall determine the location, timing and coordination of
such traffic-control devices upon the basis of an applicable engineering and
traffic investigation and shall consider the following:
   (a)   The maximum safety and protection of vehicular and pedestrian traffic
from physical injury or property damage;
   (b)   The existing and potential traffic movement, volume and conditions;
   (c)   The location and frequency of accidents, including studies of remedial
measures;
   (d)   The recommendations of the Police and Fire Chiefs;
   (e)   The acceleration of mass transportation of persons and property by
vehicles so as to expedite travel and promote public safety;
   (f)   The convenience and welfare of the general public in parking,
standing, loading and unloading, and the use of the streets as affecting
business concerns and places of assembly;
   (g)   Economy in the expenditure of money; and
   (h)   No traffic-control device shall be erected contrary to the provisions
of the Ohio Manual and Specifications for a Uniform System of Traffic-Control
Devices.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
§ 406.03 TEMPORARY TRAFFIC RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   In order to determine the effectiveness of methods of traffic control
different from the provisions of this Traffic Code or during times of
emergency, the Director of Public Safety may regulate traffic flow or change
parking regulations for a period not to exceed 30 days without the necessity of
amending the Traffic Control Map and File as provided in §
406.06.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
§ 406.04 TRAFFIC CONTROL MAP.
   There is hereby established a Traffic Control Map which shall reflect by
legend and proper designation the city’s currently existing:
   (a)   Traffic-control signals;
   (b)   Through streets, state routes and truck routes;
   (c)   One-way streets and alleys;
   (d)   Stop intersections;
   (e)   Yield right-of-way intersections;
   (f)   Commercial and passenger loading zones;
   (g)   Prohibited and limited parking areas;
   (h)   Angle parking areas; and
   (i)   Parking meter areas.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
§ 406.05 TRAFFIC CONTROL FILE.
   There is hereby established a Traffic Control File which shall list in chart
form all types of traffic control designations specified in §
406.04 and which shall also include:
   (a)   An adequate description of the street or area affected;
   (b)   An authorizing ordinance number and its effective date;
   (c)   The date when official signs, signals, markings or parking meters were
erected or placed in proper position; and
   (d)   The date when the designation was recorded upon the Traffic Control
Map.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
§ 406.06 INCORPORATION, MAINTENANCE AND AMENDMENTS.
   (a)   The Traffic Control Map and File shall be prepared and maintained to
date by the City Engineer and his or her designees under the direction of the
Safety Director. The Traffic Control Map and File existing as of the date of
passage of this Traffic Code is incorporated as a part of this Traffic Code.
   (b)   Amendments to the Traffic Control Map and File shall be made by
legislation enacted by Council. Upon the effective date of such regulations or
legislation and upon erection of proper signs and markings giving notice
thereof, such amendments shall be in full force and effect. All such amendments
shall be recorded on the Traffic Control Map and File by the City Engineer
under the direction of the Safety Director.
(Ord. 1990-64, passed 3-19-1990)
Amendments to Traffic Control Map and File
Ord. No. Date Description
Amendments to Traffic Control Map and File
Ord.  Date Description
No.
1963- 12-  Parking prohibited on both sides of SOM Center Road between Inwood Drive and
167   2-   Arthur Road at all times
      1963
1964- 2-3- Through traffic prohibited on Sherbrook Park Drive and Lakeview Drive at all
10    1964 times; repealed by Ord. 1964-104
1964- 7-6- To establish stop intersections at Sherbrook Park Drive and Lakeview Drive;
104   1964 repeals Ord. 1964-10
1965- 4-5- To prohibit parking on the west side of Glenallen Avenue
33    1965
1965- 5-
76    17-  To prohibit parking on SOM Center Road between Aurora Road and Linden Drive
      1965
1965- 5-
77    17-  To prohibit through truck traffic on Baldwin Road
      1965
1965- 8-   To establish stop intersections on Glenallen Avenue, Fox Hill Drive, Solon
123   16-  Boulevard, Parkway, Baldwin Road, Inwood Road, Linden Drive and Greenridge
      1965 Avenue
1966- 3-
45    21-  To establish 4-way stop at intersection of Liberty and Bainbridge Roads
      1966
           To establish stop intersections as follows:
              West on Orchard Road at Glenallen Avenue
              North on Greenridge Avenue at Orchard Road
              South on Edgemoor Avenue at Orchard Road
              East and west on Inwood Road at Edgemoor Avenue
              North on Edgemoor Avenue at Linden Drive
              East and west on Arlesford Drive at Fox Hill Drive
1966- 4-      East and west on Nimrod (East and West) at Fox Hill Drive
62    18-     East on Charmwood Oval at Fox Hill Drive
      1966    West on Warwickshire Lane at Fox Hill Drive
              West on Outley Park Drive at Fox Hill Drive
              North on Nimrod East at Arlesford Drive
              West on Solar Shopping Center access drive at SOM Center Road
              North on Solar Shopping Center access drive at Aurora Road
              West on Inwood Road at Glenallen Avenue
              To establish no parking at any time on west side of Glenallen Avenue between
           Parkway Avenue and Aurora Road
           To prohibit parking on south side of Station Street and to allow 2-hour parking
1967- 3-6- on the north side; to prohibit parking on the entire length of east side of
35    1967 Melbury Avenue and on the west side from Aurora Road to north boundary of
           Central National Bank lot from which point parking is permitted to Station
           Street
1967- 5-1- To establish a 3-way stop at intersection of Glenallen Avenue and Inwood Road
68    1967
1967- 6-5- To establish stop intersections on Glenallen Avenue at Orchard Road and Parkway
93    1967
           Stop intersections:
1967- 8-      North and south on Solon Boulevard at Arthur Road
139   21-     East and west on Arthur Road at Solon Boulevard
      1967    West on Baldwin Road at Glenallen Avenue
              North and south on Glenallen Avenue at Baldwin Road
1968- 2-5- Stop intersections for north and south traffic on Brookland, Copley and
14    1968 Arbordale Avenues at their intersections with Linden Drive and lnwood Avenue
1968- 4-1- No parking on east side of SOM Center Road from Erie R.R. to Bainbridge Road and
76    1968 on both sides of the street known as the cutoff immediately north of City Hall
1968- 6-   No passing on Pettibone Road from Glenwillow boundary line to Aurora Road and on
123   17-  Solon and Bainbridge Roads from SOM Center Road easterly to east city boundary
      1968
1968- 11-  No parking on entire south side of Carriage Park Drive and on north side from
237   18-  SOM Center Road west 50 feet
      1968
1969- 3-
50    17-  Westbound traffic on Fox Run to stop at Liberty Road
      1969
1969- 4-7- E-W traffic on Parkway to stop at Linden Drive and Baldwin Road
73    1969
           Stop intersections:
1969- 3-2-    Eastbound traffic on Orchard Drive and Inwood Drive at Solon Boulevard
233   1970    Westbound traffic on Carriage Park Drive at Hansen Drive
              Southbound traffic on Hansen Drive at Coachman Lane
1970- 6-   N-E traffic leaving railroad underpass at Cannon and Richmond Roads to stop
103   15-  prior to turning east onto Cannon Road
      1970
1970- 11-  Stop intersections:
178   16-     Eastbound traffic on Orchard Road at Greenridge Avenue
     1970    Westbound traffic on Orchard Road at Edgemoor Avenue
1970- 12-  E-W traffic on Bainbridge Road to stop at Old Harper Road; southbound traffic on
197   28-  Old Harper Road to stop at Bainbridge Road; amended by Ord. 1984-91
      1970
1971- 3-1- Southbound traffic on Charmwood Oval to stop at its terminus prior to re-
50    1971 entering Charmwood Oval
1971- 6-8- Stop intersection for northbound traffic on Naiman Parkway at Miles Road
120   1971
1971- 10-
196   18-  Stop required for traffic on Woodbury Avenue before entering Huntington Avenue
      1971
           Stop intersections:
              Northbound on Melbury Avenue at Station Street
              Northbound on Linden Drive at Baldwin Road
              Westbound on Inwood Road at Hudson Boulevard
              Traffic on Inwood Road at Forest Glen Avenue
              Westbound on Bridle Trail Lane at Country View Lane
              Westbound on Dogwood Lane at Country View Lane
              Westbound on Forest Lane at Country View Lane
      4-      Southbound on Glenwood Avenue at Woodall Road
1972- 17-     Southbound on Medhurst Avenue at Woodall Road
60    1972    Westbound on Woodall Road at Harper Road
              Eastbound on Briarwood Lane at Briarhill Drive
              Northbound on Briardale Lane at Briarhill Drive
              Duneden Avenue and Inwood Road
              Eastbound on Jaclyn Drive at Sharon Dale Drive
              Traffic on Edgemoor Avenue at Inwood Road
              Southbound on Forest Glen Avenue at Orchard Drive
              Northbound on Forest Glen Avenue at Park Way
              Westbound on Bainbridge Road at the intersection of Bainbridge Road and Old
           South Miles Road
           Parking prohibited:
              On the north and south sides of Solon Road between Richmond Road and the
           Solon-Bentleyville boundary
              On the east and west sides of Solon Boulevard between Aurora Road and Baldwin
           Road
              On the north side of Inwood Road between SOM Center Road and Solon Boulevard
              On the west side of SOM Center Road between Aurora Road and Bainbridge Road
              On the east side of Richmond Road from Cannon Road to the Solon-Glenwillow
           boundary
           Through truck traffic prohibited:
              On the entire length of Pettibone Road in the city
              On Solon Boulevard between Aurora Road and Arthur Road
              On Bainbridge Road between SOM Center Road and Harper Road
           The stop sign requiring all northbound traffic on Hudson Boulevard to stop
           before entering Solon Boulevard shall be removed, and in place thereof a yield
           sign shall be installed requiring all northbound traffic on Hudson Boulevard to
1972- 6-   yield to the flow of traffic on Solon Boulevard; traffic on Hudson Boulevard
93    19-  between Inwood Road and Solon Boulevard shall be required to proceed in a
      1972 northerly direction only
           Stop intersections:
              Northbound on Hudson Boulevard at Inwood Road
              Eastbound on Inwood Road and Hudson Boulevard
1972- 9-   Parking more than 30 minutes prohibited on south side of Inwood Road for 100
109   18-  feet, 50 feet each side of the main entrance to Solon High School; repealed by
      1972 Ord. 1988-138
           Stop intersections:
              Eastbound on Elmhill Drive at Janet Boulevard
1972- 10-     Southbound on Janet Boulevard at Farm Road
154   16-     Westbound on Farm Road at Elmhill Drive
      1972    Eastbound on Gemini at Elmhill Drive
              Westbound on Rockford Drive at Ledgehill Drive
              Southbound on Rockford Drive at Ledgehill Drive
              Southbound on Ledgebrook Lane at Lakeview Drive
              Westbound on Windy Hill Drive at Creekside Trail
              Northbound on Windy Willow Drive at Windy Hill Drive
              Northbound on Limberlost at Creekside Trail
              Southbound on Portage Street at Edith Street
              Westbound on Edith Street at Willow Street
              Northbound on Duneden Avenue at Linden Drive
              Southbound on Duneden Avenue at Orchard Road
1972- 9-
155   18-  Through truck traffic, for trucks with dual wheels, prohibited on Liberty Road
      1972
           Stop intersections:
      10-     Southbound on Fawn Pass at Deep Wood
1977- 3-      Westbound on Deep Wood at Liberty
197   1977    Eastbound on Deep Wood at Deer Run
              Eastbound on Deer Run Oval at Deer Run
              Northeast on Deer Run at Fox Run
1977- 11-  Stop intersections:
219   7-      Ledgehill Drive at Springside
      1977    Woodsmere Drive at Tracy Lane
           Stop intersections:
              Eastbound Ambina Drive at Cochran Road
      12-     Westbound Beaver Meadow Parkway at Cochran Road
1978- 4-      Eastbound Cottesmore Place at Cottesmore
236   1978    Southbound Cottesmore at Tally Ho Drive
              Westbound Tally Ho Drive at North Roundhead Drive
              Westbound Roundhead Place at North Roundhead
              East and westbound Washington Court at Cromwell
              Westbound Independence Court at Liberty Road
              Westbound Pepper Drive at Solon Road
              Northbound Erico Drive at Solon Road
              Southbound Tandem Court at Coachman Lane
              Eastbound Springside Lane at SOM Center Road
              Southbound Stonybrook Lane at Haver Hill Drive (west intersection)
              Eastbound Haver Hill Drive at Stonybrook Lane (east intersection)
              Southbound Ridge Lane at Cannon Road
              Northbound Davis Industrial Parkway at Solon Road
              Northbound Hudson and Solon Boulevard
           Prohibiting right turns from the left-turn lane from the eastbound exit ramp of
           U.S. Route 422 and Harper Road
           Stop intersections:
              4-way stop - Cromwell (east and west) at Roundhead Oval (north and south)
              Crabtree Lane (eastbound) at Cheswick
1979- 2-5-    Southwick (westbound) at Cheswick
31    1979    Landsdowne (northbound) at Miles Road
              Stansbury (northbound) at Miles Road
              Southwick (eastbound) at Stansbury
              Cheswick (northbound) at Miles Road
1979- 3-5- Prohibiting parking on both sides of Bainbridge Road between SOM Center Road and
50    1979 Solon Road
           Stop signs installed:
1980- 1-7-    Sedgefield Oval at North Roundhead Drive
3     1980    Sunnywood Drive at Bainbridge Road
              Meadowdale Drive at Liberty Road
1980- 5-5- Stop intersection:
44    1980    Linden (east and west) at Brookland; amended by Ord. 2014-7
           Stop intersections:
              Longview at Arthur
              Kingswood at Longview
              Kingswood at Arthur
              Southside Park at SOM Center
              North Burr Oak at SOM Center
              North Burr Oak at White Oak Drive (four way)
              Jefferson Drive West at Cromwell
              Hamilton Court at Cromwell
              Sedgefield Oval at Roundhead
              Hollyhock Lane at Roundhead
1980- 10-     Lynton Lane at Roundhead
144   6-      Lynton Lane at Hollyhock
      1980    Sunnywood at Bainbridge
              Stonewood at Meadowdale
              Meadowdale at Liberty (2-way)
              Valley Forge Drive at Liberty
              Dodsworth at Pepper Drive
              Blackberry Circle at Pepper Drive
              Cromwell at Pettibone
              South Burr Oak at White Oak
              Louise Drive at Brainard
              Fairfield Oval at Metro Parkway
              Clarendon Drive at Cannon Road
              Allenbury Drive at SOM Center
1981- 7-6- Prohibiting left turns from south exit of Fisher-Fazio parking lot on SOM Center
56    1981 Road
           Stop intersections:
              Meadowdale (westbound) at Stonewood Lane
1981- 9-8-    Meadowdale (eastbound) at Stonewood Lane
119   1981    Stonewood Lane (northbound) at Meadowdale
              Meadowdale (eastbound) at Liberty
              Sunnywood (southbound) at Bainbridge Road
1981- 9-8- Prohibiting parking on both sides of Solon Road between Bainbridge and Aurora
119   1981 Roads
1982- 1-   Establishes 3-way stops at the intersections of:
161   17-     Janet Boulevard and Farm Drive; and
      1983    Haverhill Drive and Springside Lane
           Through traffic is prohibited on Clarendon Drive and Allenbury Drive
           Stop intersections are established at the following locations:
1984- 3-5-    Southbound Clarendon Drive at Cannon Road
17    1984    Eastbound Allenbury Drive at SOM Center Road
              Northbound Tayport Drive at Allenbury Drive
              North Burr Oak at SOM Center
              Northbound Clarendon Drive and westbound Allenbury Drive at circle
           The following traffic-control devices are hereby deemed to be obsolete and shall
           be removed from the Traffic Control Map established in §
1984- 6-   406.04 and the Traffic Control File established pursuant to §
91    18-  406.05:
      1984    Stop sign on Bainbridge Road at Harper Road (eastbound)
              Stop sign on Bainbridge Road at Harper Road (westbound)
              Stop signs on Harper Road (old) at Bainbridge Road
           The following devices are in place with no authorizing ordinance:
      6-      Traffic signal on Aurora Road at Western Electric Company
1984- 18-     Traffic signal on Aurora Road at Kroger Company
92    1984    Traffic signal on Aurora Road at Metro Park
              Traffic flasher on Aurora Road at Hawthorne Valley Country Club
              Traffic signal on Harper Road at Bainbridge Road
              Traffic signal on Harper Road at Cannon Road
              Traffic flasher on SOM Center Road at Carriage Park/Maple Drive
              Traffic signal on Miles Road at Harper Road
              Traffic signal on Cannon Road at Janet Boulevard
              Traffic flasher on Liberty Road at Timberlane Drive
              Traffic flasher on Solon Road at Timberlane Drive
              Traffic signal on SOM Center at Miles Road
              Traffic flasher on Miles Road at Naiman Parkway
              Traffic signal on Harper Road at State Route U.S. 422
              Traffic signal on SOM Center at State Route U.S. 422
              Traffic signal on SOM Center at Cannon Road
              Traffic signal on SOM Center at Solon Road
              Traffic signal on SOM Center at Bainbridge Road
              Traffic signal on SOM Center at Aurora Road
              Traffic signal on SOM Center Road at Inwood Drive
              Traffic signal on SOM Center at Pettibone Road
              Traffic signal on Solon Road at Richmond Road
              Traffic signal on Solon Road at Cochran Road
              Traffic signal on Aurora Road at Pettibone Road
              Traffic signal on Aurora Road at Liberty Road
              Traffic signal on Aurora Road at Solon Road
              Traffic signal on Aurora Road at Richmond Road
              Traffic signal on Aurora Road at Cochran/Harper Roads
              Traffic signal on Aurora Road at Solon Boulevard
              Traffic signal on Miles Road at Brainard Road
              Stop sign on Baldwin eastbound at Parkway
              Stop sign on Bunker Hill at Fox Run
              Stop sign on Concord at Valley Forge
              Stop sign on Cottesmore at Cromwell
              Stop signs on Elmhill Drive at Farm Drive
              Stop sign on Estates Drive at Parkside Trail
              Stop sign on Franklin Drive at Cromwell
              Stop sign on Fox Run at Deer Run
              Stop sign on Holly Hill at Metro Park
              Stop sign on Holly Hill at Wedgewood Drive
              Stop sign on Hunter’s Ridge at Fox Run
              Stop sign on Hunter’s Ridge at Deer Run
              Stop sign on Louise Drive at Parkside Trail
              Stop sign on Naylor at Parkside Trail
              Stop sign on North Oval at Fox Run
              Stop signs on Parkside Trail at Naylor
              Stop signs on Parkside Trail at Trails End
              Stop signs on Parkside Trail at Estates Drive
              Stop signs on Parkside Trail at Louise Drive
              Stop sign on South Oval at Fox Run
              Stop sign on State Route U.S. 422 at Harper Road (westbound exit ramp)
              Stop sign on Stoneybrook at Ledgehill Drive
              Yield sign on Burlwood at Woodsdale
              Yield sign on SOM Center at Bainbridge Road (City Hall Cutoff)
           Erect stop signs and yield signs at the following locations:
              Stop sign on Naylor at Parkside Trail
              Stop sign on Trails End at Parkside Trail
              Stop sign on Inner Circle at Naylor
1985- 10-     Stop sign on Stephanie at Elm Hill
166   7-      Stop sign on Overland at Coachman
      1985    Stop sign on Ramblewood at Wintergreen
              Stop sign on Trailwood at Wintergreen
              Stop sign on Aspen Glen at Boulder Creek
              Yield signs on Solon Road at SOM Center (both eastbound and westbound)
              Remove stop signs on Parkside Trail at Trails End
           Erection of a traffic-control device at Cromwell and State Route 91 to be
           activated and in operation during the time traffic meets or exceeds the volumes
           as required by Warrant No. 10; at all other times, the device shall be in the
           flash mode
           Erection of a traffic-control device at Arthur Road and State Route 91 to be
           activated and in operation during the time traffic meets or exceeds the volumes
           as required by Warrant No. 10; at all other times, the device shall be in the
           flash mode
1985- 7-7- Erection of stop signs at the following locations:
190   1986    Northbound on Kingswood at Arthur Road
              Westbound on Ashdown at Cromwell
              Eastbound on Canterbury Road at North Sommerset Oval
              Southbound on Shadowbrook Drive at Wintergreen Drive
              Southbound on Blue Grass Oval at Churchill Downs Drive
              Eastbound on Brushwood Drive at Churchill Downs Drive
              Eastbound on Birch Circle at Ridge Lane
              Eastbound on Kenyon Circle at Woodsmore Lane
              Southbound on Woodsmore Lane at Springside Drive
           Stop intersections:
      11-     South Roundhead (eastbound) at Cromwell
1986- 17-     White Burr Oak (southbound) at North Burr Oak
182   1986    Summerset Oval (southbound) at Blue Heron
              Claythorne Road (northbound) at Summerset
              Claythorne Road (eastbound) at Summerset
           Traffic-control devices:
              Traffic signal at SOM Center Road and Linden Drive
              All traffic to turn right or left only at Solar Shopping Center driveway
           westbound at Linden. No access or through traffic into Linden Drive. Amended by
      12-  Ord. 2013-154
1986- 15-     No left turn on SOM Center Road northbound at Linden Drive; amended by Ord.
200   1986 2014-60
              No left turn on SOM Center Road northbound at Baldwin
              No left turn on SOM Center Road southbound at Solar Shopping Center
           northernmost driveway opposite Baldwin
              Right and left turn only at Baldwin eastbound at SOM Center Road No traffic
           across SOM Center Road into Solar northernmost driveway
           Traffic-control signals:
1987- 4-6-    At intersection of Cromwell Drive and SOM Center Road
57    1987    At intersection of Arthur Road and SOM Center Road
              At intersection of Solon Road and Bainbridge Road
              At intersection of Liberty Road and Bainbridge Road
           Stop intersections:
              Partridge Lane (northbound) at Quartermane
              Parkland (northbound) at Carter Street
              Tallyho (westbound) at Roundhead Drive
              Roundhead Drive (westbound) at Cromwell
              Lindsay Lane (southbound) at Lisa Lane
              Lindsay Lane (northbound) at Seneca
1987- 9-8-    Seneca (eastbound and westbound) at White Oak
191   1987    Tallyho Lane (eastbound and westbound) at Winchester
              Cheshire Place (northbound and southbound) at South Roundhead
              Bramble Lane (eastbound) at South Side Park
              Fortran Lane (northbound) at Ada Road
              Thornapple Lane (northbound) at South Side Park
              Morning Glory Circle (northbound) at Meadowdale
              Azalea Circle (northbound) at Meadowdale
              Cloverly Drive (northbound) at Meadowdale
1987- 12-
245   7-   Stop intersection at Seneca (eastbound) at Lindsay Lane
      1987
1987- 12-
255   21-  “No Parking” signs on the north side of Station Street for its entire length
      1987
1988- 4-4- To prohibit parking on the north side of Station Street for its entire length
45    1988
Res.  8-1-
1988- 1988 A traffic-control device at the intersection of Brushwood and Solon Roads
55
1988- 6-6- Flashing red light and three-way stop sign at the intersection of Cannon Road
82    1988 and Richmond Road
           Sign prohibiting truck traffic on Cannon Road (eastbound)
           The following rules shall apply to parking at the high school:
              The parking area in front of the high school on Inwood will be restricted as
1988- 8-2- follows:
138   1988       No parking or stopping 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m.
           on school days
                 One-half hour parking at all other times not specified above
                 Parking restrictions do not apply to handicapped buses
           Stop signs be posted at the following locations:
1988- 8-2-    White Oak southbound at Lisa Lane
139   1988    Warwickshire eastbound at Outley Park
              Hambleton southbound at Ashdown
              Hambleton northbound at South Roundhead
1988- 9-6- A 4-way stop sign shall be erected at Solon Boulevard and Inwood Road
168   1988
1988- 10-
178   3-   Linden Drive (entire length) is designated as a through street
      1988
1988- 11-  Stop signs shall be erected as follows:
201   7-      Westbound on Seneca/Lindsay Lane, south intersection in Oakview Estates II
      1988    Southbound on Timothy - Spring Street
1988- 12-
205   5-   No left-hand turn onto Station Street from SOM Center Road (northbound)
      1988
1988- 12-
206   5-   No left-hand turn out of Station Street onto SOM Center Road (northbound)
      1988
1988- 12-
245   19-  Station Street at SOM Center Road, right turn only
      1988
1988- 12-
246   19-  Stop sign on Crofton southbound at Woodall
      1988
1989- 5-
110   15-  Stop sign on Stratford Road eastbound at Spring Grove Drive
      1989
1989- 10-  Stop intersection:
219   2-      Cromwell at South Roundhead (northbound and southbound)
      1989
           Stop intersections:
1989- 9-      Stratford westbound at Westminster
233   18-     Ashton Lane northbound at S. Huntington
      1989    Ashton Lane southbound at Woodbury
              Angela Court northbound at Woodbury
1990- 2-   Traffic-control signal at Bainbridge Road at Nestle/Stouffers
21    19-  Stop sign erected on Westview coming into Parkland
      1990
1990- 6-   Installation of a traffic-control light at the intersection of Cochran Road and
109   18-  Carter Street
      1990
1990- 6-4- Installation of traffic-control light at the intersection of Enterprise Parkway
126   1990 and Aurora Road
           Stop signs at:
Res.  10-     Delray and Woodall
1990- 1-      Crofton at Woodall
245   1990    Crestmont at Woodall
              Everton at Woodall
1991- 2-4- Prohibiting left-hand turns and/or traffic proceeding across 5 lanes when
21    1991 exiting the Midwestern Motel/Bob Evans exit
           Installation of stop signs at the following locations:
              Lisa northbound at Seneca
1991- 1-6-    Seneca eastbound at Lisa
195   1992    Acorn northbound at Seneca
              Brackenbury westbound at Hambleton
              Popham southbound at Brackenbury
           Installation of traffic signals at the following locations:
1992- 1-6-    Harper Road at the fire station entrance
2     1992    Aurora Road at the Solar Shopping Center entrance
              Solon Road at Bedford Chagrin Parkway
           Installation of traffic signals at the following locations:
              Suzanne Lane northbound at Windy Hill
              Laura Lane northbound at Windy Hill
1992- 3-2-    Brackenbury eastbound at Popham Place
30    1992    Chagrin Highlands Drive southbound at Chagrin Highlands Boulevard
             Glenlivet Court eastbound at Chagrin Highlands Drive
              Glenlivet Court westbound at Chagrin Highlands Drive
              Chagrin Highlands Drive northbound at Gaelic Glen Drive
              Gaelic Glen Drive westbound at Glasglow Drive
1992- 8-
145   17-  Installation of traffic signals at SOM Center Road at the Parkside School
      1992
           Installation of traffic signs and designations at the following locations:
              Stop sign on Camberly Court westbound at Winchester Drive
1992- 1-4-    Stop sign on Harrow Court westbound at Winchester Drive
182   1993    Stop sign on Winchester Drive southbound at Pettibone Road
           No parking district from 33380 Cromwell east to SOM Center Road - “No Parking”
           sign to be moved from 33410 Cromwell to 33380 Cromwell
1993- 2-
14    15-  Installation of a flashing traffic signal on Solon Road at Metro Parkway
      1993
           Installation of stop signs at the following locations:
              Lochmoor Drive westbound at Chagrin Highlands Drive
              Arbor Glen Court northbound at Lochmoor Drive
              Loch Lomond Court southbound at Lochmoor Drive
              Glenlivet Court westbound at Penfield Drive
              Cedar Court northbound at Penfield Drive
1993- 3-      Overlook Court southbound at Penfield Drive
29    15-     Penfield Drive southbound at Chagrin Highlands Drive
      1993    Mayapple Circle southbound at Spicebush Lane
              Teasel Court southbound at Spicebush Lane
              Water Pepper Circle southbound at Spicebush Lane
              Nightshade Lane northbound at Spicebush Lane
              Spatterdock Lane northbound at Spicebush Lane
              Harron Court westbound at Winchester Drive
              Camberly Court westbound at Winchester Drive
1993- 5-3- No U-turns on Inwood Road in front of Solon High School
67    1993
1993- 12-
193   6-   Four-way stop intersection at Woodall and Crofton
      1993
1993- 12-
213   6-   Three-way stop sign at White Oak and Lisa Lane
      1993
1994- 4-
57    20-  Three-way stop signs at Ada and Fortran Drives
      1994
1994- 5-2- Increase speed limit on Carter Street to 35 mph
62    1994
1994- 5-2- “No thru truck” signs on Ada Drive at SOM Center Road
69    1994
           Installation of stop signs at the following locations:
1995- 1-3-    Eastbound on Seminole Way at Navajo
1     1995    Southbound on Arapaho Court at Seminole Way
              Eastbound on Heather Lane at South Huntington E
              Westbound on Heather Lane at South Huntington W
1995- 9-
130   18-  Removal of stop sign on Liberty Road at Conrail Railroad tracks
      1995
1995- 9-5- Installation of two “No Parking” signs on the west side of Janet Boulevard, at
186   1995 intervals not to exceed 200 feet
           Provide for the upgrade of warning flashers at the following locations per the
           recommendation of Traff-Pro Consultants:
1995- 9-5-    Arthur Road School pedestrian crossing signs
187   1995    Arthur Road railroad crossing
              Aurora/Richmond signal ahead
              Cannon/Spring Grove intersection ahead
1995- 10-  Flashing warning lights both ways at Liberty Road and the Conrail tracks,
205   2-   including appropriate street striping
      1995
1995- 4-1- Stop sign eastbound and westbound on Woodall at Lake Vista
279   1996
1996- 2-   To prohibit through truck traffic on Pettibone Road between SOM Center Road and
12    21-  the westerly Corporate boundary
      1996
Res.  6-
1996- 17-  Prohibiting cut-through traffic on Medhurst Avenue, both ways, for 6 months
121   1996
Res.  6-
1996- 17-  Prohibiting cut-through traffic on Glenwood Avenue, both ways, for 6 months
122   1996
1996- 7-
146   17-  Stop sign on Denise Court northbound at Louise Drive
      1996
1996- 10-
176   21-  No left turn (northbound) on SOM Center Road at the Applebee’s exit
      1996
1996- 10-
191   21-  No left turn (northbound) from SOM Center Road into Davis Drive at Applebee’s
      1996
1996- 10-
192   21-  Stop sign at Chestnut (eastbound) at Hillside
      1996
1997- 8-4- Stop sign on Navajo Trail (southbound) at Seminole Way
171   1997
1997- 11-  Stops signs on Longview Drive at Highview Drive and on Highview Drive at
238   3-   Longview Drive in Greenfield Village Subdivision; and on Joseph Drive at Michael
      1997 Drive in Timber Trails Subdivision
1998- 2-   “Through Traffic Prohibited” sign on Meadowdale Drive, east of Liberty Road.
40    17-  Existing sign to be removed
      1998
1998- 2-   “Through Traffic Prohibited” sign on Tracy Lane, south of Cannon Road. Existing
41    17-  sign to be removed
      1998
1998- 3-   No left turn sign (southbound) from SOM Center Road into Fifth Third Bank; and
54    16-  no left turn out of Fifth Third Bank onto SOM Center Road southbound
      1998
1998- 3-   Prohibiting through truck traffic on Solon Road between Erico Products and the
55    16-  easterly corporation boundary
      1998
           Stop signs at the following locations:
              Ridgecliff Drive northbound at Ayleshire
1998- 7-      Dorset Lane at Bainbridge Road
132   20-     Cortina Circle at Dorset Lane
      1998    Patterson Lane at Dorset Lane
              Alsace Court connector road at Dorset Lane
              Alsace Court connector road at Alsace Court circle
1998- 8-   No left turn sign for traffic existing the Solon Community Park onto SOM Center
144   17-  Road
      1998
1998- 10-
191   5-   Stop signs and an intersection control beacon at Brainard and Cannon Roads
      1998
      3-   Installation of stop signs at the following locations:
1999- 29-     Stonebridge Court at North Park Boulevard
38    1999    Leighton Court at North Park Boulevard
              Saddle Lane at Blue Pond Drive
1999- 5-
84    17-  4-way stop sign at the Glenlivet Court/Chagrin Highlands Drive intersection
      1999
1999- 6-7- Prohibiting parking on both sides of Hillside Lane from the property lines at
110   1999 7295 Hillside Lane and 7300 Hillside Lane to Pettibone Road
1999- 6-7- 3-way stop at Ada Drive/Silkwood Drive intersection
111   1999
1999- 7-6- No parking zone within the “T” turnaround area at the northern terminus of
131   1999 Elmwood Drive and Highland Drive
1999- 7-6- 2-hour parking during school hours on Arbordale, Brookland and Copley; amended
132   1999 by Ord. 1999-159
1999- 7-6- 4-way stop at the intersection of Winchester Drive, Tally Ho and Tally Ho Court
133   1999
      8-   Residents and other legal occupants of premises on Arbordale, Brookland and
1999- 16-  Copley may apply at the Police Department for permission to park on said streets
159   1999 in excess of the 2-hour limit, and, for good cause shown, may receive a waiver
           therefor; amends Ord. 1999-132
      5-   Installation of stop signs at the following locations:
2000- 15-     Derby Downs Drive, at the Brushwood Drive/Churchill Drive intersection, with
113   2000 an “oncoming traffic does not stop” message
              Woodall Road, eastbound and westbound, at the Lake Vista Drive intersection
2000- 7-5- No parking zone on both sides of Aurora Road, from Pettibone Road to the east
194   2000 corporation line
           Installation of stop signs at the following locations:
              Witchhazel Lane at Pettibone Road
              Witchhazel Lane at Spatterdock Lane
              Sedge Circle at Witchhazel Lane
      12-     Dorset Lane at Winston Lane
2000- 18-     McDowell Drive at Winston Lane
357   2000    Brandamore Court at McDowell Drive
           Installation of “No Turn on Red” signs at the following locations:
              SOM Center and U.S. 422 eastbound ramp, with “except curb lane” supplemental
           plaque
              Harper Road and Bainbridge Road intersection all directions, with “9:00 a.m.
           to 4:00 p.m. weekdays” supplemental plaque
           Installation of street signs for designated bicycle and pedestrian routes at the
           following locations:
              Liberty Road north from Twinsburg Line at:
                 City border
                 Pettibone Drive
                 Aurora Drive
              Liberty Road south from Bainbridge Road at:
                 Bainbridge Road
                 Aurora Road
                 Pettibone Drive
              Pettibone Road from Bainbridge to Glen Willow at:
                 City border
                 Aurora Road
                 Liberty Road
                 SOM Center
              Pettibone Road from Glen Willow to Bainbridge at:
                 City border
                 SOM Center
                 Liberty Road
                 Aurora Road
              Bainbridge Road from Bainbridge Township going west at:
                 City border
                 Liberty Road
                 SOM Center
                 Kruse Drive
              Bainbridge Road from Harper Road going east at:
                 Harper Road
2001- 5-         Solon Road
47    21-        SOM Center
     2001       Liberty Road
              Solon Road from Bentleyville going southwest at:
                 City border
                 SOM Center
                 Bainbridge Road
                 Aurora Road
                 Cochran Road
                 Hawthorne
              Solon Road from Oakwood going northeast at:
                 City border
                 Hawthorne
                 Cochran Road
                 Aurora Road
                 Bainbridge Road
                 SOM Center
                 Brainard Road from Miles Road going south at city border
                 Brainard Road from Cannon Road going north at Cannon Road
              Cannon Road from Brainard Road going east at:
                 Brainard Road
                 Hawthorne Parkway
              Cannon Road from Harper to Brainard at:
                 Harper Road
                 Hawthorne Parkway
                 Harper Road from Miles Road going south at:
                 Hawthorne Parkway
                 At city border
              Harper Road from Cannon Road going north at:
                 Harper Road
                 Hawthorne Parkway
2001- 2-   Installation of stop sign on Woodduck Lane at its intersection with Spatterdock
49    19-  Lane
      2001
2001- 10-  Prohibits left turns into and out of the Aurora Road access drive at the CVS
251   15-  Pharmacy site located at the southwest corner of SOM Center and Aurora Roads
      2001
2001- 11-
274   19-  Installation of stop sign on Navajo Trail at the circle intersection
      2001
2001- 12-
297   17-  Installation of traffic signal at the Pettibone Road/Liberty Road intersection
      2001
2002- 4-   Designating parking on Solon Boulevard from Linden Drive to Orchard Road for 2-
58    15-  hour time limits during school hours with the exception of those who qualify for
      2002 a parking permit
2002- 6-   Providing for street signs for designated bicycle and pedestrian routes
140   17-  throughout the city
      2002
2002- 9-   Providing for stop signs at:
217   18-     North Park Boulevard at its intersection with Hemington Boulevard
      2002    Belmar Road at its intersection with Aurora Road
2002- 11-  Prohibiting vehicles from obstructing the Fire Station 2 Bainbridge Road
247   4-   driveway
      2002
2002- 12-  Providing that the Liberty Road/Fox Run Drive/Timberlane Drive intersection be a
287   16-  4-way stop intersection
      2002
2003- 1-   Providing that the North Park/Leighton/Stonebridge intersection be a 4-way stop
13    22-  intersection
      2003
2003- 3-   Permitting only right turns onto SOM Center Road from the southern driveway of
62    17-  the retail facility located at 6221/6231 SOM Center Road
      2003
2003- 7-   Removing the flashing warning lights at the intersection of Liberty Road and the
194   21-  Conrail Tracks
      2003
2005- 2-   Restricting the Aurora Road westbound curb lane at the SOM Center Road
35    23-  intersection to right turns only
      2005
2005- 4-   Providing for a stop sign at the Solon Square Shopping Center access drive and
91    18-  the Station Street intersection
      2005
2006- 4-
81    17-  Providing for stop signs on Portz Parkway
      2006
2006- 10-  Prohibiting left turns out of the Solon Square Shopping Center Easterly Drive
238   3-   onto Aurora Road
      2006
2006- 11-
275   20-  Providing for stop signs at the Lochmoor Drive/Loch Lomand Drive intersection
      2006
2007- 1-   Amending Ord. 2006-238 to permit right turns only out of the Solon Square
14    18-  Shopping Center easterly drive onto Aurora Road; amended by ord. 2008-19
      2007
2007- 3-   Prohibiting parking on the inside bend of Shadowbrook Drive as indicated by the
68    19-  Traffic Engineer on Exhibit “A” attached to Ordinance 2007-68
      2007
2007- 12-  Providing for a “Do Not Block Drive” sign at the Solon Boulevard entrance of the
287   3-   Lube Stop located at 33300 Aurora Road
      2007
2008- 2-4- Amending Ord. 2007-14 to permit left turns out of the Solon Square Shopping
19    2008 Center easterly drive onto Aurora Road during restricted hours
2008- 3-
59    17-  Providing for a “No Parking” sign at the limits of 34400 Lakeview Drive
      2008
2011- 5-2- Removing the right turn on red restriction at the intersection of Harper and
79    2011 Bainbridge Roads; amended by Ord. 2011-93
2011- 5-   Amending Ord. 2011-79 to clarify that only the right turn on red restriction for
93    16-  westbound Bainbridge Road at Harper Road shall be removed
      2011
2011- 12-  Establishing through and truck routes and reasonable weight limits on Cannon
241   19-  Road: through truck traffic is prohibited for all vehicles exceeding 5 tons
      2011 gross weight on Cannon Road (CR-99), between Richmond Road and SOM Center Road
2012- 5-   Providing for a stop sign on westbound Spicebush Lane at the intersection of
137   21-  Spicebush Lane and Nightshade Lane
      2012
           As part of the City Wide Traffic Signal Improvement Project, authorizing and
      8-   amending the Traffic Control Map and Traffic Control File indicating the removal
2012- 20-  of unwarranted traffic signals at the intersections of:
218   2012    Aurora Road and Hawthorn Parkway
              Aurora Road and Old South Miles Road
              Kruse Drive and Bainbridge Road
2013- 7-1- Installation of two “no left turn” signs on Solon Road for the driveway exit of
132   2013 Burntwood Tavern
2013- 7-   Rescinding the “no access or through traffic” provision into Linden Drive from
154   15-  the Solon Village Shopping Center
      2013
2014- 1-   Removing stop signs on Linden Driven at the intersection of Brookland Avenue as
7     21-  recommended by the GPD, the City’s Traffic Engineer
      2014
2014- 3-   Amending Ord. 1986-200 by removing the “no left turn on SOM Center Road
60    17-  northbound at Linden Drive” restriction
      2014
2014- 4-
91    21-  Installation of stop signs at the railroad crossing at Arthur Road
      2014
2014- 9-
186   15-  Authorizing the installation of stop signs at the following intersections:
      2014
              Kruse Drive westbound at Bainbridge Road
              Hawthorn Parkway both northbound and southbound at Aurora Road
              Old South Miles Road southbound/eastbound at Aurora Road
2016- 3-   New signage indicating “no through traffic” on Valley Lane at Richmond Road and
55    21-  Cannon Road
      2016
2016- 9-   Prohibiting right turns on red on Pettibone Road eastbound at the Aurora Road/
165   19-  Pettibone Road intersection
      2016
2017- 1-
05    17-  Amending the lane designation for the Aurora Road and Cochran Road intersection
      2017
2017- 4-
75    17-  Providing for a “no parking” sign on the west side of White Oak Drive
      2017
2017- 5-   Installing additional signage to prohibit right turns on red on Pettibone Road
91    15-  eastbound at the Aurora Road/Pettibone Road intersection
      2017
2018- 8-   Installing a traffic signal, and eliminating the left turn restriction and
184   20-  eliminating the stop sign at the intersection of Aurora Road and Portz Parkway
      2018
2019- 3-   Installing “no parking anytime” signs on the north side of Carter Street
70    18-  starting at the intersection of Cochran Road east 940 feet
      2019
2019- 7-   Installing two signs prohibiting right turns on red on Liberty Road southbound
119   15-  at the Aurora Road/Liberty Road intersection during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:
      2019 00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday
2019- 10-  Creating a designated school zone for the Solon Preschool located at 6545 Som
190   21-  Center Road and authorizing the installation of signage for the school zone
      2019
2023- 8-   Installing two “no parking anytime” signs on the north side of North Park
191   23-  Boulevard from the driveway at 29905 North Park Boulevard to Harper Road
      2023
            
 
 
CHAPTER 408: PENALTIES
Section
   
408.01   Penalties for misdemeanor
   
408.02   General Code penalty
   
408.03   Waiver
   
408.04   Suspension of driver’s license
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Criteria for probation; conditions for probation, see R.C. § 2951.02
   Definition of “dangerous offender,” see §
698.01
   Definition of “imprisoned,” see R.C. § 1.05
   Definition of “repeat offender,” see §
698.01
   Imposing sentence for misdemeanor, see §
698.03
   Multiple sentences, see §
698.05
   Organizational penalties, see §
698.04
   Satisfaction of fine; credit for time served, see R.C. § 2947.14
§ 408.01 PENALTIES FOR MISDEMEANOR.
   Whoever is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor shall be sentenced in accordance with §
698.02.
§ 408.02 GENERAL CODE PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this Traffic Code for which no penalty is
otherwise provided is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first
offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, such
person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree; on each subsequent
offense within one year after the first offense, such person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree. When any person is found guilty of a first
offense for a violation of §
434.03 upon a finding that he or she operated a motor vehicle faster than 35
mph in a business district, or faster than 50 mph in other portions of the
municipality, or faster than 35 mph while passing through a school zone during
recess or while children are going to or leaving school during the opening or
closing hours, such person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(Ord. 1990-64, passed 3-19-1990)
§ 408.03 WAIVER.
   Any person charged with a violation of any provision of this Traffic Code
which constitutes a minor misdemeanor or who is charged with a first offense
for which payment of a prescribed fine may be made, may pay such sum in the
manner prescribed on the issued traffic ticket. Such payment shall be deemed a
plea of guilty, waiver of court appearance and acknowledgment of conviction of
the alleged offense and may be accepted in full satisfaction of the prescribed
penalty for such alleged violation. Payment of the prescribed fine need not be
accepted when laws prescribe that a certain number of such offenses shall
require court appearance.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
§ 408.04 SUSPENSION OF DRIVER’S LICENSE.
   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4510.07 or in any other provision of
the Revised Code, whenever an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of any provision of this Traffic Code that is substantially
equivalent to a provision of the Revised Code, and a court is permitted or
required to suspend a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit for a violation of that provision, a court, in addition to any other
penalties authorized by law, may suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege for the period of
time the court determines appropriate, but the period of suspension imposed for
the violation of the provision of this Traffic Code shall not exceed the period
of suspension that is permitted or required to be imposed for the violation of
the provision of the Revised Code to which the provision of this Traffic Code
is substantially equivalent.
(R.C. § 4510.05)
TITLE FOUR - PUBLIC WAYS AND TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
            Chap.
412.   Obstruction and Special Uses of Public Ways
            Chap.
414.   Traffic-Control Devices
            Chap.
416.   Pedestrians
CHAPTER 412: OBSTRUCTION AND SPECIAL USES OF PUBLIC WAYS
Section
   
412.01   Placing injurious material or obstruction in street
   
412.02   Zones of quiet
   
412.03   Play streets
   
412.04   Toy vehicles on roadway
   
412.05   Freeway use prohibited by pedestrians, bicycles and animals
   
412.06   Parades and assemblages; permit required
   
412.07   Games on streets
   
412.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Loads dropping or leaking; tracking mud; removal required, see §
440.06
   Parking in alleys or narrow streets; exceptions, see §
452.11
   Power to regulate processions or assemblages, see R.C. § 4511.07
   Selling, washing or repairing vehicle upon roadway, see §
452.08
   Sidewalk obstructions; damage or injury, see §
660.10
   Through and truck routes, see §
440.15
§ 412.01 PLACING INJURIOUS MATERIAL OR OBSTRUCTION IN STREET.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a
highway, lane, road, street or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails or
other articles which may damage or injure any person, vehicle or animal
traveling along or upon the highway, except such substances that may be placed
upon the roadway by proper authority for the repair or construction thereof.
      (2)   Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any
highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the
same.
      (3)   Any person authorized to remove a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a
highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the
highway from the vehicle.
      (4)   No person shall place any obstruction in or upon a highway without
proper authority.
   (b)   No person, with intent to cause physical harm to a person or a
vehicle, shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a highway, lane, road,
street or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails or other articles which
may damage or injure any person, vehicle or animal traveling along or upon the
highway, except substances that may be placed upon the roadway by proper
authority for the repair or construction thereof.
   (c)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c), whoever
violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever
violates division (a) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4511.74)
§ 412.02 ZONES OF QUIET.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a zone of quiet, no person
operating a vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other warning
device of the vehicle except in an emergency.
§ 412.03 PLAY STREETS.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that any street or part
thereof is a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street
or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose
residences are within the closed area and then the drivers shall exercise the
greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.
§ 412.04 TOY VEHICLES ON ROADWAY.
   No person riding upon any coaster, roller skates, sled, toy vehicle or other
similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a
crosswalk, and when so crossing the person shall be granted all of the rights
and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This
section shall not apply to any street set aside as a play street.
§ 412.05 FREEWAY USE PROHIBITED BY PEDESTRIANS, BICYCLES AND ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, shall:
      (1)   As a pedestrian, occupy any space within the limits of the right-
of-way of a freeway, except: in a rest area; on a facility that is separated
from the roadway and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately
marked for pedestrian use; in the performance of public works or official
duties; as a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of a
motor vehicle; or to obtain assistance; and
      (2)   Occupy any space within the limits of the right-of-way of a
freeway, with: an animal-drawn vehicle; a ridden or led animal; herded animals;
a pushcart; a bicycle, except on a facility that is separated from the roadway
and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately marked for
bicycle use; an electric bicycle; a bicycle with motor attached; a motor-driven
cycle with a motor which produces not to exceed five brake horsepower; an
agricultural tractor; farm machinery; except in the performance of public works
or official duties.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.051)
§ 412.06 PARADES AND ASSEMBLAGES; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   No organization or group of persons shall parade upon the streets or
block off any street area without first obtaining a permit from the Director of
Public Safety or his or her authorized representative.
   (b)   The permit shall designate the route over which the parade shall be
permitted or the area to be blocked off.
   (c)   Applications for such permits shall be made on such forms as may be
prescribed and shall contain such information as is reasonably necessary to a
fair determination of whether or not a permit should be issued. Applications
shall be filed not less than five days before the time intended for such
parade, procession or assemblage.
   (d)   The permit or any order accompanying it may limit or prescribe
reasonable conditions, including the hours, the places of assembly and of
dispersal, the route of march or travel and the streets, highways or portions
thereof which may be used or occupied.
   (e)   The permit may be refused or cancelled if:
      (1)   The resultant conditions would unreasonably hinder the movement of
traffic;
      (2)   The resultant conditions would require the diversion of sufficient
police officers or firefighters so as to deprive the city of normal police and
fire protection;
      (3)   The resultant conditions would be reasonably likely to provoke
disorderly conduct, create a disturbance or threaten the safety of residents,
by reason of the number of persons to participate in such parade, the nature or
subject matter of the parade, the area in which the parade will proceed or be
located, and all other relevant factors;
      (4)   The parade route of march or assembly areas would unreasonably
interfere with the movement of police vehicles, firefighting equipment or
ambulance service to other areas of the city;
      (5)   The information contained in the application is found to be false,
misleading or incomplete in any material detail; and
      (6)   An emergency such as a fire or storm would prevent the proper
conduct of the parade.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
§ 412.07 GAMES ON STREETS.
   No person shall fly a kite or play any game of ball, quoits or other game on
any street unless the same has been set aside for playground purposes.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
§ 412.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 414: TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
Section
   
414.01   Obedience to traffic-control devices
   
414.02   Through streets; stop and yield right-of-way signs
   
414.03   Traffic-control signal terms and lights
   
414.04   Signal to control lane direction of travel
   
414.05   Pedestrian control signals
   
414.06   Flashing traffic signals
   
414.07   Unauthorized signs and signals, hiding from view, advertising
   
414.08   Alteration, injury, removal of traffic-control devices
   
414.09   Unauthorized possession or sale of devices
   
414.10   Use of mast arm signal supports
   
414.11   Signal preemption devices; prohibitions
   
414.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Authority and considerations for placing of devices, see §
406.02
   Criminal mischief (tampering), see §
642.11
   Designation of through streets or stop intersections, see R.C. §§ 4511.07,
4511.65
   Intersections at which traffic-control signals fail or malfunction, see §
432.155
   Placing and maintaining local traffic-control devices, see R.C. §§ 4511.10,
4511.11
   Traffic-control devices defined, see §
402.48
   Traffic law photo-monitoring devices, state regulations, see R.C. §§
4511.092 et seq.
   Uniform system of traffic-control devices, see R.C. §§ 4511.09, 4511.11
§ 414.01 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (a)   (1)   No pedestrian or driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
instructions of any traffic-control device placed in accordance with the
provisions of this Traffic Code, unless at the time otherwise directed by a
police officer.
      (2)   No provision of this Traffic Code for which signs are required
shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the
alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular
section of this Traffic Code does not state that signs are required, that
section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place.
(R.C. § 4511.12(A))
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (c) of this section, any operator
of a commercial motor vehicle, upon approaching a scale location established
for the purpose of determining the weight of the vehicle and its load, shall
comply with any traffic-control device or the order of a peace officer
directing the vehicle to proceed to be weighed or otherwise inspected.
      (2)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle, upon bypassing a scale
location in accordance with division (c) of this section, shall comply with an
order of a peace officer to stop the vehicle to verify the use and operation of
an electronic clearance device.
   (c)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle that is equipped with an
electronic clearance device authorized by the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol under R.C. § 4549.081 may bypass a scale location, regardless of
the instruction of a traffic-control device to enter the scale facility, if
either of the following apply:
      (1)   The in-cab transponder displays a green light or other affirmative
visual signal and also sounds an affirmative audible signal; and
      (2)   Any other criterion established by the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol is met.
   (d)   Any peace officer may order the operator of a commercial motor vehicle
that bypasses a scale location to stop the vehicle to verify the use and
operation of an electronic clearance device.
   (e)   As used in this section, COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE means any
combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating or an actual gross
vehicle weight of more than 10,000 pounds if the vehicle is used in interstate
or intrastate commerce to transport property and also means any vehicle that is
transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is required pursuant to
49 C.F.R. Parts 100 to 180.
(R.C. § 4511.121(A) - (C), (E))
   (f)   No person shall use an electronic clearance device if the device or
its use is not in compliance with rules of the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol.
(R.C. § 4549.081(B))
   (g)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (g), whoever
violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever
violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.12(B))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (b) of this
section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (b)
of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender commits the offense while
distracted and the distracting activity is a contributing factor to the
commission of the offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine
established under R.C. § 4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.121(D))
      (3)   Whoever violates division (f) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
third degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4549.081(C))
§ 414.02 THROUGH STREETS; STOP AND YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY SIGNS.
   (a)   All state routes are hereby designated as through highways, provided
that stop signs, yield signs or traffic-control signals shall be erected at all
intersections with such through highways by the Department of Transportation as
to highways under its jurisdiction and by local authorities as to highways
under their jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section. Where
two or more state routes that are through highways intersect, and no traffic-
control signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall be erected at
one or more entrances thereto by the Department or by local authorities having
jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section. Whenever the
Director of Transportation determines on the basis of an engineering and
traffic investigation that stop signs are necessary to stop traffic on a
through highway for safe and efficient operation, nothing in this section shall
be construed to prevent the installations. When circumstances warrant, the
Director also may omit stop signs on roadways intersecting through highways
under his or her jurisdiction. Before the Director either installs or removes a
stop sign under this division (a), he or she shall give notice, in writing, of
that proposed action to the affected local authority at least 30 days before
installing or removing the stop sign.
   (b)   Other streets or highways, or portions thereof, are hereby designated
as through highways if they are within the municipality, if they have a
continuous length of more than one mile between the limits of the street or
highway or portion thereof, and if they have stop or yield signs or traffic-
control signals at the entrances of the majority of intersecting streets or
highways. For purposes of this section, the limits of the street or highway, or
portion thereof, shall be the municipal corporation line, the physical terminus
of the street or highway, or any point on the streets or highway at which
vehicular traffic thereon is required by regulatory signs to stop or yield to
traffic on the intersecting street, provided, that in residence districts, the
municipality may by ordinance designate the street or highway, or portion
thereof, not to be a through highway and thereafter the affected residence
district shall be indicated by official traffic-control devices. Where two or
more through highways designated under this division (b) intersect and no
traffic-control signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall be
erected at one or more entrances thereto by the Department or by local
authorities having jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section.
   (c)   The Department or local authorities having jurisdiction need not erect
stop signs at intersections they find to be so constructed as to permit traffic
to safely enter a through highway without coming to a stop. Signs shall be
erected at such intersections indicating that the operator of a vehicle shall
yield the right-of-way to or merge with all traffic proceeding on the through
highway.
   (d)   Local authorities, with reference to highways under their
jurisdiction, may designate additional through highways, and shall erect stop
signs, yield signs or traffic-control signals at all streets and highways
intersecting the through highways, or may designate any intersection as a stop
or yield intersection, and shall erect like signs at one or more entrances to
the intersection.
(R.C. § 4511.65)
§ 414.03 TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL TERMS AND LIGHTS.
   Highway traffic signal indications for vehicles and pedestrians shall have
the following meanings.
   (a)   Steady green signal indication.
      (1)   A.   Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal indication
are permitted to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a U-
turn movement except as such movement is modified by a lane-use sign, turn
prohibition sign, lane marking, roadway design, separate turn signal indication
or other traffic-control device. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles
turning right or left or making a U-turn movement, shall yield the right-of-way
to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk; and
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         B.   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a U-turn
movement to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching
from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard
during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the
intersection.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal indication, displayed
alone or in combination with another signal indication, are permitted to
cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such
arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications displayed at
the same time. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left
or making a U-turn movement, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the
following:
         A.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk; and
         B.   Other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      (3)   A.   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication,
as provided in R.C. § 4511.14, pedestrians facing a circular green signal
indication are permitted to proceed across the roadway within any marked or
unmarked associated crosswalk. The pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection or so close as to create an immediate
hazard at the time that the green signal indication is first displayed.
         B.   Pedestrians facing a green arrow signal indication, unless
otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or other traffic-control
device, shall not cross the roadway.
   (b)   Steady yellow signal indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow signal indication
are thereby warned that the related green movement or the related flashing
arrow movement is being terminated or that a steady red signal indication will
be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the
intersection. The provisions governing vehicular operation under the movement
being terminated shall continue to apply while the steady circular yellow
signal indication is displayed.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow arrow signal indication is
thereby warned that the related green arrow movement or the related flashing
arrow movement is being terminated. The provisions governing vehicular
operation under the movement being terminated shall continue to apply while the
steady yellow arrow signal indication is displayed.
      (3)   Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal
indication, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as
provided in R.C. § 4511.14 or other traffic- control device, shall not start to
cross the roadway.
   (c)   Steady red signal indication.
      (1)   A.   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal
indication, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted
by another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if
there is no stop line, traffic shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before
entering the intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication
to proceed is displayed except as provided in divisions (c)(1), (c)(2) and (c)
(3) of this section.
         B.   Except when a traffic-control device is in place prohibiting a
turn on red or a steady red arrow signal indication is displayed, vehicular
traffic facing a steady circular red signal indication is permitted, after
stopping, to enter the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-
way street into a one-way street. The right to proceed with the turn shall be
subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a stop
sign.
      (2)   A.   Vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow signal indication
shall not enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by the arrow
and, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted by
another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if
there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before entering the
intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication or other
traffic-control device permitting the movement indicated by such red arrow is
displayed.
         B.   When a traffic control device is in place permitting a turn on a
steady red arrow signal indication, vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow
indication is permitted, after stopping, to enter the intersection to turn
right, or to turn left from a one-way street into a one-way street. The right
to proceed with the turn shall be limited to the direction indicated by the
arrow and shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a
stop at a stop sign.
      (3)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as
provided in R.C. § 4511.14 or other traffic-control device, pedestrians facing
a steady circular red or steady red arrow signal indication shall not enter the
roadway.
      (4)   Local authorities by ordinance, or the Director of Transportation
on state highways, may prohibit a right or a left turn against a steady red
signal at any intersection, which shall be effective when signs giving notice
thereof are posted at the intersection.
   (d)   Flashing green signal indication. A flashing green signal indication
has no meaning and shall not be used.
   (e)   Flashing yellow signal indication.
      (1)   A.   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing circular yellow signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter
the intersection to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a U-
turn movement except as such movement is modified by lane-use signs, turn
prohibition signs, lane markings, roadway design, separate turn signal
indications, or other traffic- control devices. Such vehicular traffic,
including vehicles turning right or left or making a U-turn movement, shall
yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk; and
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         B.   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a U-turn to
the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the
opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the
time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
      (2)   A.   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing yellow arrow signal indication, displayed alone or in combination with
another signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter the intersection
only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or other such movement as is
permitted by other signal indications displayed at the same time. Such
vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or making a U-turn,
shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk; and
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         B.   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a U-turn to
the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the
opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the
time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
      (3)   Pedestrians facing any flashing yellow signal indication at an
intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic-control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the
right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing yellow signal indication is first displayed.
      (4)   When a flashing circular yellow signal indication is displayed as a
beacon to supplement another traffic-control device, road users are notified
that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained
thereon or that the regulatory or warning requirements of the other traffic-
control device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently
applicable.
   (f)   Flashing red signal indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing circular red signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near
side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. The right to proceed
shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a
stop sign.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing any flashing red signal indication at an
intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic-control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the
right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing red signal indication is first displayed.
      (3)   When a flashing circular red signal indication is displayed as a
beacon to supplement another traffic-control device, road users are notified
that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained
thereon or that the regulatory requirements of the other traffic-control
device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently applicable.
Use of this signal indication shall be limited to supplementing stop, do not
enter or wrong way signs, and to applications where compliance with the
supplemented traffic-control device requires a stop at a designated point.
   (g)   Official traffic-control signal at a place other than an intersection.
In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and maintained at a
place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be
applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no
application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the
pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any
such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.
   (h)   Railroad grade crossings. This section does not apply at railroad
grade crossings. Conduct of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade
crossings shall be governed by R.C. §§ 4511.61 and 4511.62.
(R.C. § 4511.13)
§ 414.04 SIGNAL TO CONTROL LANE DIRECTION OF TRAVEL.
   The meanings of lane-use control signal indications are as follows.
   (a)   A steady downward green arrow. A road user is permitted to drive in
the lane over which the arrow signal indication is located.
   (b)   A steady yellow “X.” A road user is to prepare to vacate the lane over
which the signal indication is located because a lane control change is being
made to a steady red “X” signal indication.
   (c)   A steady white two-way left-turn arrow. A road user is permitted to
use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a left turn, but not
for through travel, with the understanding that common use of the lane by
oncoming road users for left turns also is permitted.
   (d)   A steady white one-way left-turn arrow. A road user is permitted to
use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a left turn, without
opposing turns in the same lane, but not for through travel.
   (e)   A steady red “X.” A road user is not permitted to use the lane over
which the signal indication is located and that this signal indication shall
modify accordingly the meaning of other traffic controls present.
(R.C. § 4511.131)
§ 414.05 PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words “walk” or
“don’t walk,” or the symbol of a walking person or an upraised palm are in
place, these signals shall indicate the following instructions.
   (a)   A steady walking person signal indication, which symbolizes “walk,”
means that a pedestrian facing the signal indication is permitted to start to
cross the roadway in the direction of the signal indication, possibly in
conflict with turning vehicles. The pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the walking person
signal indication is first shown.
   (b)   A flashing upraised hand signal indication, which symbolizes “don’t
walk,” means that a pedestrian shall not start to cross the roadway in the
direction of the signal indication, but that any pedestrian who has already
started to cross on a steady walking person signal indication shall proceed to
the far side of the traveled way of the street or highway, unless otherwise
directed by a traffic-control device to proceed only to the median of a divided
highway or only to some other island or pedestrian refuge area.
   (c)   A steady upraised hand signal indication means that a pedestrian shall
not enter the roadway in the direction of the signal indication.
   (d)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the continued
use of pedestrian control signals utilizing the word “wait” if those signals
were installed prior to March 28, 1985.
   (e)   A flashing walking person signal indication has no meaning and shall
not be used.
(R.C. § 4511.14)
§ 414.06 FLASHING TRAFFIC SIGNALS.
Editor’s note:
   Section 414.06 was repealed as part of the 2012 recodification of these
Codified Ordinances because substantially equivalent state law (Ohio
R.C.4511.15) was repealed by the Ohio General Assembly.
§ 414.07 UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS AND SIGNALS, HIDING FROM VIEW, ADVERTISING.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of
any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to
be, is an imitation of or resembles a traffic-control device or railroad sign
or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or hides from
view or interferes with the effectiveness of any traffic-control device or any
railroad sign or signal; and no person shall place or maintain, nor shall any
public authority permit, upon any highway, any traffic sign or signal bearing
thereon any commercial advertising. This section does not prohibit either the
erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful
directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for traffic-
control devices, or the erection upon private property of traffic-control
devices by the owner of real property in accordance with R.C. §§ 4511.211 and
4511.432.
      (2)   Every prohibited sign, signal, marking or device is a public
nuisance, and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway may remove the
same or cause it to be removed.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.16)
§ 414.08 ALTERATION, INJURY, REMOVAL OF TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (a)   No person, without lawful authority, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy or otherwise improperly
tamper with any traffic- control device, any railroad sign or signal, or any
inscription, shield or insignia on the device, sign or signal, or any part of
the device, sign or signal;
      (2)   Knowingly drive upon or over any freshly applied pavement marking
material on the surface of a roadway while the marking material is in an
undried condition, and is marked by flags, markers, signs or other devices
intended to protect it; or
      (3)   Knowingly move, damage, destroy or otherwise improperly tamper with
a manhole cover.
   (b)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), whoever
violates division (a)(1) or (a)(3) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the third degree. If a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(3) of this
section creates a risk of physical harm to any person, the offender is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)
(3) of this section causes serious physical harm to property that is owned,
leased or controlled by a state or local authority, the offender is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), whoever violates
division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.17)
§ 414.09 UNAUTHORIZED POSSESSION OR SALE OF DEVICES.
   (a)   As used in this section, TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE means any sign,
traffic-control signal or other device conforming to and placed or erected in
accordance with the manual adopted under R.C. § 4511.09 by authority of a
public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic, including signs denoting the names of streets and
highways, but does not mean any pavement marking.
   (b)   No individual shall buy or otherwise possess, or sell, a traffic-
control device, except when one of the following applies:
      (1)   In the course of the individual’s employment by the state or a
local authority for the express or implied purpose of manufacturing, providing,
erecting, moving or removing such a traffic-control device;
      (2)   In the course of the individual’s employment by any manufacturer of
traffic-control devices other than a state or local authority;
      (3)   For the purpose of demonstrating the design and function of a
traffic-control device to state or local officials;
      (4)   When the traffic-control device has been purchased from the state
or a local authority at a sale of property that is no longer needed or is unfit
for use; or
      (5)   When the traffic-control device has been properly purchased from a
manufacturer for use on private property and the person possessing the device
has a sales receipt for the device or other acknowledgment of sale issued by
the manufacturer.
   (c)   This section does not preclude, and shall not be construed as
precluding, prosecution for theft in violation of R.C. § 2913.02, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or for receiving stolen property
in violation of R.C. § 2913.51, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 4511.18)
§ 414.10 USE OF MAST ARM SIGNAL SUPPORTS.
   (a)   Council hereby finds and determines that the use of mast arm signal
supports is a safer and more efficient method of placing traffic signals, that
mast arm signals are more easily repaired than cable hung signals, and that
mast arm hung signals are more aesthetically pleasing than cable hung signals.
   (b)   Effective as of the passage of this section, it is the policy of this
city to install only mast arm signal supports on all state and county roads
whenever traffic signal installation can be properly implemented and/or
whenever the proposes installation would be aesthetically nonconforming if
installed by another method.
(Ord. 1991-8, passed 1-21-1991)
§ 414.11 SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICES; PROHIBITIONS.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall possess a portable signal preemption device.
      (2)   No person shall use a portable signal preemption device to affect
the operation of a traffic- control device.
   (b)   Division (a)(1) of this section does not apply to any of the following
persons and division (a)(2) of this section does not apply to any of the
following persons when responding to an emergency call:
      (1)   A peace officer, as defined in R.C. § 109.17(A)(1), (A)(12), (A)
(14) or (A)(19);
      (2)   A State Highway Patrol officer; or
      (3)   A person while occupying a public safety vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 4511.01(E)(1), (E)(3) or (E)(4).
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Whoever violates division (a)(2) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   As used in this section, PORTABLE SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICE means a
device that, if activated by a person, is capable of changing a traffic-control
signal to green out of sequence.
(R.C. § 4511.031)
§ 414.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and 408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.
CHAPTER 416: PEDESTRIANS
Section
   
416.01   Duties of pedestrians and drivers at crosswalks
   
416.02   Right-of-way of blind person
   
416.03   Right-of-way yielded by pedestrian; crossing roadways
   
416.04   Moving in crosswalks
   
416.05   Walking on sidewalks and streets
   
416.06   Soliciting rides or business; riding on outside of vehicle or in cargo
storage area
   
416.07   Passing through bridge signals or railroad barriers
   
416.08   Right-of-way of public safety vehicles
   
416.09   Right-of-way on sidewalks
   
416.10   Intoxication
   
416.11   Persons operating motorized wheelchairs
   
416.12   Operation of electric personal assistive mobility devices
   
416.13   Operation of personal delivery device on sidewalks and crosswalks
   
416.14   Low-speed micromobility devices
   
416.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Obedience to traffic-control devices, see §
414.01
   Opening doors on side available to traffic, see §
452.07
   Pedestrian control signals, see §
414.05
   Pedestrians prohibited on freeways, see §
412.05
§ 416.01 DUTIES OF PEDESTRIANS AND DRIVERS AT CROSSWALKS.
   (a)   When traffic-control signals are not in place, not in operation or are
not clearly assigning the right-of-way, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the
right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, or if required
by R.C. § 4511.132, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, to a
pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon
the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the
pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as
to be in danger.
   (b)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and
walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close as to constitute an
immediate hazard.
   (c)   Division (a) of this section does not apply under the conditions
stated in R.C. § 4511.48(B), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (d)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (e), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (f)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.46)
§ 416.02 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF BLIND PERSON.
   (a)   (1)   As used in this section BLIND PERSON or BLIND PEDESTRIAN means a
person having not more than 20/200 visual acuity in the better eye with
correcting lenses, or visual acuity greater than 20/200, but with a limitation
in the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field
subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees.
      (2)   The driver of every vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to every
blind pedestrian guided by a guide dog, or carrying a cane which is
predominantly white or metallic in color, with or without a red tip.
   (b)   No person, other than a blind person, while on any public highway,
street, alley or other public thoroughfare, shall carry a white or metallic
cane, with or without a red tip.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.47)
§ 416.03 RIGHT-OF-WAY YIELDED BY PEDESTRIAN; CROSSING ROADWAYS.
   (a)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (b)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way
to all traffic upon the roadway.
   (c)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked
crosswalk.
   (d)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless
authorized by official traffic-control devices; and when authorized to cross
diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official
traffic-control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.
   (e)   This section does not relieve the operator of a vehicle from
exercising due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway.
   (f)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (f), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.48)
§ 416.04 MOVING IN CROSSWALKS.
   (a)   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.49)
§ 416.05 WALKING ON SIDEWALKS AND STREETS.
   (a)   Where a sidewalk is provided and its use is practicable, it shall be
unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (b)   Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder, as far as practicable from the
edge of the roadway.
   (c)   Where neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any pedestrian
walking along and upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable to an
outside edge of the roadway, and, if on a two-way roadway, shall walk only on
the left side of the roadway.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. §§ 4511.13 and 4511.46, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, any pedestrian upon a roadway
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (e), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.50)
§ 416.06 SOLICITING RIDES OR BUSINESS; RIDING ON OUTSIDE OF VEHICLE OR IN CARGO
STORAGE AREA.
   (a)   No person while on a roadway outside a safety zone shall solicit a
ride from the driver of any vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(2) of this section, no person
shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting employment, business or
contributions from the occupant of any vehicle.
      (2)   The Council, by ordinance, may authorize the issuance of a permit
to a charitable organization to allow a person acting on behalf of the
organization to solicit charitable contributions from the occupant of a vehicle
by standing on a highway, other than a freeway as provided in R.C. § 4511.051
(A), that is under the jurisdiction of the municipality. The permit shall be
valid for only one period of time, which shall be specified in the permit, in
any calendar year. The Council also may specify the locations where
contributions may be solicited and may impose any other restrictions on or
requirements regarding the manner in which the solicitations are to be
conducted that the Council considers advisable.
      (3)   As used in divisions (b)(2) of this section, CHARITABLE
ORGANIZATION means an organization that has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a currently valid ruling or determination letter recognizing the tax-
exempt status of the organization pursuant to IRC § 501(c)(3).
   (c)   No person shall hang onto or ride on the outside of any motor vehicle
while it is moving upon a roadway, except mechanics or test engineers making
repairs or adjustments, or workers performing specialized highway or street
maintenance or construction under authority of a public agency.
   (d)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person to hang onto or ride on
the outside of any motor vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway, except
mechanics or test engineers making repairs or adjustments, or workers
performing specialized highway or street maintenance or construction under
authority of a public agency.
   (e)   No driver of a truck, trailer or semitrailer shall knowingly permit
any person who has not attained the age of 16 years to ride in the unenclosed
or unroofed cargo storage area of the driver’s vehicle if the vehicle is
traveling faster than 25 mph, unless either of the following applies:
      (1)   The cargo storage area of the vehicle is equipped with a properly
secured seat to which is attached a seat safety belt that is in compliance with
federal standards for an occupant restraining device as defined in R.C. §
4513.263(A)(2), the seat and seat safety belt were installed at the time the
vehicle was originally assembled, and the person riding in the cargo storage
area is in the seat and is wearing the seat safety belt; or
      (2)   An emergency exists that threatens the life of the driver or the
person being transported in the cargo storage area of the truck, trailer or
semitrailer.
   (f)   No driver of a truck, trailer or semitrailer shall permit any person,
except for those workers performing specialized highway or street maintenance
or construction under authority of a public agency, to ride in the cargo
storage area or on a tailgate of the driver’s vehicle while the tailgate is
unlatched.
   (g)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(Ord. 1990-64, passed 3-19-1990)
Statutory reference:
   Hitchhiking - soliciting employment, business, or contributions from
occupant of vehicle, see R.C. § 4511.51
§ 416.07 PASSING THROUGH BRIDGE SIGNALS OR RAILROAD BARRIERS.
   (a)   No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or approach
thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate or barrier after a bridge operation
signal indication has been given.
   (b)   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing
gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while the gate or
barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.511)
§ 416.08 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLES.
   (a)   Upon the immediate approach of a public safety vehicle, as stated in
R.C. § 4511.45 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, every
pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to the public safety vehicle.
   (b)   This section shall not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle
from the duty to exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.452)
§ 416.09 RIGHT-OF-WAY ON SIDEWALKS.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian
on a sidewalk.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.441)
§ 416.10 INTOXICATION.
   (a)   A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol, any drug of abuse,
or any combination of them, to a degree that renders the pedestrian a hazard
shall not walk or be upon a highway.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.481)
§ 416.11 PERSONS OPERATING MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIRS.
   Every person operating a motorized wheelchair shall have all of the rights
and duties applicable to a pedestrian that are contained in this chapter,
except those provisions which by their nature can have no application.
(R.C. § 4511.491)
§ 416.12 OPERATION OF ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES.
   (a)   (1)   Electric personal assistive mobility devices may be operated on
the public streets, highways, sidewalks and paths and portions of roadways set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in accordance with this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, those sections of
this Traffic Code that by their nature are applicable to an electric personal
assistive mobility device apply to the device and the person operating it
whenever it is operated upon any public street, highway, sidewalk or path or
upon any portion of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
      (3)   The municipality may regulate or prohibit the operation of electric
personal assistive mobility devices on public streets, highways, sidewalks and
paths, or portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles,
under its jurisdiction.
   (b)   No operator of an electric personal assistive mobility device shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians and human-powered
vehicles at all times;
      (2)   Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a
pedestrian;
      (3)   Operate the device at night unless the device or its operator is
equipped with or wearing both of the following:
         A.   A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white light visible
from a distance of not less than 500 feet; and
         B.   A red reflector facing the rear that is visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet when directly in front of lawful lower
beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle.
      (4)   Operate the device on any portion of a street or highway that has
an established speed limit of 55 mph or more;
      (5)   Operate the device upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of
pedestrians or other specialized use when an appropriate sign giving notice of
the specialized use is posted on the path;
      (6)   If under 18 years of age, operate the device unless wearing a
protective helmet on the person’s head with the chin strap properly fastened;
and
      (7)   If under 16 years of age, operate the device unless, during the
operation, the person is under the direct visual and audible supervision of
another person who is 18 years of age or older and is responsible for the
immediate care of the person under 16 years of age.
   (c)   No person who is under 14 years of age shall operate an electric
personal assistive mobility device.
   (d)   No person shall distribute or sell an electric personal assistive
mobility device unless the device is accompanied by a written statement that is
substantially equivalent to the following: “WARNING: TO REDUCE THE RISK OF
SERIOUS INJURY, USE ONLY WHILE WEARING FULL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT – HELMET,
WRIST GUARDS, ELBOW PADS AND KNEE PADS.”
   (e)   Nothing in this section affects or shall be construed to affect any
rule of the Director of Natural Resources or a Board of Park District
Commissioners governing the operation of vehicles on lands under the control of
the Director or Board, as applicable.
   (f)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (b) or (c) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor and shall be punished as follows:
         A.   The offender shall be fined $10; and
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (b) or (c) of this section, or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, the court, in
addition to imposing the fine required under division (f)(1)A. of this section,
shall do one of the following:
            1.   Order the impoundment for not less than one day but no more
than 30 days of the electric personal assistive mobility device that was
involved in the current violation of that division. The court shall order the
device to be impounded at a safe indoor location designated by the court and
may assess storage fees of not more than $5 per day; provided the total
storage, processing and release fees assessed against the offender or the
device in connection with the device’s impoundment or subsequent release shall
not exceed $50; or
            2.   If the court does not issue an impoundment order pursuant to
division (f)(1)B.1. of this section, issue an order prohibiting the offender
from operating any electric personal assistive mobility device on the public
streets, highways, sidewalks and paths and portions of roadways set aside for
the exclusive use of bicycles for not less than one day but not more than 30
days.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.512)
   (g)   As used in this code, ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE
means a self-balancing two non-tandem wheeled device that is designed to
transport only one person, has an electric propulsion system of an average of
750 watts, and when ridden on a paved level surface by an operator who weighs
170 pounds has a maximum speed of less than 20 mph.
(R.C. § 4501.01(TT))
§ 416.13 OPERATION OF PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE ON SIDEWALKS AND CROSSWALKS.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Eligible entity." Means a corporation, partnership, association,
firm, sole proprietorship, or other entity engaged in business.
      (2)   "Personal delivery device." Means an electrically powered device to
which all of the following apply:
         A.   The device is intended primarily to transport property and cargo
on sidewalks and crosswalks.
         B.   The device weighs less than 250 pounds excluding any property or
cargo being carried in the device.
         C.   The device has a maximum speed of ten miles per hour.
         D.   The device is equipped with technology that enables the operation
of the device with active control or monitoring by a person, without active
control or monitoring by a person, or both with or without active control or
monitoring by a person.
      (3)   "Personal delivery device operator." Means an agent of an eligible
entity who exercises direct physical control over, or monitoring of, the
navigation and operation of a personal delivery device. The phrase does not
include, with respect to a delivery or other service rendered by a personal
delivery device, the person who requests the delivery or service. The phrase
also does not include a person who only arranges for and dispatches a personal
delivery device for a delivery or other service.
   (b)   An eligible entity may operate a personal delivery device on sidewalks
and crosswalks so long as all of the following requirements are met:
      (1)   The personal delivery device is operated in accordance with all
regulations, if any, established by each local authority within which the
personal delivery device is operated.
      (2)   A personal delivery device operator is actively controlling or
monitoring the navigation and operation of the personal delivery device.
      (3)   The eligible entity maintains an insurance policy that includes
general liability coverage of not less than $100,000 for damages arising from
the operation of the personal delivery device by the eligible entity and any
agent of the eligible entity.
      (4)   The device is equipped with all of the following:
         A.   A marker that clearly identifies the name and contact information
of the eligible entity operating the personal delivery device and a unique
identification number;
         B.   A braking system that enables the personal delivery device to
come to a controlled stop;
         C.   If the personal delivery device is being operated between sunset
and sunrise, a light on both the front and rear of the personal delivery device
that is visible in clear weather from a distance of at least 500 feet to the
front and rear of the personal delivery device when directly in front of low
beams of headlights on a motor vehicle.
   (c)   No personal delivery device operator shall allow a personal delivery
device to do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to comply with traffic or pedestrian control devices and
signals;
      (2)   Unreasonably interfere with pedestrians or traffic;
      (3)   Transport any hazardous material that would require a permit issued
by the Public Utilities Commission;
      (4)   Operate on a street or highway, except when crossing the street or
highway within a crosswalk.
   (d)   A personal delivery device has all of the rights and obligations
applicable to a pedestrian under the same circumstances, except that a personal
delivery device shall yield the right-of-way to human pedestrians on sidewalks
and crosswalks.
   (e)   (1)   No person shall operate a personal delivery device unless the
person is authorized to do so under this section and complies with the
requirements of this section.
      (2)   An eligible entity is responsible for both of the following:
         A.   Any violation of this section that is committed by a personal
delivery device operator; and
         B.   Any other circumstance, including a technological malfunction, in
which a personal delivery device operates in a manner prohibited by divisions
(c)(1) to (c)(4) of this section.
(R.C. § 4511.513)
§ 416.14 LOW-SPEED MICROMOBILITY DEVICES.
   (a)   (1)   A low-speed micromobility device may be operated on the public
streets, highways, sidewalks, and shared-use paths, and may be operated on any
portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in accordance
with this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, those sections of
this title that by their nature could apply to a low-speed micromobility device
do apply to the device and the person operating it whenever it is operated upon
any public street, highway, sidewalk, or shared-use path, or upon any portion
of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
   (b)   No operator of a low-speed micromobility device shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians at all times;
      (2)   Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a
pedestrian;
      (3)   Operate the device at night unless the device or its operator is
equipped with or wearing both of the following:
         A.   A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white light visible
from a distance of not less than 500 feet;
         B.   A red reflector facing the rear that is visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet when directly in front of lawful lower
beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle.
   (c)   (1)   No person who is under 16 years of age shall rent a low-speed
micromobility device.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly rent a low-speed micromobility device to
a person who is under 16 years of age.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly rent a low-speed micromobility device on
behalf of a person who is under 16 years of age.
   (d)   No person shall operate a low-speed micromobility device at a speed
greater than 20 miles per hour.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Unless a mens rea is otherwise specified in this section, an
offense established under this section is a strict liability offense and R.C. §
2901.20 does not apply. The designation of that offense as a strict liability
offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for which there
is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense.
   (f)   Notwithstanding division (a)(1) of this section, the municipality,
county, township, metropolitan park district, township park district,
recreation district, or any division of the Ohio Department of Natural
Resources if the division has the approval of the Ohio Director of Natural
Resources may do any of the following:
      (1)   Regulate or prohibit the operation of low-speed micromobility
devices on public streets, highways, sidewalks, and shared-use paths, and
portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, under its
jurisdiction;
      (2)   Include low-speed micromobility devices that are adapted to expand
access for people with various physical limitations into a shared bicycle,
shared electric bicycle, or similar vehicle sharing program, under its
jurisdiction;
      (3)   Require the owner or operator of a low-speed micromobility device
rental service or low-speed micromobility device sharing program to maintain
commercial general liability insurance related to the operation of the devices,
with limits of up to $1,000,000 per occurrence and $2,000,000 per aggregate.
(R.C. § 4511.514)
§ 416.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and 408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.
TITLE SIX - VEHICLES AND OPERATION
            Chap.
432.   Operation Generally
            Chap.
434.   O.V.I.; Reckless Operation; Speed
            Chap.
436.   Licensing; Accidents
            Chap.
438.   Safety and Equipment
            Chap.
440.   Commercial and Heavy Vehicles
            Chap.
442.   Drivers of Commercial Vehicles
            Chap.
444.   Motor Transportation Companies
            Chap.
446.   Light Motor Vehicle Noise Control
CHAPTER 432: OPERATION GENERALLY
Section
   
432.01   Driving upon right side of roadway; exceptions
   
432.02   Passing to right when proceeding in opposite directions
   
432.03   Overtaking, passing to left; driver’s duties
   
432.04   Overtaking, passing to right of vehicle
   
432.05   Overtaking, passing to left of centerline
   
432.06   Driving upon left side of roadway
   
432.07   Hazardous or no passing zones
   
432.08   Driving within lanes or continuous lines of traffic
   
432.09   Following too closely
   
432.10   Turning at intersections
   
432.11   U-turns restricted
   
432.12   Starting and backing vehicles
   
432.13   Signals before changing course, turning or stopping
   
432.14   Hand and arm signals
   
432.15   Right-of-way at intersections
   
432.155   Intersections at which traffic- control signals fail or malfunction
   
432.16   Right-of-way when turning left
   
432.17   Operation of vehicle at stop and yield signs
   
432.18   Emergency or public safety vehicles at stop signals or signs
   
432.19   Right-of-way of public safety or coroner’s vehicle
   
432.195   Driving while approaching stationary public safety vehicle and
certain other vehicles with caution
   
432.20   Right-of-way at private driveway, alley or building
   
432.205   Stop signs on private roads and driveways
   
432.21   Right-of-way of funeral procession
   
432.22   Driving and parking upon sidewalks, tree lawns or curbs
   
432.23   Driver’s view and control to be unobstructed by load or persons
   
432.24   Driving upon street posted as closed for repair
   
432.25   Following and parking near emergency or safety vehicles
   
432.26   Driving over fire hose
   
432.27   Driving through safety zone
   
432.28   One-way streets and rotary traffic islands
   
432.29   Driving upon divided roadways
   
432.30   Stopping for school bus; actuating visual signals; discharging
children
   
432.31   Driving across grade crossings
   
432.32   Stopping at grade crossings
   
432.33   Slow-moving vehicles or equipment at grade crossings
   
432.34   Obstructing intersections, crosswalks or grade crossings
   
432.35   “Peeling;” cracking exhaust noises
   
432.36   Shortcutting across private property
   
432.37   Entering and exiting controlled-access highway
   
432.38   Weaving; full time and attention
   
432.39   Operation on paths set aside for bicycles
   
432.40   Littering from motor vehicles
   
432.41   Use of earphones while driving
   
432.42   Driving on railroad tracks
   
432.43   Texting while driving prohibited
   
432.46   Use of electronic wireless communication devices by minors or
probationary drivers while driving prohibited
   
432.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Criminal damaging through operation of a motor vehicle, see §
642.105
   Obedience to traffic-control devices, see §
414.01
   Operation of bicycles and motorcycles generally, see
Ch. 474
   Operation of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles and all-purpose vehicles,
see §§
476.03,
476.04
   Yielding right-of-way to pedestrians on sidewalks, see §
416.09
§ 432.01 DRIVING UPON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon
the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction, or when making a left turn under the rules governing those
movements;
      (2)   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left
of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the
unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an
immediate hazard;
      (3)   When driving upon a roadway divided into three or more marked lanes
for traffic under the rules applicable thereon;
      (4)   When driving upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for
one-way traffic; and
      (5)   When otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic-control
device.
   (b)   (1)   Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the
prevailing and lawful speed of traffic at the time and place and under the
conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane then available
for traffic, and far enough to the right to allow passing by faster vehicles if
the passing is safe and reasonable, except under any of the following
circumstances:
         A.   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction;
         B.   When preparing for a left turn; or
         C.   When the driver must necessarily drive in a lane other than the
right-hand lane to continue on the driver’s intended route.
      (2)   Nothing in division (b)(1) of this section requires a driver of a
slower vehicle to compromise the driver’s safety to allow overtaking by a
faster vehicle.
   (c)   Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic and
providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the
left of the centerline of the roadway, except when authorized by official
traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left of the center of
the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use the lanes, or
except as permitted under division (a)(2) of this section. This division (c)
shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the centerline in making
a left turn into or from an alley, private road or driveway.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (d), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (e)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.25)
§ 432.02 PASSING TO RIGHT WHEN PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.
   (a)   Operators of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass
each other to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one
line of traffic in each direction, each operator shall give to the other one-
half of the main traveled portion of the roadway or as nearly one-half as is
reasonably possible.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.26)
§ 432.03 OVERTAKING, PASSING TO LEFT; DRIVER’S DUTIES.
   (a)   The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction.
      (1)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction shall, except as provided in division (a)(3) of this
section, signal to the vehicle to be overtaken, shall pass to the left thereof
at a safe distance, and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway
until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. When a motor vehicle overtakes and
passes a bicycle or electric bicycle, three feet or greater is considered a
safe passing distance.
      (2)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
operator of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle at the latter’s audible signal, and the operator shall not
increase the speed of the operator’s vehicle until completely passed by the
overtaking vehicle.
      (3)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking and passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction on a divided highway as defined in R.C. §
4511.35, a limited access highway as defined in R.C. § 5511.02, or a highway
with four or more traffic lanes is not required to signal audibly to the
vehicle being overtaken and passed.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.27)
§ 432.04 OVERTAKING, PASSING TO RIGHT OF VEHICLE.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass on the right of another
vehicle only under the following conditions:
      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
or
      (2)   Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for
two or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction being traveled
by the overtaking vehicle.
   (b)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle only
under conditions permitting the movement in safety. The movement shall not be
made by driving off the roadway.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.28)
§ 432.05 OVERTAKING, PASSING TO LEFT OF CENTERLINE.
   (a)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left of the center of the roadway in
overtaking and passing traffic proceeding in the same direction, unless the
left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient
distance ahead to permit the overtaking and passing to be completely made
without interfering with the safe operation of any traffic approaching from the
opposite direction or any traffic overtaken. In every event, the overtaking
vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as soon as practicable, and
in the event the passing movement involves the use of a lane authorized for the
traffic approaching from the opposite direction, before coming within 200 feet
of any approaching vehicle.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.29)
§ 432.06 DRIVING UPON LEFT SIDE OF ROADWAY.
   (a)   No vehicle shall be driven upon the left side of the roadway under the
following conditions:
      (1)   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the
highway, where the operator’s view is obstructed within such a distance as to
create a hazard in the event traffic might approach from the opposite
direction;
      (2)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any
bridge, viaduct or tunnel; or
      (3)   When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection
or railroad grade crossing.
   (b)   This section does not apply to vehicles upon a one-way roadway, upon a
roadway where traffic is lawfully directed to be driven to the left side, or
under the conditions described in R.C. § 4511.25(A)(2) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.30)
§ 432.07 HAZARDOUS OR NO PASSING ZONES.
   (a)   The Department of Transportation may determine those portions of any
state highway where overtaking and passing other traffic or driving to the left
of the center or centerline of the roadway would be especially hazardous, and
may, by appropriate signs or markings on the highway, indicate the beginning
and end of the zones. When signs or markings are in place and clearly visible,
every operator of a vehicle shall obey the directions of the signs or markings,
notwithstanding the distances set out in R.C. § 4511.30.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply when all of the following
apply:
      (1)   The slower vehicle is proceeding at less than half the speed of the
speed limit applicable to that location;
      (2)   The faster vehicle is capable of overtaking and passing the slower
vehicle without exceeding the speed limit; or
      (3)   There is sufficient clear sight distance to the left of the center
or centerline of the roadway to meet the overtaking and passing provisions of
R.C. § 4511.29, considering the speed of the slower vehicle.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.31)
§ 432.08 DRIVING WITHIN LANES OR CONTINUOUS LINES OF TRAFFIC.
   (a)   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for traffic, or wherever within the municipality traffic is lawfully
moving in two or more substantially continuous lines in the same direction, the
following rules apply.
      (1)   A vehicle shall be driven, as nearly as is practicable, entirely
within a single lane or line of traffic and shall not be moved from the lane or
line until the driver has first ascertained that the movement can be made with
safety.
      (2)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and provides for
the two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center
lane, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is
clearly visible and the center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance,
or when preparing for a left turn, or where the center lane is at the time
allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is
proceeding, and is posted with signs to give notice of that allocation.
      (3)   Official signs may be erected directing specified traffic to use a
designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction, regardless of the center of the roadway, or restricting
the use of a particular lane to only buses during certain hours or during all
hours, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of the signs.
      (4)   Official traffic-control devices may be installed prohibiting the
changing of lanes on sections of roadway, and drivers of vehicles shall obey
the directions of every such device.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.33)
§ 432.09 FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.
   (a)   (1)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle
more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of
the vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway.
      (2)   The driver of any truck, or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle,
when traveling upon a roadway outside a business or residence district, shall
maintain a sufficient space, whenever conditions permit, between the vehicle
and another vehicle ahead so an overtaking motor vehicle may enter and occupy
the space without danger. This division (a) does not prevent overtaking and
passing nor does it apply to any lane specially designated for use by trucks.
      (3)   Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business
or residence district in a caravan or motorcade shall maintain a sufficient
space between the vehicles so an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy the
space without danger. This division (a) shall not apply to funeral processions.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.34)
§ 432.10 TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall be
governed by the following rules:
      (1)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway;
      (2)   At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both
directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left
turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the
centerline thereof and by passing to the right of the centerline where it
enters the intersection, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn
shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the centerline of
the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made in
that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection;
and
      (3)   At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on
one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at
any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand
lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of the
vehicle, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so
as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left hand lane
of the roadway being entered lawfully available to traffic moving in that lane.
   (b)   The Department of Transportation and local authorities may cause
markers, buttons or signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections, and
thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in this
section be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection, and when markers,
buttons or signs are so placed, no operator of a vehicle shall turn the vehicle
at an intersection other than as directed and required by the markers, buttons
or signs.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.36)
§ 432.11 U-TURNS RESTRICTED.
   (a)   Except as provided in R.C. § 4511.13 and division (b) of this section,
no vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any
curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, if the vehicle
cannot be seen within 500 feet by the driver of any other vehicle approaching
from either direction.
   (b)   The driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, may turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction. This division (b) applies only when the emergency vehicle
or public safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with
and displaying at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating light visible
under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of
the vehicle, and when the driver of the vehicle is giving an audible signal by
siren, exhaust whistle or bell. This division (b) does not relieve the driver
of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with
due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.37)
§ 432.12 STARTING AND BACKING VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or
parked until the movement can be made with reasonable safety.
      (2)   Before backing, operators of vehicles shall give ample warning, and
while backing they shall exercise vigilance not to injure person or property on
the street or highway.
      (3)   No person shall back a motor vehicle on a freeway, except:
         A.   In a rest area;
         B.   In the performance of public works or official duties; or
         C.   As a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of
a motor vehicle.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.38)
§ 432.13 SIGNALS BEFORE CHANGING COURSE, TURNING OR STOPPING.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall turn a vehicle or move right or left upon a
highway unless and until the person has exercised due care to ascertain that
the movement can be made with reasonable safety, nor without giving an
appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided.
      (2)   When required, a signal of intention to turn or move right or left
shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by
the vehicle before turning, except that in the case of a person operating a
bicycle or electric bicycle, the signal shall be made not less than one time
but is not required to be continuous. A bicycle or electric bicycle operator is
not required to make a signal if the bicycle is in a designated turn lane, and
a signal shall not be given when the operator's hands are needed for the safe
operation of the bicycle or electric bicycle.
      (3)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear, when there is opportunity to
give a signal.
      (4)   Any stop or turn signal required by this section shall be given
either by means of the hand and arm, or by signal lights that clearly indicate
to both approaching and following traffic the intention to turn or move right
or left, except that any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped
with, and the required signal shall be given by, signal lights when the
distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside
limit of the body, cab or load of the motor vehicle exceeds 24 inches, or when
the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit
of the body or load thereof exceeds 14 feet, whether a single vehicle or a
combination of vehicles.
      (5)   The signal lights required by this section shall not be flashed on
one side only on a disabled vehicle, flashed as a courtesy or “do pass” signal
to operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear, nor be flashed on one
side only of a parked vehicle except as may be necessary for compliance with
this section.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.39)
§ 432.14 HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, all signals
required by the provisions of this Traffic Code, when given by hand and arm,
shall be given from the left side of the vehicle, for a distance of 50 feet
prior to the actual turn, in the following manner, and the signals shall
indicate as follows:
      (1)   Left turn, hand and arm extended horizontally;
      (2)   Right turn, hand and arm extended upward; and
      (3)   Stop or decrease speed, hand and arm extended downward.
   (b)   As an alternative to division (a)(2) of this section, a person
operating a bicycle may give a right turn signal by extending the right hand
and arm horizontally and to the right side of the bicycle.
(Ord. 2002-62, passed 4-1-2002)
Statutory reference:
   Hand and arm signals, see R.C. § 4511.40
§ 432.15 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (a)   When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different
streets or highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle
on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
   (b)   The right-of-way rule declared in division (a) of this section is
modified at through highways and otherwise as stated in this Traffic Code or
R.C. Chapter 4511.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.41)
§ 432.155 INTERSECTIONS AT WHICH TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS FAIL OR MALFUNCTION.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle who approaches an intersection where traffic
is controlled by traffic control signals shall do all of the following if the
signal facing the driver exhibits no colored lights or colored lighted arrows,
exhibits a combination of such lights or arrows that fails to clearly indicate
the assignment of right-of-way, or, if the vehicle is a bicycle or an electric
bicycle, the signals are otherwise malfunctioning due to the failure of a
vehicle detector to detect the presence of the bicycle or electric bicycle:
      (1)   Stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, stop before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, stop
before entering the intersection;
      (2)   Yield the right-of-way to all vehicles in the intersection or
approaching on an intersecting road, if the vehicles will constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways; and
      (3)   Exercise ordinary care while proceeding through the intersection.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.132)
§ 432.16 RIGHT-OF-WAY WHEN TURNING LEFT.
   (a)   The operator of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an
intersection or into an alley, private road or driveway shall yield the right-
of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within
the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.42)
§ 432.17 OPERATION OF VEHICLE AT STOP AND YIELD SIGNS.
   (a)   Except when directed to proceed by a law enforcement officer, every
driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering it. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-
way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so
closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is
moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways.
   (b)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow down to a
speed reasonable for the existing conditions, and if required for safety to
stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then at the
point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it. After
slowing, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways. Whenever a driver is involved in a
collision with a vehicle in the intersection or junction of roadways, after
driving past a yield sign without stopping, the collision shall be prima facie
evidence of the driver’s failure to yield the right-of-way.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.43)
§ 432.18 EMERGENCY OR PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLES AT STOP SIGNALS OR SIGNS.
   (a)   The driver of any emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, upon approaching a red or stop signal or any
stop sign, shall slow down as necessary for safety to traffic, but may proceed
cautiously past the red or stop sign or signal with due regard for the safety
of all persons using the street or highway.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.03)
§ 432.19 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF PUBLIC SAFETY OR CORONER’S VEHICLE.
   (a)   Upon the approach of a public safety vehicle or coroner’s vehicle,
equipped with at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating light visible
under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of
the vehicle, and the driver is giving an audible signal by siren, exhaust
whistle or bell, no driver of any other vehicle shall fail to yield the right-
of-way, immediately drive, if practical, to a position parallel to, and as
close as possible to, the right edge or curb of the highway clear of any
intersection, and stop and remain in that position until the public safety
vehicle or coroner’s vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a
police officer.
   (b)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle or
coroner’s vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons and property upon the highway.
   (c)   This section applies to a coroner’s vehicle only when the vehicle is
operated in accordance with R.C. § 4513.171, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance. As used in this section, CORONER’S VEHICLE means a vehicle
used by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator that is equipped
with a flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and a siren, exhaust
whistle or bell capable of giving an audible signal.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (d) or division (e),
whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree
on a first offense. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or
traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the third degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 4511.45)
   (e)   (1)   When the failure of a motor vehicle operator to yield the right-
of-way to a public safety vehicle as required by division (a) of this section
impedes the ability of the public safety vehicle to respond to an emergency,
any emergency personnel in the public safety vehicle may report the license
plate number and a general description of the vehicle and the operator of the
vehicle to the law enforcement agency exercising jurisdiction over the area
where the alleged violation occurred.
      (2)   A.   Upon receipt of a report under division (e)(1) of this
section, the law enforcement agency may conduct an investigation to attempt to
determine or confirm the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation.
         B.   If the identity of the operator at the time of an alleged
violation of division (a) of this section is established, the law enforcement
agency has probable cause to issue either a written warning or a citation for
that violation, and the agency shall issue a written warning or a citation to
the operator.
         C.   If the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of the
alleged violation cannot be established, the law enforcement agency may issue a
written warning to the person who owned the vehicle at the time of the alleged
violation. However, in the case of a leased or rented vehicle, the law
enforcement agency shall issue the written warning to the person who leased or
rented the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation.
      (3)   A.   Whoever violates division (a) of this section based on a
report filed under division (e)(1) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined $150.
         B.   If a person who is issued a citation for a violation of division
(a) of this section based on a report filed under division (e)(1) of this
section does not enter a written plea of guilty and does not waive the person’s
right to contest the citation but instead appears in person in the proper court
to answer the charge, the trier of fact cannot find beyond a reasonable doubt
that the person committed that violation unless the emergency personnel who
filed the report appears in person in the court and testifies.
      (4)   As used in this division (e):
         A.   LICENSE PLATE. Includes any temporary motor vehicle license
registration issued under R.C. § 4503.182 or similar law of another
jurisdiction.
         B.   PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Does not include an unmarked public safety
vehicle or a vehicle used by a public law enforcement officer or other person
sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state or a vehicle used
by the motor carrier enforcement unit for the enforcement of orders and rules
of the public utilities commission.
(R.C. § 4511.454)
§ 432.195 DRIVING WHILE APPROACHING STATIONARY PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE AND
CERTAIN OTHER VEHICLES WITH CAUTION.
   (a)   The driver of a motor vehicle, upon approaching a stationary public
safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, waste collection
vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor
vehicle inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a
highway maintenance vehicle that is displaying the appropriate visual signals
by means of flashing, oscillating or rotating lights, as prescribed in R.C. §
4513.17, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   If the driver of the motor vehicle is traveling on a highway that
consists of at least two lanes that carry traffic in the same direction of
travel as that of the driver’s motor vehicle, the driver shall proceed with due
caution and, if possible and with due regard to the road, weather and traffic
conditions, shall change lanes into a lane this is not adjacent to that of the
stationary public safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle,
waste collection vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to
conduct motor vehicle inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and
4923.06, or a highway maintenance vehicle; or
      (2)   If the driver is not traveling on a highway of a type described in
division (a)(1) of this section, or if the driver is traveling on a highway of
that type but it is not possible to change lanes or if to do so would be
unsafe, the driver shall proceed with due caution, reduce the speed of the
motor vehicle, and maintain a safe speed for the road, weather and traffic
conditions.
   (b)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle,
emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, waste collection vehicle, vehicle used
by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor vehicle inspections in
accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a highway maintenance vehicle
from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and
property upon the highway.
   (c)   No person shall fail to drive a motor vehicle in compliance with
divisions (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section when so required by division (a) of
this section.
   (d)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (d), whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Notwithstanding § 698.02 or R.C. § 2929.28, upon a finding that a
person operated a motor vehicle in violation of division (c) of this section,
the court, in addition to all other penalties provided by law, shall impose a
fine of two times the usual amount imposed for the violation.
      (3)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
   (e)   The offense established under this section is a strict liability
offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this offense as a
strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.
(R.C. § 4511.213)
§ 432.20 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT PRIVATE DRIVEWAY, ALLEY OR BUILDING.
   (a)   (1)   The operator of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from
any place other than another roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all
traffic approaching on the roadway to be entered or crossed.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (a), whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.44)
   (b)   (1)   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building,
private road or driveway within a business or residence district shall stop the
vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area
extending across the alley, building entrance, road or driveway, or in the
event there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the point nearest the street to
be entered where the driver has a view of approaching traffic thereon.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), whoever violates
division (b) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (b) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
division (b) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.431)
   (c)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn into a private road or
driveway, alley or building from a public street or highway shall be governed
by the following rules:
      (1)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway;
      (2)   Upon a roadway where traffic is proceeding in opposite directions,
approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made from that portion of the
right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof; and
      (3)   Upon a roadway where traffic is restricted to one direction,
approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made as close as practicable
to the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   (d)   It shall be the duty of the driver of any vehicle entering a private
road or driveway, alley or building to yield the right-of-way to pedestrians
lawfully using the sidewalk or sidewalk area extending across the private road
or driveway, alley or building.
§ 432.205 STOP SIGNS ON PRIVATE ROADS AND DRIVEWAYS.
   (a)   The owner of a private road or driveway located in a private
residential area containing 20 or more dwelling units may erect stop signs at
places where the road or driveway intersects with another private road or
driveway in the residential area, in compliance with all of the following
requirements.
      (1)   The stop sign is sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily
observant person and meets the specifications of and is placed in accordance
with the Manual adopted by the Department of Transportation pursuant to R.C. §
4511.09.
      (2)   The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the private road or
driveway that is in plain view and clearly informs persons entering the road or
driveway that they are entering private property, stop signs have been posted
and must be obeyed, and the signs are enforceable by law enforcement officers
under state law. The sign required by this division (a), where appropriate, may
be incorporated with the sign required by R.C. § 4511.211(A)(2), or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (b)   R.C. §§ 4511.43(A) and 4511.46, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, shall be deemed to apply to the driver of a vehicle on a
private road or driveway where a stop sign is placed in accordance with
division (a) of this section and to a pedestrian crossing such a road or
driveway at an intersection where a stop sign is in place.
   (c)   When a stop sign is placed in accordance with division (a) of this
section, any law enforcement officer may apprehend a person found violating the
stop sign and may stop and charge the person with violating the stop sign.
   (d)   As used in this section, and for the purpose of applying R.C. §§
4511.43(A) and 4511.46, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, to
conduct under this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   INTERSECTION.
         A.   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two private roads or driveways which join one another at, or
approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling
upon different private roads or driveways joining at any other angle may come
in conflict.
         B.   Where a private road or driveway includes two roadways 30 feet or
more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of the private roads or
driveways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
      (2)   OWNER and PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL AREA CONTAINING 20 OR MORE DWELLING
UNITS. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4511.211.
      (3)   ROADWAY. The portion of a private road or driveway improved,
designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, except the berm or shoulder.
If a private road or driveway includes two or more separate roadways, the term
ROADWAY means any such roadway separately but not all such roadways
collectively.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (e), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.432)
§ 432.21 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF FUNERAL PROCESSION.
   (a)   As used in this section, FUNERAL PROCESSION means two or more vehicles
accompanying the cremated remains or the body of a deceased person in the
daytime when each of the vehicles has its headlights lighted and is displaying
a purple and white or an orange and white pennant attached to each vehicle in
such a manner as to be clearly visible to traffic approaching from any
direction.
   (b)   Excepting public safety vehicles proceeding in accordance with R.C. §
4511.45 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or when directed
otherwise by a police officer, pedestrians and the operators of all vehicles
shall yield the right-of-way to each vehicle that is a part of a funeral
procession. Whenever the lead vehicle in a funeral procession lawfully enters
an intersection, the remainder of the vehicles in the procession may continue
to follow the lead vehicle through the intersection, notwithstanding any
traffic-control devices or right-of-way provisions of the Revised Code,
provided that the operator of each vehicle exercises due care to avoid
colliding with any other vehicle or pedestrian.
   (c)   No person shall operate any vehicle as a part of a funeral procession
without having the headlights of the vehicle lighted and without displaying a
purple and white or an orange and white pennant in such a manner as to be
clearly visible to traffic approaching from any direction.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (d), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (e)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.451)
§ 432.22 DRIVING AND PARKING UPON SIDEWALKS, TREE LAWNS OR CURBS.
   No person shall drive, stand or park a vehicle, other than a bicycle, upon a
sidewalk, sidewalk area, street lawn area or the curb of a street, except when
entering or leaving a permanent or temporary driveway or when lawfully
authorized. This section shall have no application to tricycles.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
§ 432.23 DRIVER’S VIEW AND CONTROL TO BE UNOBSTRUCTED BY LOAD OR PERSONS.
   (a)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there
are in the front seat such number of persons, as to obstruct the view of the
driver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or to interfere with the driver’s
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (b)   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in a position as to interfere
with the driver’s view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with the driver’s
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (c)   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic; nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (d), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.70)
§ 432.24 DRIVING UPON STREET POSTED AS CLOSED FOR REPAIR.
   (a)   No person shall drive upon, along or across a street or highway, or
any part of a street or highway that has been closed in the process of its
construction, reconstruction or repair, and posted with appropriate signs by
the authority having jurisdiction to close the highway.
(R.C. § 4511.71(A))
   (b)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle on or onto a public street or
highway that is temporarily covered by a rise in water level, including
groundwater or an overflow of water, and that is clearly marked by a sign that
specifies that the road is closed due to the rise in water level and that any
person who uses the closed portion of the road may be fined up to $2,000.
      (2)   A person who is issued a citation for a violation of division (b)
(1) of this section is not permitted to enter a written plea of guilty and
waive the person’s right to contest the citation in court, but instead must
appear in person in the proper court to answer the charge.
(R.C. § 4511.714(A), (B))
   (c)   (1)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), whoever
violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever
violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
         B.   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.71(B))
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
         B.   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required
under R.C. § 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or required under
any provision of law, the court imposing the sentence upon an offender who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (b) of this section
shall order the offender to reimburse one or more rescuers for the cost any
such rescuer incurred in rescuing the person, excluding any cost of
transporting the rescued person to a hospital or other facility for treatment
of injuries, up to a cumulative maximum of $2,000. If more than one rescuer was
involved in the emergency response, the court shall allocate the reimbursement
proportionately, according to the cost each rescuer incurred. A financial
sanction imposed under this section is a judgment in favor of the rescuer and,
subject to a determination of indigency under R.C. § 2929.28(B), a rescuer may
collect the financial sanction in the same manner as provided in R.C. §
2929.28.
(R.C. § 4511.714(C))
   (d)   As used in this section:
      (1)   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE ORGANIZATION. Has the same meanings as in
R.C. § 9.60.
      (2)   FIREFIGHTING AGENCY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 9.60.
      (3)   PRIVATE FIRE COMPANY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 9.60.
      (4)   RESCUER. Means a state agency, political subdivision, firefighting
agency, private fire company, or emergency medical service organization.
(R.C. § 4511.714(D))
§ 432.25 FOLLOWING AND PARKING NEAR EMERGENCY OR SAFETY VEHICLES.
   (a)   The driver of any vehicle, other than an emergency vehicle or public
safety vehicle on official business, shall not follow any emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle traveling in response to an alarm closer than 500 feet,
or drive into or park the vehicle within the block where the fire apparatus has
stopped in answer to a fire alarm, unless directed to do so by a police officer
or a firefighter.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.72)
§ 432.26 DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.
   (a)   No vehicle shall, without the consent of the Fire Department official
in command, be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department that is
laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of
fire.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.73)
§ 432.27 DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE.
   (a)   No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety
zone.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.60)
§ 432.28 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.
   (a)   (1)   Upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for one-way
traffic, a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.
      (2)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven
only to the right of the rotary traffic island.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.32)
§ 432.29 DRIVING UPON DIVIDED ROADWAYS.
   (a)   Whenever any highway has been divided into two roadways by an
intervening space, or by a physical barrier, or a clearly indicated dividing
section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be
driven only upon the right-hand roadway, and no vehicle shall be driven over,
across or within any dividing space, barrier or section, except through an
opening, crossover or intersection established by public authority. This
section does not prohibit the occupancy of the dividing space, barrier or
section for the purpose of an emergency stop, or in compliance with an order of
a police officer.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.35)
§ 432.30 STOPPING FOR SCHOOL BUS; ACTUATING VISUAL SIGNALS; DISCHARGING
CHILDREN.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle, upon meeting or overtaking from either
direction any school bus stopped for the purpose of receiving or discharging
any school child, person attending programs offered by community boards of
mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child
attending a program offered by a head start agency, shall stop at least ten
feet from the front or rear of the school bus and shall not proceed until the
school bus resumes motion, or until signaled by the school bus driver to
proceed. It is no defense to a charge under this division (a) that the school
bus involved failed to display or be equipped with an automatically extended
stop warning sign as required by division (b) of this section.
   (b)   Every school bus shall be equipped with amber and red visual signals
meeting the requirements of R.C. § 4511.771 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and an automatically extended stop warning sign of a type
approved by the Ohio Department of Education and Workforce, which shall be
actuated by the driver of the bus whenever but only whenever the bus is stopped
or stopping on the roadway for the purpose of receiving or discharging school
children, persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental
health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or children attending
programs offered by head start agencies. A school bus driver shall not actuate
the visual signals or the stop warning sign in designated school bus loading
areas where the bus is entirely off the roadway or at school buildings when
children or persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental
health and county boards of developmental disabilities are loading or unloading
at curbside or at buildings when children attending programs offered by head
start agencies are loading or unloading at curbside. The visual signals and
stop warning sign shall be synchronized or otherwise operated as required by
the Ohio Administrative Code.
   (c)   Where a highway has been divided into four or more traffic lanes, a
driver of a vehicle need not stop for a school bus approaching from the
opposite direction which has stopped for the purpose of receiving or
discharging any school child, persons attending programs offered by community
boards of mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or
children attending programs offered by head start agencies. The driver of any
vehicle overtaking the school bus shall comply with division (a) above.
   (d)   School buses operating on divided highways or on highways with four or
more traffic lanes shall receive and discharge all school children, persons
attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and county
boards of developmental disabilities, and children attending programs offered
by head start agencies on their residence side of the highway.
   (e)   No school bus driver shall start the driver’s bus until after any
child, person attending programs offered by community boards of mental health
and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child attending a program
offered by a head start agency who may have alighted therefrom has reached a
place of safety on the child’s or person’s residence side of the road.
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section may be fined an
amount not to exceed $500. A person who is issued a citation for a violation of
division (a) of this section is not permitted to enter a written plea of guilty
and waive the person’s right to contest the citation in a trial but instead
must appear in person in the proper court to answer the charge.
      (2)   In addition to and independent of any other penalty provided by
law, the court or Mayor may impose upon an offender who violates this section a
class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7). When a
license is suspended under this section, the court or Mayor shall cause the
offender to deliver the license to the court, and the court or Clerk of the
Court immediately shall forward the license to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles,
together with notice of the court’s action.
   (g)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   HEAD START AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3301.32.
      (2)   SCHOOL BUS. As used in relation to children who attend a program
offered by a head start agency, means a bus that is owned and operated by a
head start agency, is equipped with an automatically extended stop warning sign
of a type approved by the Ohio Department of Education and Workforce, is
painted the color and displays the markings described in R.C. § 4511.77, and is
equipped with amber and red visual signals meeting the requirements of R.C. §
4511.77, irrespective of whether or not the bus has 15 or more children aboard
at any time. The term does not include a van owned and operated by a head start
agency, irrespective of its color, lights or markings.
(R.C. § 4511.75)
§ 432.31 DRIVING ACROSS GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (a)   (1)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad
grade crossing, the person shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet
from the nearest rail of the railroad if any of the following circumstances
exist at the crossing:
         A.   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a train;
         B.   A crossing gate is lowered;
         C.   A flagperson gives or continues to give a signal of the approach
or passage of a train;
         D.   There is insufficient space on the other side of the railroad
grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle the person is operating without
obstructing the passage of other vehicles, pedestrians or railroad trains,
notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed;
         E.   An approaching train is emitting an audible signal or is plainly
visible, and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing; and
         F.   There is insufficient undercarriage clearance to safely negotiate
the crossing.
      (2)   A person who is driving a vehicle and who approaches a railroad
grade crossing shall not proceed as long as any of the circumstances described
in divisions (a)(1)A. through (a)(1)F. of this section exist at the crossing.
   (b)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while the gate or barrier is
closed, or is being opened or closed unless the person is signaled by a law
enforcement officer or flagperson that it is permissible to do so.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 4511.62)
§ 432.32 STOPPING AT GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2) of this section, the
operator of any bus, any school vehicle or any vehicle transporting material
required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R. Parts 100 to 185, before crossing at
grade any track of a railroad, shall stop the vehicle, and while so stopped,
shall listen through an open door or open window, and look in both directions
along the track for any approaching train and for signals indicating the
approach of a train, and shall proceed only upon exercising due care after
stopping, looking and listening as required by this section. Upon proceeding,
the operator of such a vehicle shall cross only in a gear that will ensure
there will be no necessity for changing gears while traversing the crossing,
and shall not shift gears while crossing the tracks.
      (2)   Division (a) of this section does not apply at grade crossings when
any local authority has filed an application with the Public Utilities
Commission requesting the approval of an exempt crossing, and the Public
Utilities Commission has authorized and approved an exempt crossing as provided
in R.C. § 4511.63(B).
      (3)   As used in division (a) of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         A.   BUS. Any vehicle originally designed by its manufacturer to
transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver, or carries 16 or more
passengers, including the driver.
         B.   EXEMPT CROSSING. A highway rail grade crossing authorized and
approved by the Public Utilities Commission under R.C. § 4511.63(B) at which
vehicles may cross without making the stop otherwise required by this section.
         C.   SCHOOL VEHICLE. Any vehicle used for the transportation of pupils
to and from a school or school-related function if the vehicle is owned or
operated by, or operated under contract with, a public or nonpublic school.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (a)(4), whoever
violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more
violations of division (a) of this section or R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76,
4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764, 4511.77 or 4511.79, or a municipal ordinance that
is substantially equivalent to any of those sections, whoever violates division
(a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.63)
   (b)   (1)   As used in this section, ACTIVE GRADE CROSSING WARNING DEVICE
means signs, signals, gates, or other protective devices erected or installed
at a public highway-railway crossing at common grade and activated by an
electrical circuit.
      (2)   The Department of Transportation and local authorities, with the
approval of the Department, may designate dangerous highway crossings over
railroad tracks and erect stop signs thereat.
      (3)   A.   The Department and local authorities shall erect stop signs at
a railroad highway grade crossing in either of the following circumstances:
            1.   New warning devices that are not active grade crossing warning
devices are being installed at the grade crossing, and railroad crossbucks were
the only warning devices at the grade crossing prior to the installation of the
new warning devices.
            2.   The grade crossing is constructed after July 1, 2013 and only
warning devices that are not active grade crossing warning devices are
installed at the grade crossing.
         B.   Division (b)(3)A. of this section does not apply to a railroad
highway grade crossing that the Director of Transportation has exempted from
that division because of traffic flow or other considerations or factors.
      (4)   When stop signs are erected pursuant to division (b)(2) or (b)(3)
of this section, the operator of any vehicle shall stop within 50, but not less
than 15, feet from the nearest rail of the railroad tracks and shall exercise
due care before proceeding across such grade crossing.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (b)(4) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (6)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.61)
§ 432.33 SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES OR EQUIPMENT AT GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (a)   No person shall operate or move any crawler-type tractor, steam
shovel, derrick, roller or any equipment or structure having a normal operating
speed of six or less mph or a vertical body or load clearance of less than nine
inches above the level surface of a roadway, upon or across any tracks at a
railroad grade crossing without first complying with divisions (a)(1) and (a)
(2) of this section.
      (1)   Before making any such crossing, the person operating or moving any
such vehicle or equipment shall first stop the same, and while stopped, the
person shall listen and look in both directions along the track for any
approaching train and for signals indicating the approach of a train, and shall
proceed only upon exercising due care.
      (2)   No such crossing shall be made when warning is given by automatic
signal, crossing gates or a flagperson, or otherwise of the immediate approach
of a railroad train or car.
   (b)   If the normal sustained speed of the vehicle, equipment or structure
is not more than three mph, the person owning, operating or moving the same
shall also give notice of the intended crossing to a station agent or
superintendent of the railroad, and a reasonable time shall be given to the
railroad to provide proper protection for the crossing. Where the vehicles or
equipment are being used in constructing or repairing a section of highway
lying on both sides of a railroad grade crossing, and in this construction or
repair it is necessary to repeatedly move the vehicles or equipment over the
crossing, one daily notice specifying when the work will start and stating the
hours during which it will be prosecuted is sufficient.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.64)
§ 432.34 OBSTRUCTING INTERSECTIONS, CROSSWALKS OR GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (a)   No driver shall enter an intersection or marked crosswalk, or drive
onto any railroad grade crossing, unless there is sufficient space on the other
side of the intersection, crosswalk or grade crossing to accommodate the
vehicle the driver is operating without obstructing the passage of other
vehicles, pedestrians or railroad trains, notwithstanding any traffic-control
signal indication to proceed.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.712)
§ 432.35 “PEELING;” CRACKING EXHAUST NOISES.
   No person shall operate any motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe
operation, or in compliance with law, in such a manner that the vehicle is so
rapidly accelerated or started from a stopped position, or in the shifting of
gears while in motion, that the exhaust system emits a loud, cracking or
chattering noise unusual to its normal operation, or that the rubber tires of
the vehicle squeal or leave tire marks on the roadway, commonly known as
“peeling.”
§ 432.36 SHORTCUTTING ACROSS PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No operator of a motor vehicle shall enter upon private property for the
sole purpose of driving across that property, between abutting streets or other
public ways thereof. The failure to stop on the property in connection with or
in furtherance of the enterprise or activities being conducted on the property
shall constitute prima facie evidence of the violation.
§ 432.37 ENTERING AND EXITING CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY.
   (a)   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access
highway except at such entrances and exits as are established by public
authority.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
(Ord. 1990-64, passed 3-19-1990)
§ 432.38 WEAVING; FULL TIME AND ATTENTION.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle upon any street
or highway in a weaving or zigzag course unless the irregular course is
necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law.
   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle without giving
his or her full time and attention to the operation of the vehicle.
§ 432.39 OPERATION ON PATHS SET ASIDE FOR BICYCLES.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, snowmobile or all-
purpose vehicle upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, when
an appropriate sign giving notice of that use is posted on the path.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect any rule of
the Director of Natural Resources governing the operation of motor vehicles,
snowmobiles, all-purpose vehicles and bicycles on lands under the Director’s
jurisdiction.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.713)
§ 432.40 LITTERING FROM MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (a)   No operator or occupant of a motor vehicle shall, regardless of
intent, throw, drop, discard or deposit litter from any motor vehicle in
operation upon any street, road or highway, except into a litter receptacle in
a manner that prevents its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (b)   No operator of a motor vehicle in operation upon any street, road or
highway shall allow litter to be thrown, dropped, discarded or deposited from
the motor vehicle, except into a litter receptacle in a manner that prevents
its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (c)   As used in this section, LITTER means garbage, trash, waste, rubbish,
ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts, furniture,
glass or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.82)
§ 432.41 USE OF EARPHONES WHILE DRIVING.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   EARPHONES. Any device that covers all or a portion of both ears and
that does either of the following:
         A.   Through either a physical connection to another device or a
wireless connection, provides the listener with radio programs, music, or other
information;
         B.   Provides hearing protection.
         EARPHONES does not include speakers or other listening devices that
are built into protective headgear.
      (2)   EARPLUGS. Any device that can be inserted into one or both ears and
that does either of the following:
         A.   Through either a physical connection to another device or a
wireless connection, provides the listener with radio programs, music, or other
information;
         B.   Provides hearing protection.
   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle while wearing earphones over,
or earplugs in, both ears.
   (c)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   Any person wearing a hearing aid;
      (2)   Law enforcement personnel while on duty;
      (3)   Fire Department personnel and emergency medical service personnel
while on duty;
      (4)   Any person engaged in the operation of equipment for use in the
maintenance or repair of any highway;
      (5)   Any person engaged in the operation of refuse collection equipment;
      (6)   Any person wearing earphones or earplugs for hearing protection
while operating a motorcycle.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.84)
§ 432.42 DRIVING ON RAILROAD TRACKS.
   No person shall draw or drive a vehicle on or between the rails or tracks or
along the graded roadway of any railroad without the knowledge and consent of
the owner or controller of such railroad, unless compelled by necessity to do
so.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
§ 432.43 TEXTING WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any street, highway, or
property open to the public for vehicular traffic while using, holding, or
physically supporting with any part of the person’s body an electronic wireless
communications device.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device to make
contact, for emergency purposes, with a law enforcement agency, hospital or
health care provider, fire department, or other similar emergency agency or
entity;
      (2)   A person driving a public safety vehicle while using an electronic
wireless communications device in the course of the person’s duties;
      (3)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device when
the person’s motor vehicle is in a stationary position and is outside a lane of
travel, at a traffic control signal that is currently directing traffic to
stop, or parked on a road or highway due to an emergency or road closure;
      (4)   A person using and holding an electronic wireless communications
device directly near the person’s ear for the purpose of making, receiving, or
conducting a telephone call, provided that the person does not manually enter
letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
      (5)   A person receiving wireless messages on an electronic wireless
communications device regarding the operation or navigation of a motor vehicle;
safety-related information, including emergency, traffic, or weather alerts; or
data used primarily by the motor vehicle, provided that the person does not
hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (6)   A person using the speaker phone function of the electronic
wireless communications device, provided that the person does not hold or
support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (7)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device for
navigation purposes, provided that the person does not do either of the
following during the use:
         A.   Manually enter letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
         B.   Hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (8)   A person using a feature or function of the electronic wireless
communications device with a single touch or single swipe, provided that the
person does not do either of the following during the use:
         A.   Manually enter letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
         B.   Hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (9)   A person operating a commercial truck while using a mobile data
terminal that transmits and receives data;
      (10)   A person operating a utility service vehicle or a vehicle for or
on behalf of a utility, if the person is acting in response to an emergency,
power outage, or circumstance that affects the health or safety of individuals;
      (11)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device in
conjunction with a voice-operated or hands-free feature or function of the
vehicle or of the device without the use of either hand except to activate,
deactivate, or initiate the feature or function with a single touch or swipe,
provided the person does not hold or support the device with any part of the
person’s body;
      (12)   A person using technology that physically or electronically
integrates the device into the motor vehicle, provided that the person does not
do either of the following during the use:
         A.   Manually enter letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
         B.   Hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body.
      (13)   A person storing an electronic wireless communications device in a
holster, harness, or article of clothing on the person’s body.
   (c)   If a law enforcement officer issues an offender a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of division (a) of this section, the officer shall do
both of the following:
      (1)   Report the issuance of the ticket, citation, or summons to the
officer’s law enforcement agency;
      (2)   Ensure that such report indicates the offender’s race.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of operating a
motor vehicle while using an electronic wireless communication device, an
unclassified misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided in divisions (d)(1)
to (d)(5) of this section.
      (1)   The offender shall be fined, and is subject to a suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege, as follows:
         A.   Except as provided in divisions (d)(1)B., (d)(1)C., (d)(1)D., and
(d)(2) of this section, the court shall impose upon the offender a fine of not
more than $150.
         B.   If, within two years of the violation, the offender has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one prior violation of this section, R.C. §
4511.204, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court shall
impose upon the offender a fine of not more than $250.
         C.   If, within two years of the violation, the offender has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more prior violations of this section,
R.C. § 4511.204, or a substantially equivalent or municipal ordinance, the
court shall impose upon the offender a fine of not more than $500. The court
also may impose a suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or
nonresident operating privilege for 90 days.
         D.   Notwithstanding divisions (d)(1)A. to (d)(1)C. of this section,
if the offender was operating the motor vehicle at the time of the violation in
a construction zone where a sign was posted in accordance with R.C. § 4511.98,
the court, in addition to all other penalties provided by law, shall impose
upon the offender a fine of two times the amount imposed for the violation
under division (d)(1)A., (d)(1)B., or (d)(1)C. of this section, as applicable.
      (2)   If the offender is in the category of offenders to whom division
(d)(1)A. of this section applies, in lieu of payment of the fine of $150 under
division (d)(1)A. of this section and the assessment of points under division
(d)(4) of this section, the offender instead may elect to attend the distracted
driving safety course, as described in R.C. § 4511.991. If the offender attends
and successfully completes the course, the offender shall be issued written
evidence that the offender successfully completed the course. The offender
shall not be required to pay the fine and shall not have the points assessed
against that offender’s driver’s license if the offender submits the written
evidence to the court within 90 days of the violation of division (a) of this
section. However, successful completion of the course does not result in a
dismissal of the charges for the violation, and the violation is a prior
offense under divisions (d)(1)B. and (d)(1)C. of this section if the offender
commits a subsequent violation or violations of division (a) of this section
within two years of the offense for which the course was completed. This
division does not apply with respect to any offender in the category of
offenders to whom division (d)(1)B., (d)(1)C., or (d)(1)D. of this section
applies.
      (3)   The court may impose any other penalty authorized under R.C. §§
2929.21 to 2929.28. However, the court shall not impose a fine or a suspension
not otherwise specified in division (d)(1) of this section. The court also
shall not impose a jail term or community residential sanction.
      (4)   Except as provided in division (d)(2) of this section, points shall
be assessed for a violation of division (a) of this section in accordance with
R.C. § 4510.036.
      (5)   The offense established under this section is a strict liability
offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this offense as a
strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.
   (e)   A prosecution for an offense in violation of this section does not
preclude a prosecution for an offense in violation of R.C. § 4511.204 based on
the same conduct. However, the two offenses are allied offenses of similar
import under R.C. § 2941.25.
   (f)   (1)   A law enforcement officer does not have probable cause and shall
not stop the operator of a motor vehicle for purposes of enforcing this section
unless the officer visually observes the operator using, holding, or physically
supporting with any part of the person’s body the electronic wireless
communications device.
      (2)   A law enforcement officer who stops the operator of a motor vehicle
for a violation of division (a) of this section shall inform the operator that
the operator may decline a search of the operator’s electronic wireless
communications device. The officer shall not do any of the following:
         A.   Access the device without a warrant, unless the operator
voluntarily and unequivocally gives consent for the officer to access the
device;
         B.   Confiscate the device while awaiting the issuance of a warrant to
access the device;
         C.   Obtain consent from the operator to access the device through
coercion or any other improper means. Any consent by the operator to access the
device shall be voluntary and unequivocal before the officer may access the
device without a warrant.
   (g)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Electronic wireless communications device.”
         A.   Includes any of the following:
            1.   A wireless telephone;
            2.   A text-messaging device;
            3.   A personal digital assistant;
            4.   A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet;
            5.   Any device capable of displaying a video, movie, broadcast
television image, or visual image;
            6.   Any other substantially similar wireless device that is
designed or used to communicate text, initiate or receive communication, or
exchange information or data.
         B.   An “electronic wireless communications device” does not include a
two- way radio transmitter or receiver used by a person who is licensed by the
federal communications commission to participate in the amateur radio service.
      (2)   “Utility.” An entity specified in R.C. § 4905.03(A), (C), (D), (E),
or (G).
      (3)   “Utility service vehicle.” A vehicle owned or operated by a
utility.
      (4)   “Voice-operated or hands-free feature or function.” A feature or
function that allows a person to use an electronic wireless communications
device without the use of either hand, except to activate, deactivate, or
initiate the feature or function with a single touch or single swipe.
(R.C. § 4511.204)
Statutory reference:
   No preemption for local regulations imposing greater penalties, see R.C. §
4511.204(E)
§ 432.46 USE OF ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATION DEVICES BY MINORS OR
PROBATIONARY DRIVERS WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit who has not attained the
age of 18 years and no holder of a probationary driver’s license shall drive a
motor vehicle on any street, highway or property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic or parking while using in any manner an
electronic wireless communications device.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to either of the
following:
      (1)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device for
emergency purposes, including an emergency contact with a law enforcement
agency, hospital or health care provider, fire department or other similar
emergency agency or entity;
      (2)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device whose
motor vehicle is in a stationary position and the motor vehicle is outside a
lane of travel; or
      (3)   A person using a navigation device in a voice-operated or hands-
free manner who does not manipulate the device while driving.
   (c)   (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(2) of this section, whoever
violates division (a) of this section shall be fined $150. In addition, the
court shall impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license
or permit for a definite period of 60 days.
      (2)   If the person previously has been adjudicated a delinquent child or
a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of this section, whoever violates
this section shall be fined $300. In addition, the court shall impose a class
seven suspension of the person’s driver’s license or permit for a definite
period of one year.
   (d)   The filing of a sworn complaint against a person for a violation of
this section does not preclude the filing of a sworn complaint for a violation
of R.C. § 4511.205 for the same conduct. However, if a person is adjudicated a
delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of this section
and is also adjudicated a delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a
violation of R.C. § 4511.205 for the same conduct, the two offenses are allied
offenses of similar import under R.C. § 2941.25.
   (e)   As used in this section, ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE
includes any of the following:
      (1)   A wireless telephone;
      (2)   A personal digital assistant;
      (3)   A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet;
      (4)   A text-messaging device; or
      (5)   Any other substantially similar electronic wireless device that is
designed or used to communicate via voice, image or written word.
(R.C. § 4511.205)
§ 432.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and 408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.
CHAPTER 434: O.V.I.; RECKLESS OPERATION; SPEED
Section
   
434.01   Driving or physical control of vehicle while under the influence of
alcohol or drugs
   
434.011   Immobilizing or disabling device violation
   
434.02   Reckless operation on streets, public or private property
   
434.025   Reasonable control
   
434.03   Maximum speed limits; assured clear distance ahead
   
434.035   Speed limits on private roads and driveways
   
434.04   Slow speed; posted minimum speeds
   
434.05   Speed limitations over bridges
   
434.06   Speed exceptions for emergency or safety vehicles
   
434.07   Street racing, stunt driving and street takeovers prohibited
   
434.08   Vehicular homicide; vehicular manslaughter; vehicular assault
   
434.09   Operation restricted for mini-trucks and low-speed, under-speed, or
utility vehicles
   
434.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Alcohol defined, see R.C. § 4301.01
   Alteration of prima facie speed limits, see R.C. §§ 4511.21, 4511.22,
4511.23
   Criminal offenses by drivers of commercial vehicles, see §§
442.05,
442.08
   Driving upon sidewalks, tree lawns or curbs, see §
432.22
   Drug of abuse defined, see R.C. § 3719.011
   Intoxicated pedestrians, see §
416.10
   Liquor consumption in motor vehicle, see §
612.04
   “Peeling,” see §
432.35
   Weaving; full time and attention, see §
432.38
§ 434.01 DRIVING OR PHYSICAL CONTROL OF VEHICLE WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF
ALCOHOL OR DRUGS.
   (a)   Driving under the influence.
      (1)   No person shall operate any vehicle within this municipality, if,
at the time of the operation, any of the following apply:
         A.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
a combination of them;
         B.   The person has a concentration of 0.08% or more but less than
0.17% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood;
         C.   The person has a concentration of 0.096% or more but less than
0.204% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or
plasma;
         D.   The person has a concentration of 0.08 grams or more but less
than 0.17 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath;
         E.   The person has a concentration of 0.11 grams or more but less
than 0.238 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s
urine;
         F.   The person has a concentration of 0.17% or more by weight per
unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood;
         G.   The person has a concentration of 0.204% or more by weight per
unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or plasma;
         H   The person has a concentration of 0.17 grams or more by weight of
alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath;
         I.   The person has a concentration of 0.238 grams or more by weight
of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine; and
         J.   Except as provided in division (l) of this section, the person
has a concentration of any of the following controlled substances or
metabolites of a controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum
or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds any of the following:
            1.   The person has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s
urine of at least 500 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter
of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma;
            2.   The person has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s
urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s urine
or has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma of at least 50 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma;
            3.   The person has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine metabolite per milliliter
of the person’s urine or has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of
cocaine metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma;
            4.   The person has a concentration of heroin in the person’s urine
of at least 2,000 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s urine or
has a concentration of heroin in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma of at least 50 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma;
            5.   The person has a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-
monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s urine of at least ten nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s urine or has
a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s whole blood
or blood serum or plasma;
            6.   The person has a concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s urine
of at least 25 nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s urine or a
concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of
at least ten nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma;
            7.   The person has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s
urine of at least ten nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma of at least two nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma;
            8.   Either of the following applies:
               a.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or a combination of them, and the person has a concentration of
marihuana metabolite in the person’s urine of at least 15 nanograms of
marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a
concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma of at least five nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma; or
               b.   The person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in
the person’s urine of at least 35 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite
in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms
of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma.
            9.   The person has a concentration of methamphetamine in the
person’s urine of at least 500 nanograms of methamphetamine per milliliter of
the person’s urine or has a concentration of methamphetamine in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of
methamphetamine per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma;
            10.   The person has a concentration of phencyclidine in the
person’s urine of at least 25 nanograms of phencyclidine per milliliter of the
person’s urine or has a concentration of phencyclidine in the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of phencyclidine per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma; and
            11.   The State Board of Pharmacy has adopted a rule pursuant to
R.C. § 4729.041 that specifies the amount of salvia divinorum and the amount of
salvinorin A that constitute concentrations of salvia divinorum and salvinorin
A in a person’s urine, in a person’s whole blood, or in a person’s blood serum
or plasma at or above which the person is impaired for purposes of operating
any vehicle within this state, the rule is in effect, and the person has a
concentration of salvia divinorum or salvinorin A of at least that amount so
specified by rule in the person’s urine, in the person’s whole blood, or in the
person’s blood serum or plasma.
      (2)   No person who, within 20 years of the conduct described in division
(a)(2)A. of this section, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
a violation of this division or a substantially equivalent State law or
municipal ordinance, division (a)(1) of this section or a substantially
equivalent State law or municipal ordinance, or shall do both of the following:
         A.   Operate any vehicle within this municipality while under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them; and
         B.   Subsequent to being arrested for operating the vehicle as
described in division (a)(2)A. of this section, being asked by a law
enforcement officer to submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and being advised by the
officer in accordance with R.C. § 4511.192 or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance of the consequences of the person’s refusal or submission
to the test or tests, refuse to submit to the test or tests.
   (b)   Underage alcohol consumption. No person under 21 years of age shall
operate any vehicle within this municipality if, at the time of the operation,
any of the following apply:
      (1)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02% but less than
0.08% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood;
      (2)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.03% but less than
0.096% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or
plasma;
      (3)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02 grams but less than
0.08 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath; and
      (4)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.028 grams but less
than 0.11 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine.
   (c)   Prosecution; limitation on convictions. In any proceeding arising out
of one incident, a person may be charged with a violation of division (a)(1)A.
or (a)(2) and a violation of division (b)(1), (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section,
but the person may not be convicted of more than one violation of these
divisions.
   (d)   Evidence; tests.
      (1)   A.   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (a)(1)A. of this section or for an equivalent offense
that is vehicle-related, the result of any test of any blood or urine withdrawn
and analyzed at any health care provider, as defined in R.C. § 2317.02, may be
admitted with expert testimony to be considered with any other relevant and
competent evidence in determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant.
         B.   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of division (a) or
(b) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, the
court may admit evidence on the concentration of alcohol, drugs of abuse,
controlled substances, metabolites of a controlled substance or a combination
of them in the defendant’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine or
other bodily substance at the time of the alleged violation as shown by
chemical analysis of the substance withdrawn within three hours of the time of
the alleged violation. The three-hour time limit specified in this division (d)
(1)B. regarding the admission of evidence does not extend or affect the two-
hour time limit specified in R.C. § 4511.192(A) as the maximum period of time
during which a person may consent to a chemical test or tests as described in
that section. The court may admit evidence on the concentration of alcohol,
drugs of abuse, or a combination of them as described in this division (d)(1)
B. when a person submits to a blood test at the request of a law enforcement
officer under R.C. § 4511.191 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, or a blood or urine sample is obtained pursuant to a search warrant.
Only a physician, a registered nurse, an emergency medical technician-
intermediate, an emergency medical technician-paramedic, or a qualified
technician, chemist or phlebotomist shall withdraw a blood sample for the
purpose of determining the alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a
controlled substance, or combination content of the whole blood, blood serum or
blood plasma. This limitation does not apply to the taking of breath or urine
specimens. A person authorized to withdraw blood under this division (d)(1)B.
may refuse to withdraw blood under this division (d)(1)B., if in that person’s
opinion, the physical welfare of the person would be endangered by the
withdrawing of blood. The bodily substance withdrawn under this division (d)
(1)B. shall be analyzed in accordance with methods approved by the Director of
Health by an individual possessing a valid permit issued by the Director
pursuant to R.C. § 3701.143.
         C.   As used in division (d)(1)B. of this section, EMERGENCY MEDICAL
TECHNICIAN-INTERMEDIATE and EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-PARAMEDIC have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 4765.01.
      (2)   In a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (a) of this
section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, if there was at
the time the bodily substance was withdrawn a concentration of less than the
applicable concentration of alcohol specified in divisions (a)(1)B., (a)(1)C.,
(a)(1)D. and (a)(1)E. of this section or less than the applicable concentration
of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled
substance specified for a violation of division (a)(1)J. of this section, that
fact may be considered with other competent evidence in determining the guilt
or innocence of the defendant. This division (d)(2) does not limit or affect a
criminal prosecution for a violation of division (b) of this section.
      (3)   Upon the request of the person who was tested, the results of the
chemical test shall be made available to the person or the person’s attorney,
immediately upon the completion of the chemical test analysis. If the chemical
test was obtained pursuant to division (d)(1)B. of this section, the person
tested may have a physician, a registered nurse or a qualified technician,
chemist or phlebotomist of the person’s own choosing administer a chemical test
or tests, at the person’s expense, in addition to any administered at the
request of a law enforcement officer. If the person was under arrest as
described in R.C. § 4511.191(A)(5), the arresting officer shall advise the
person at the time of the arrest that the person may have an independent
chemical test taken at the person’s own expense. If the person was under arrest
other than described in R.C. § 4511.191(A)(5), the form to be read to the
person to be tested, as required under division (g) of this section, shall
state that the person may have an independent test performed at the person’s
expense. The failure or inability to obtain an additional chemical test by a
person shall not preclude the admission of evidence relating to the chemical
test or tests taken at the request of a law enforcement officer.
      (4)   A.   As used in division (d)(4)B. and (d)(4)C. of this section,
NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY ADMINISTRATION means the National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration established as an administration of the United
States Department of Transportation under 96 Stat. 2415 (1983), 49 U.S.C. §
105.
         B.   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (a) or (b) of this section, of a municipal ordinance
relating to operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or alcohol and a drug of abuse, or of a municipal ordinance relating to
operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath or urine, if a law enforcement officer has administered
a field sobriety test to the operator of the vehicle involved in the violation
and if it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the officer
administered the test in substantial compliance with the testing standards for
any reliable, credible and generally accepted field sobriety tests that were in
effect at the time the tests were administered, including but not limited to
any testing standards then in effect that were set by the National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration, all of the following apply:
            1.   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered;
            2.   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field
sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding; and
            3.   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
division (d)(4)B.1. or (d)(4)B.2. of this section and if the testimony or
evidence is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the
testimony or evidence and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the
trier of fact considers to be appropriate.
         C.   Division (d)(4)B. of this section does not limit or preclude a
court, in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by
probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division,
from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by
division (d)(4)B. of this section.
   (e)   Laboratory report.
      (1)   Subject to division (e)(3) of this section, in any criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of division (a)(1)B.,
(a)(1)C., (a)(1)D., (a)(1)E., (a)(1)F., (a)(1)G., (a)(1)H., (a)(1)I. or (a)
(1)J. or (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3) or (b)(4) of this section or for an equivalent
offense that is substantially equivalent to any of those divisions, a
laboratory report from any laboratory personnel issued a permit by the
Department of Health authorizing an analysis as described in this division (e)
(1) that contains an analysis of the whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, urine or other bodily substance tested and that contains all of the
information specified in this division (e)(1) shall be admitted as prima facie
evidence of the information and statements that the report contains. The
laboratory report shall contain all of the following:
         A.   The signature, under oath, of any person who performed the
analysis;
         B.   Any findings as to the identity and quantity of alcohol, a drug
of abuse, a controlled substance, a metabolite of a controlled substance, or a
combination of them that was found;
         C.   A copy of a notarized statement by the laboratory director or a
designee of the director that contains the name of each certified analyst or
test performer involved with the report, the analyst’s or test performer’s
employment relationship with the laboratory that issued the report, and a
notation that performing an analysis of the type involved is part of the
analyst’s or test performer’s regular duties; and
         D.   An outline of the analyst’s or test performer’s education,
training and experience in performing the type of analysis involved and a
certification that the laboratory satisfies appropriate quality control
standards in general and, in this particular analysis, under rules of the
Department of Health.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding the admission
of evidence, a report of the type described in division (e)(1) of this section
is not admissible against the defendant to whom it pertains in any proceeding,
other than a preliminary hearing or a grand jury proceeding, unless the
prosecutor has served a copy of the report on the defendant’s attorney or, if
the defendant has no attorney, on the defendant.
      (3)   A report of the type described in division (e)(1) of this section
shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents, identity or amount of any
substance if, within seven days after the defendant to whom the report pertains
or the defendant’s attorney receives a copy of the report, the defendant or the
defendant’s attorney demands the testimony of the person who signed the report.
The judge in the case may extend the seven-day time limit in the interest of
justice.
   (f)   Limitation of liability.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (f)(1), any
physician, registered nurse, emergency medical technician-intermediate,
emergency medical technician-paramedic, or qualified technician, chemist or
phlebotomist who withdraws blood from a person pursuant to this section or R.C.
§ 4511.19, 4511.191 or 4511.192, and any hospital, first-aid station or clinic
at which blood is withdrawn from a person pursuant to this section or R.C. §
4511.19, 4511.191 or 4511.192, is immune from criminal liability and civil
liability based upon a claim of assault and battery or any other claim that is
not a claim of malpractice, for any act performed in withdrawing blood from the
person. The immunity provided in this division (f)(1) also extends to an
emergency medical service organization that employs an emergency medical
technician-intermediate or emergency medical technician-paramedic who withdraws
blood under this section. The immunity provided in this division (f)(1) is not
available to a person who withdraws blood if the person engages in willful or
wanton misconduct.
      (2)   As used in division (f)(1), EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-
INTERMEDIATE and EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-PARAMEDIC have the same meanings
as in R.C. § 4765.01.
(R.C. § 4511.19(A) - (F))
   (g)   Implied consent.
      (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this division (g), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         A.   ALCOHOL MONITORING DEVICE. Any device that provides for
continuous alcohol monitoring, any ignition interlock device, any immobilizing
or disabling device other than an ignition interlock device that is constantly
available to monitor the concentration of alcohol in a person’s system, or any
other device that provides for the automatic testing and periodic reporting of
alcohol consumption by a person and that a court orders a person to use as a
sanction imposed as a result of the person’s conviction of or plea of guilty to
an offense.
         B.   COMMUNITY ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 5119.01.
         C.   PHYSICAL CONTROL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.194.
      (2)   Implied consent to chemical tests. Any person who operates a
vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for
vehicular travel or parking within this municipality or who is in physical
control of a vehicle shall be deemed to have given consent to a chemical test
or tests of the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine to
determine the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a
controlled substance, or combination content of the person’s whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath or urine if arrested for a violation of division (a),
(b) or (o) of this section, R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), 4511.194 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or any other municipal O.V.I.
ordinance.
      (3)   Tests at request of law enforcement agent. The chemical test or
tests under division (g)(2) of this section shall be administered at the
request of a law enforcement officer having reasonable grounds to believe the
person was operating or in physical control of a vehicle in violation of a
division, section or ordinance identified in division (g)(2) of this section.
The law enforcement agency by which the officer is employed shall designate
which of the tests shall be administered.
      (4)   Effect of death or unconsciousness. Any person who is dead or
unconscious, or who otherwise is in a condition rendering the person incapable
of refusal, shall be deemed to have consented as provided in division (g)(2) of
this section and the test or tests may be administered, subject to R.C. §§
313.12 to 313.16.
      (5)   Chemical tests.
         A.   If a law enforcement officer arrests a person for a violation of
R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, or a municipal O.V.I. ordinance and if the person if convicted would
be required to be sentenced under R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(c), (G)(1)(d) or (G)(1)
(e), the law enforcement officer shall request the person to submit, and the
person shall submit, to a chemical test or tests of the person’s whole blood,
blood serum or plasma, breath or urine for the purpose of determining the
alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled
substance, or combination content of the person’s whole blood, blood serum or
plasma, breath or urine. A law enforcement officer who makes a request pursuant
to this division (g)(5)A. that a person submit to a chemical test or tests is
not required to advise the person of the consequences of submitting to, or
refusing to submit to, the test or tests and is not required to give the person
the form described in division (g)(7) of this section, but the officer shall
advise the person at the time of the arrest that if the person refuses to take
a chemical test the officer may employ whatever reasonable means are necessary
to ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma. The officer shall also advise the person at the
time of the arrest that the person may have an independent chemical test taken
at the person’s own expense. Divisions (g)(3) and (g)(4) of this section apply
to the administration of a chemical test or tests pursuant to this division (g)
(5)A..
         B.   If a person refuses to submit to a chemical test upon a request
made pursuant to division (g)(5)A. of this section, the law enforcement officer
who made the request may employ whatever reasonable means are necessary to
ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the person’s whole blood
or blood serum or plasma. A law enforcement officer who acts pursuant to this
division (g)(5)B. to ensure that a person submits to a chemical test of the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma is immune from criminal and civil
liability based upon a claim for assault and battery or any other claim for the
acts, unless the officer so acted with malicious purpose, in bad faith, or in a
wanton or reckless manner.
(R.C. § 4511.191(A))
      (6)   Advice required. Except as provided in division (g)(5) of this
section, the arresting law enforcement officer shall give advice in accordance
with this division (g)(6) to any person under arrest for a violation of
division (a), (b) or (o) of this section, R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), 4511.194 or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or any other municipal O.V.I.
ordinance. The officer shall give that advice in a written form that contains
the information described in division (g)(7) of this section and shall read the
advice to the person. The form shall contain a statement that the form was
shown to the person under arrest and read to the person by the arresting
officer. One or more persons shall witness the arresting officer’s reading of
the form, and the witnesses shall certify to this fact by signing the form. The
person must submit to the chemical test or tests, subsequent to the request of
the arresting officer, within two hours of the time of the alleged violation
and, if the person does not submit to the test or tests within that two-hour
time limit, the failure to submit automatically constitutes a refusal to submit
to the test or tests.
      (7)   Certification of arrest. Except as provided in division (g)(5) of
this section, if a person is under arrest as described in division (g)(6) of
this section, before the person may be requested to submit to a chemical test
or tests to determine the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance,
metabolite of a controlled substance or combination content of the person’s
whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine, the arresting officer
shall read the following form to the person:
"You now are under arrest for (specifically state the offense under state law
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for which the person was
arrested – operating a vehicle under the influence of alcohol, a drug, or a
combination of them; operating a vehicle while under the influence of a listed
controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance;
operating a vehicle after underage alcohol consumption; or having physical
control of a vehicle while under the influence).
“If you refuse to take any chemical test required by law, your Ohio driving
privileges will be suspended immediately, and you will have to pay a fee to
have the privileges reinstated. If you have a prior conviction of O.V.I. or
operating a vehicle while under the influence of a listed controlled substance
or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance under state or municipal law
within the preceding 20 years, you are now under arrest for state O.V.I., and,
if you refuse to take a chemical test, you will face increased penalties if you
subsequently are convicted of the state O.V.I.
(Read this part unless the person is under arrest for solely having physical
control of a vehicle while under the influence.) “If you take any chemical test
required by law and are found to be at or over the prohibited amount of
alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
your whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine as set by law, your
Ohio driving privileges will be suspended immediately, and you will have to pay
a fee to have the privileges reinstated.
         “If you take a chemical test, you may have an independent chemical
test taken at your own expense.”
      (8)   Actions required by arresting officer. If the arresting law
enforcement officer does not ask a person under arrest as described in division
(g)(5) of this section or division (g)(6) of this section to submit to a
chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191 or this section, the arresting
officer shall seize the Ohio or out-of-state driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit of the person and immediately forward it to the court in
which the arrested person is to appear on the charge. If the arrested person is
not in possession of the person’s license or permit or it is not in the
person’s vehicle, the officer shall order the person to surrender it to the law
enforcement agency that employs the officer within 24 hours after the arrest,
and, upon the surrender, the agency immediately shall forward the license or
permit to the court in which the person is to appear on the charge. Upon
receipt of the license or permit, the court shall retain it pending the
arrested person’s initial appearance and any action taken under R.C. §
4511.196.
      (9)   Duties of officer.
         A.   If a law enforcement officer asks a person under arrest as
described in division (g)(5) of this section to submit to a chemical test or
tests under that division and the test results indicate a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath
or urine at the time of the alleged offense, or if a law enforcement officer
asks a person under arrest as described in division (g)(6) of this section to
submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191 or this section, if
the officer advises the person in accordance with this section of the
consequences of the person’s refusal or submission, and if either the person
refuses to submit to the test or tests or, unless the arrest was for a
violation of division (o) of this section, R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the person submits to the test or tests and the
test results indicate a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine at the time of the alleged
offense, the arresting officer shall do all of the following:
            1.   On behalf of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, notify the
person that, independent of any penalties or sanctions imposed upon the person,
the person’s Ohio driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege is suspended immediately, that the suspension
will last at least until the person’s initial appearance on the charge, which
will be held within five days after the date of the person’s arrest or the
issuance of a citation to the person, and that the person may appeal the
suspension at the initial appearance or during the period of time ending 30
days after that initial appearance;
            2.   Seize the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit of
the person and immediately forward it to the Registrar. If the arrested person
is not in possession of the person’s license or permit or it is not in the
person’s vehicle, the officer shall order the person to surrender it to the law
enforcement agency that employs the officer within 24 hours after the person is
given notice of the suspension, and, upon the surrender, the officer’s
employing agency immediately shall forward the license or permit to the
Registrar;
            3.   Verify the person’s current residence and, if it differs from
that on the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit, notify
the Registrar of the change; and
            4.   Send to the Registrar, within 48 hours after the arrest of the
person, a sworn report that includes all of the following statements:
               a.   That the officer had reasonable grounds to believe that, at
the time of the arrest, the arrested person was operating a vehicle in
violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B) or a municipal O.V.I. ordinance or for
being in physical control of a stationary vehicle in violation of R.C. §
4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
               b.   That the person was arrested and charged with a violation
of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, or a municipal O.V.I. ordinance;
               c.   Unless division (g)(9)A.4.e. of this section applies, that
the officer asked the person to take the designated chemical test or tests,
advised the person in accordance with this section of the consequences of
submitting to, or refusing to take, the test or tests, and gave the person the
form described in division (g)(7) of this section;
               d.   Unless division (g)(9)A.4.e. of this section applies, that
either the person refused to submit to the chemical test or tests or, unless
the arrest was for a violation of R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the person submitted to the chemical test or tests and the
test results indicate a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine at the time of the alleged
offense; and
               e.   If the person was under arrest as described in division (g)
(5) of this section and the chemical test or tests were performed in accordance
with that division, that the person was under arrest as described in that
division, that the chemical test or tests were performed in accordance with
that division, and that test results indicated a prohibited concentration of
alcohol, a controlled substance or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine at the time of
the alleged offense.
         B.   Division (g)(9)A. of this section does not apply to a person who
is arrested for a violation of division (o) of this section, R.C. § 4511.194 or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or any other substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, who is asked by a law enforcement officer to
submit to a chemical test or tests under this section, and who submits to the
test or tests, regardless of the amount of alcohol, a controlled substance or a
metabolite of a controlled substance that the test results indicate is present
in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine.
      (10)   Sworn report of arresting officer.
         A.   The arresting officer shall give the officer’s sworn report that
is completed under this section to the arrested person at the time of the
arrest, or the Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall send the report to the person
by regular first-class mail as soon as possible after receipt of the report,
but not later than 14 days after receipt of it. An arresting officer may give
an unsworn report to the arrested person at the time of the arrest, provided
the report is complete when given to the arrested person and subsequently is
sworn to by the arresting officer. As soon as possible, but not later than 48
hours after the arrest of the person, the arresting officer shall send a copy
of the sworn report to the court in which the arrested person is to appear on
the charge for which the person was arrested.
         B.   The sworn report of an arresting officer completed under this
section is prima facie proof of the information and statements that it
contains. It shall be admitted and considered as prima facie proof of the
information and statements that it contains in any appeal under R.C. § 4511.197
relative to any suspension of a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit or nonresident operating privilege that results from the
arrest covered by the report.
(R.C. § 4511.192)
      (11)   Suspension effective immediately. A suspension of a person’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege under this section for the time described in R.C. § 4511.191(B) or
(C) is effective immediately from the time at which the arresting officer
serves the notice of suspension upon the arrested person. Any subsequent
finding that the person is not guilty of the charge that resulted in the
person’s being requested to take the chemical test or tests under division (g)
(1) through (g)(5) of this section does not affect the suspension.
      (12)   Initial appearance. If a person arrested for operating a vehicle
in violation of division (a) or (b) of this section, R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B),
or any other municipal O.V.I. ordinance, or for being in physical control of a
vehicle in violation of division (o) of this section or R.C. § 4511.194 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, regardless of whether the
person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege is or is not suspended under R.C. § 4511.191(B) or (C) or
R.C. Chapter 4510, the person’s initial appearance on the charge resulting from
the arrest shall be held within five days of the person’s arrest or the
issuance of the citation to him or her, subject to any continuance granted by
the court pursuant to R.C. § 4511.197 regarding the issues specified in that
section.
(R.C. § 4511.191(D))
   (h)   Penalty for driving under the influence.
      (1)   Whoever violates any provisions of divisions (a)(1)A. through (a)
(1)I. or (a)(2) of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them. Whoever
violates division (a)(1)J. of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle
while under the influence of a listed controlled substance or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance. The court shall sentence the offender for
either offense under R.C. Chapter 2929, except as otherwise authorized or
required by divisions (h)(1)A. through (h)(1)E. of this section.
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (h)(1)B., (h)(1)C., (h)
(1)D. or (h)(1)E. of this section, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree and the court shall sentence the offender to all of the
penalties and sanctions provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(a)(i) to (G)(1)(a)
(iv).
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in division (h)(1)E. of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of division (a) of this
section, or one other equivalent offense is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties and
sanctions provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) to (G)(1)(b)(v).
         C.   Except as otherwise provided in division (h)(1)E. of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of division (a) of this
section or other equivalent offenses is guilty of a misdemeanor. The court
shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties and sanctions provided in
R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(c)(i) to (G)(1)(c)(vi).
         D.   Except as otherwise provided in division (h)(1)E. of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of division (a) of
this section or other equivalent offenses or an offender who, within 20 years
of the offense, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to five or
more violations of that nature, or an offender who previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a specification of the type described in R.C.
§ 2941.1413, is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
         E.   An offender who previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) that was a felony, regardless of
when the violation and the conviction or guilty plea occurred, is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   An offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (a) of this section and who subsequently seeks reinstatement of the
driver’s or occupational driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege suspended under this section or R.C. § 4511.19 as a result of the
conviction or guilty plea shall pay a reinstatement fee as provided in R.C. §
4511.191(F)(2).
      (3)   A.   If an offender is sentenced to a jail term under R.C. §
4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) or (G)(1)(b)(ii) or (G)(1)(c)(i) or (G)(1)(c)(ii) and if,
within 60 days of sentencing of the offender, the court issues a written
finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail
where the offender is required to serve the term, the offender will not be able
to begin serving that term within the 60-day period following the date of
sentencing, the court may impose an alternative sentence as specified in R.C. §
4511.19(G)(3) that includes a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring,
with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and
continuous alcohol monitoring.
         B.   As an alternative to the mandatory jail terms as required by R.C.
§ 4511.19(G)(1), the court may sentence the offender as provided in R.C. §
4511.19(G)(3).
      (4)   If an offender’s driver’s or occupational driver’s license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended under division (h) of
this section or R.C. § 4511.19(G) and if R.C. § 4510.13 permits the court to
grant limited driving privileges, the court may grant the limited driving
privileges in accordance with that section. If division (A)(7) of that section
requires the court impose as a condition of the privileges that the offender
must display on the vehicle that is driven subject to the privileges restricted
license plates that are issued under R.C. § 4503.231, except as provided in
division (B) of that section, the court shall impose that condition as one of
the conditions of the limited driving privileges granted to the offender,
except as provided in R.C. § 4503.231(B).
      (5)   Fines imposed under this section for a violation of division (a) of
this section shall be distributed as provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(5).
      (6)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order of criminal
forfeiture under division (h)(1)C., (h)(1)D. or (h)(1)E. of this section is
assigned or transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in
addition to or independent of any other penalty established by law, the court
may fine the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of
the National Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds of any fine so
imposed shall be distributed in accordance with division (C)(2) of that
section.
      (7)   In all cases in which an offender is sentenced under division (h)
of this section, the offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, the court, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, may order restitution pursuant to §
698.02(f) or R.C. § 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for
any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and
proximate result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or
after committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under division
(h) of this section.
      (8)   A court may order an offender to reimburse a law enforcement agency
for any costs incurred by the agency with respect to a chemical test or tests
administered to the offender if all of the following apply:
         A.   The offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (a) of this section.
         B.   The test or tests were of the offender's whole blood, blood serum
or plasma, or urine.
         C.   The test or tests indicated that the offender had a prohibited
concentration of a controlled substance or a metabolite of a controlled
substance in the offender's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine at the
time of the offense.
      (9)   As used in division (h) of this section, ELECTRONIC MONITORING has
the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   (i)   Penalty for operating a vehicle after underage alcohol consumption.
Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of operating a motor
vehicle after underage alcohol consumption and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (i)(2) of this section,
the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. In addition to
any other sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class six
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident operating
privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6). The court may grant
limited driving privileges relative to the suspension under R.C. §§ 4510.021
and 4510.13. The court may grant unlimited driving privileges with an ignition
interlock device relative to the suspension and may reduce the period of
suspension as authorized under R.C. § 4510.022. If the court grants unlimited
driving privileges under R.C. § 4510.022, the court shall suspend any jail term
imposed under division (i)(1) of this section as required under that section;
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of division (a)
of this section or other equivalent offense or offenses, the offender is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the third degree. In addition to any other sanction imposed
for the offense, the court shall impose a class four suspension of the
offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4). The court may grant limited driving
privileges relative to the suspension under R.C. §§ 4510.021 and 4510.13.
      (3)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
698.02(f) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender's operation of the vehicle before, during, or after
committing the violation of division (b) of this section.
   (j)   Treatment programs.
      (1)   No court shall sentence an offender to an alcohol treatment program
under this section unless the treatment program complies with the minimum
standards for alcohol treatment programs adopted under R.C. 5119 by the
Director of Mental Health and Addiction Services.
      (2)   An offender who stays in a drivers’ intervention program or in an
alcohol treatment program under an order issued under this section shall pay
the cost of the stay in the program. However, if the court determines that an
offender who stays in an alcohol treatment program under an order issued under
this section is unable to pay the cost of the stay in the program, the court
may order that the cost be paid from the court’s Indigent Drivers’ Alcohol
Treatment Fund.
   (k)   Appeal; effect on suspension. If a person whose driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended
under this section or R.C. § 4511.19 files an appeal regarding any aspect of
the person’s trial or sentence, the appeal itself does not stay the operation
of the suspension.
   (l)   Exception; direction of health professional. Division (a)(1)J. of this
section does not apply to a person who operates a vehicle while the person has
a concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma or
urine that equals or exceeds the amount specified in that division, if both of
the following apply:
      (1)   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs; and
      (2)   The person injected, ingested or inhaled the controlled substance
in accordance with the health professional’s directions.
   (m)   Applicability to R.C. § 2923.16(D). The prohibited concentrations of a
controlled substance or a metabolite of a controlled substance listed in
division (a)(1)J. of this section also apply in a prosecution of a violation of
R.C. § 2923.16(D) in the same manner as if the offender is being prosecuted for
a prohibited concentration of alcohol.
   (n)   Applicability of terms. All terms defined in R.C. § 4510.01 apply to
this section. If the meaning of a term defined in R.C. § 4510.01 conflicts with
the meaning of the same term as defined in R.C. § 4501.01 or 4511.01, the term
as defined in R.C. § 4510.01 applies to this section.
(R.C. § 4511.19(G) - (M))
   (o)   Physical control of vehicle while under the influence.
      (1)   Definition. As used in this division (o), PHYSICAL CONTROL means
being in the driver’s position of the front seat of a vehicle and having
possession of the vehicle’s ignition key or other ignition device.
      (2)   Generally. No person shall be in physical control of a vehicle if,
at the time of the physical control, any of the following apply:
         A.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse or
a combination of them;
         B.   The person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine
contains at least the concentration of alcohol specified in divisions (a)(1)B.,
(a)(1)C., (a)(1)D. or (a)(1)E. of this section; and
         C.   Except as provided in division (o)(5) of this section, the person
has a concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of
a controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma or
urine that equals or exceeds the concentration specified in division (a)(1)J.
of this section.
      (3)   Field sobriety test.
         A.   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of this section, if a law enforcement officer has administered a
field sobriety test to the person in physical control of the vehicle involved
in the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the
officer administered the test in substantial compliance with the testing
standards for any reliable, credible and generally acceptable field sobriety
tests that were in effect at the time the tests were administered, including
but not limited to any testing standards then in effect that were set by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, all of the following apply:
            1.   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered;
            2.   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field
sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding; and
            3.   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
division (o)(3)A.1. or (o)(3)A.2. of this section and if the testimony or
evidence is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the
testimony or evidence, and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the
trier of fact considers to be appropriate.
         B.   Division (o)(3)A. of this section does not limit or preclude a
court, in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by
probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division,
from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by
division (o)(3)A. of this section.
      (4)   Penalty. Whoever violates this division (o) is guilty of having
physical control of a vehicle while under the influence, a misdemeanor of the
first degree. In addition to other sanctions imposed, the court may impose on
the offender a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license
or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02
(A)(7).
      (5)   Exception. Division (o)(2)C. of this section does not apply to a
person who is in physical control of a vehicle while the person has a
concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma or
urine that equals or exceeds the amount specified in division (a)(1)J. of this
section if both of the following apply:
         A.   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs; and
         B.   The person injected, ingested or inhaled the controlled substance
in accordance with the health professional’s directions.
(R.C. § 4511.194)
   (p)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL SANCTION, CONTINUOUS ALCOHOL MONITORING,
JAIL, MANDATORY PRISON TERM, MANDATORY TERM OF LOCAL INCARCERATION, PRISON TERM
and SANCTION. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      (2)   DRUG OF ABUSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4506.01.
      (3)   EQUIVALENT OFFENSE. Any of the following:
         A.   A violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A);
         B.   A violation of a municipal O.V.I. ordinance;
         C.   A violation of R.C. § 2903.04 in a case in which the offender was
subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that section;
         D.   A violation of R.C. § 2903.06(A)(1) or 2903.08 or a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to either of those divisions;
         E.   A violation of R.C. § 2903.06(A)(2), (A)(3) or (A)(4), 2903.08(A)
(2) or former R.C. § 2903.07, or a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any of those divisions or that former section, in a case in which
a judge or jury as the trier of fact found that the offender was under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them;
         F.   A violation of R.C. § 1547.11(A);
         G.   A violation of a municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from
operating or being in physical control of any vessel underway or from
manipulating any water skis, aquaplane or similar device on the waters of this
state while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination
of them or prohibiting a person from operating or being in physical control of
any vessel underway or from manipulating any water skis, aquaplane or similar
device on the waters of this state with a prohibited concentration of alcohol,
a controlled substance or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine;
         H.   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
R.C. § 4511.19(A) or 1547.11(A);
         I.   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A) or 1547.11(A).
      (4)   EQUIVALENT OFFENSE THAT IS VEHICLE-RELATED. An equivalent offense
that is any of the following:
         A.   A violation described in division A., B., C., D. or E. of the
definition for EQUIVALENT OFFENSE provided in this division (p);
         B.   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
R.C. § 4511.19(A);
         C.   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A).
      (5)   MANDATORY JAIL TERM. The mandatory term in jail of three, six, ten,
20, 30 or 60 days that must be imposed under R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(a), (G)(1)(b)
or (G)(1)(c) upon an offender convicted of a violation of division (A) of that
section and in relation to which all of the following apply:
         A.   Except as specifically authorized under R.C. § 4511.19, the term
must be served in a jail; and
         B.   Except as specifically authorized under R.C. § 4511.19, the term
cannot be suspended, reduced or otherwise modified pursuant to R.C. §§ 2929.21
through 2929.28 or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (6)   MUNICIPAL O.V.I. ORDINANCE and MUNICIPAL O.V.I. OFFENSE. Any
municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle while under
the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them or
prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration
of alcohol, a controlled substance or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine.
(R.C. § 4511.181)
Statutory reference:
   Continuous alcohol monitoring, see R.C. § 4511.198
   Disposition of fines, immobilization of vehicle and impoundment of license
plates, criminal forfeiture for municipal ordinance conviction, see R.C. §
4511.193
   Effect of refusal to submit to test, seizure of license, suspension periods,
appeal procedures, occupational driving privileges, and Indigent Drivers’
Alcohol Treatment Funds, see R.C. § 4511.191
   Judicial pretrial suspension, initial appearance, see R.C. § 4511.196
   Mayor’s Court to suspend driver’s license, see R.C. § 1905.201
   Seizure of vehicles upon arrest, see R.C. § 4511.195
   Trial judge to suspend driver’s license, see R.C. § 4510.05
§ 434.011 IMMOBILIZING OR DISABLING DEVICE VIOLATION.
   (a)   (1)   No offender who has been granted limited or unlimited driving
privileges, during any period that the offender is required to operate only a
motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device, shall request
or permit any other person to breathe into the device if it is an ignition
interlock device or another type of device that monitors the concentration of
alcohol in a person’s breath or to otherwise start the motor vehicle equipped
with the device, for the purpose of providing the offender with an operable
motor vehicle.
      (2)   No person shall breathe into an immobilizing or disabling device
that is an ignition interlock device or another type of device that monitors
the concentration of alcohol in a person’s breath or otherwise start a motor
vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device, for the purpose of
providing an operable motor vehicle to another person who has been granted
limited or unlimited driving privileges under the condition that the person
operate only a motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device.
      (3)   No unauthorized person shall tamper with or circumvent the
operation of an immobilizing or disabling device.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an immobilizing or
disabling device violation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4510.44)
§ 434.02 RECKLESS OPERATION ON STREETS, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any street or highway in willful
or wanton disregard of the safety of persons or property.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any public or private
property other than streets or highways in willful or wanton disregard of the
safety of persons or property.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to the competitive
operation of vehicles on public or private property when the owner of the
property knowingly permits such operation thereon.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c), whoever violates
any provision of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates any
provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates any
provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. §§ 4511.20, 4511.201)
§ 434.025 REASONABLE CONTROL.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, agricultural tractor or
agricultural tractor that is towing, pulling or otherwise drawing a unit of
farm machinery on any street, highway or property open to the public for
vehicular traffic without being in reasonable control of the vehicle,
agricultural tractor or unit of farm machinery.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle
or agricultural tractor without being in control of it, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.202)
§ 434.03 MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS; ASSURED CLEAR DISTANCE AHEAD.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater or less
than is reasonable or proper, having due regard for the traffic, surface and
width of the street or highway and any other conditions, and no person shall
drive any motor vehicle in and upon any street or highway at a greater speed
than will permit him or her to bring it to a stop within the assured clear
distance ahead.
   (b)   It is prima facie lawful, in the absence of a lower limit declared or
established pursuant to this section by the Director of Transportation or local
authorities, for the operator of a motor vehicle to operate the same at a speed
not exceeding the following:
      (1)   A.   Twenty mph in school zones during school recess and while
children are going to or leaving school during the opening or closing hours,
and when 20 mph school speed limit signs are erected, except that on
controlled-access highways and expressways, if the right-of-way line fence has
been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be governed by
division (b)(4) of this section, and on freeways, if the right-of-way line
fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be governed
by divisions (b)(10) and (b)(11) of this section. The end of every school zone
may be marked by a sign indicating the end of the zone. Nothing in this section
or in the Manual and Specifications for a Uniform System of Traffic-Control
Devices shall be construed to require school zones to be indicated by signs
equipped with flashing or other lights, or giving other special notice of the
hours in which the school zone speed limit is in effect.
         B.   As used in this section, SCHOOL means all of the following:
            1.   Any school chartered under R.C. § 3301.16;
            2.   Any nonchartered school that during the preceding year filed
with the Ohio Department of Education and Workforce in compliance with O.A.C.
3301-35-08, a copy of the school's report for the parents of the school's
pupils certifying that the school meets state minimum standards for
nonchartered, nontax-supported schools and presents evidence of this filing to
the jurisdiction from which it is requesting the establishment of a school
zone;
            3.   Any special elementary school that in writing requests the
County Engineer to create a school zone at the location of the school. Upon
receipt of such written request, the County Engineer shall create a school zone
at that location by erecting appropriate signs;
            4.   Any preschool education program operated by an educational
service center that is located on a street or highway with a speed limit of 45
miles per hour or more, when the educational service center in writing requests
that the County Engineer create a school zone at the location of that program.
Upon receipt of such a written request, the County Engineer shall create a
school zone at that location by erecting the appropriate signs.
         C.   As used in this section, SCHOOL ZONE means that portion of a
street or highway passing a school fronting upon the street or highway that is
encompassed by projecting the school property lines to the fronting street or
highway, and also includes that portion of a state highway. Upon request from
local authorities for streets and highways under their jurisdiction and that
portion of a state highway under the jurisdiction of the Director of
Transportation or a request from a County Engineer in the case of a school zone
for a special elementary school, the Director may extend the traditional school
zone boundaries. The distances in divisions (b)(1)C.1. through (b)(1)C.3. below
shall not exceed 300 feet per approach per direction, and are bounded by
whichever of the following distances or combination thereof the Director
approves as most appropriate:
            1.   The distance encompassed by projecting the school building
lines normal to the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction;
            2.   The distance encompassed by projecting the school property
lines intersecting the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction; and
            3.   The distance encompassed by the special marking of the
pavement for a principal school pupil crosswalk plus a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction of the highway.
         D.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the
Director’s initial action on August 9, 1976, establishing all school zones at
the traditional school zone boundaries defined by projecting school property
lines, except when those boundaries are extended as provided in divisions (b)
(1)A. and (b)(1)C. of this section.
         E.   As used in this division (b)(1), CROSSWALK has the meaning given
that term in R.C. § 4511.01(LL)(2).
         F.   The Director may, upon request by resolution of the legislative
authority and upon submission by the municipality of such engineering, traffic
and other information as the Director considers necessary, designate a school
zone on any portion of a state route lying within the municipality that
includes a crosswalk customarily used by children going to or leaving a school
during recess and opening and closing hours, whenever the distance, as measured
in a straight line, from the school property line nearest the crosswalk to the
nearest point of a crosswalk is no more than 1,320 feet. Such a school zone
shall include the distance encompassed by the crosswalk and extending 300 feet
in each appropriate direction of the state route.
         G.   As used in this section, SPECIAL ELEMENTARY SCHOOL means a school
that meets all of the following:
            1.   It is not chartered and does not receive tax revenue from any
source;
            2.   It does not educate children beyond the eighth grade;
            3.   It is located outside the limits of a municipal corporation;
            4.   A majority of the total number of students enrolled at the
school are not related by blood; and
            5.   The principal or other person in charge of the special
elementary school annually sends a report to the superintendent of the school
district in which the special elementary school is located indicating the total
number of students enrolled at the school, but otherwise the principal or other
person in charge does not report any other information or data to the
superintendent.
      (2)   Twenty-five mph in all other portions of the municipality, except
on state routes outside business districts, through highways outside business
districts and alleys;
      (3)   Thirty-five mph on all state routes or through highways within the
municipality outside business districts, except as provided in divisions (b)(4)
and (b)(6) of this section;
      (4)   Fifty miles per hour on controlled-access highways and expressways
within the municipality, except as provided in divisions (b)(12), (b)(13), (b)
(14), (b)(15), and (b)(16) of this section;
      (5)   Fifty-five miles per hour on highways outside the municipality,
other than highways within island jurisdictions as provided in division (b)(8)
of this section, highways as provided in divisions (b)(9) and (b)(10) of this
section, and highways, expressways and freeways as provided in divisions (b)
(12), (b)(13), (b)(14), and (b)(16) of this section;
      (6)   Fifty miles per hour on state routes within the municipality
outside urban districts unless a lower prima facie speed is established as
further provided in this section;
      (7)   Fifteen miles per hour on all alleys within the municipality;
      (8)   Thirty-five miles per hour on highways outside the municipality
that are within an island jurisdiction;
      (9)   Thirty-five miles per hour on through highways, except state
routes, that are outside municipal corporations and that are within a national
park with boundaries extending through two or more counties;
      (10)   Sixty miles per hour on two-lane state routes outside municipal
corporations as established by the Director under R.C. § 4511.21(H)(2);
      (11)   Fifty-five miles per hour on freeways with paved shoulders inside
the municipality, other than freeways as provided in divisions (b)(14) and (b)
(16) of this section;
      (12)   Sixty miles per hour on rural expressways with traffic control
signals and on all portions of rural divided highways, except as provided in
divisions (b)(13) and (b)(14) of this section;
      (13)   Sixty-five miles per hour on all rural expressways without traffic
control signals;
      (14)   Seventy miles per hour on all rural freeways;
      (15)   Fifty-five miles per hour on all portions of freeways or
expressways in congested areas as determined by the Director and that are
located within a municipal corporation or within an interstate freeway
outerbelt, except as provided in division (b)(16) of this section;
      (16)   Sixty-five miles per hour on all portions of freeways or
expressways without traffic control signals in urbanized areas.
   (c)   It is prima facie unlawful for any person to exceed any of the speed
limitations in divisions (b)(1)A., (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7), (b)
(8) and (b)(9) of this section or any declared or established pursuant to this
section by the Director or local authorities and it is unlawful for any person
to exceed any of the speed limitations in division (d) of this section. No
person shall be convicted of more than one violation of this section for the
same conduct, although violations of more than one provision of this section
may be charged in the alternative in a single affidavit.
   (d)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon a street or highway as
follows:
      (1)   At a speed exceeding 55 miles per hour, except upon a two-lane
state route as provided in division (b)(10) of this section and upon a highway,
expressway or freeway as provided in divisions (b)(13), (b)(14), (b)(15) and
(b)(17) of this section;
      (2)   At a speed exceeding 60 miles per hour upon a two-lane state route
as provided in division (b)(10) of this section and upon a highway as provided
in division (b)(13) of this section;
      (3)   At a speed exceeding 65 miles per hour upon an expressway as
provided in division (b)(14) of this section or upon a freeway as provided in
division (b)(17) of this section, except upon a freeway as provided in division
(b)(15) of this section;
      (4)   At a speed exceeding 70 miles per hour upon a freeway as provided
in division (b)(15) of this section;
      (5)   At a speed exceeding the posted speed limit upon a highway,
expressway or freeway for which the Director has determined and declared a
speed limit pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(I)(2) or (L)(2).
   (e)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(E), in every charge of violating this
section, the affidavit and warrant shall specify the time, place and speed at
which the defendant is alleged to have driven, and in charges made in reliance
upon division (c) of this section also the speed which division (b)(1)A., (b)
(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7), (b)(8) or (b)(9) of, or a limit declared
or established pursuant to, this section or R.C. § 4511.21 declares is prima
facie lawful at the time and place of the alleged violation, except that in
affidavits where a person is alleged to have driven at a greater speed than
will permit the person to bring the vehicle to stop within the assured clear
distance ahead, the affidavit and warrant need not specify the speed at which
the defendant is alleged to have driven.
   (f)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(F), when a speed in excess of both a prima
facie limitation and a limitation in division (d) of this section is alleged,
the defendant shall be charged in a single affidavit, alleging a single act,
with a violation indicated of both division (b)(1)A., (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4),
(b)(6), (b)(7), (b)(8) or (b)(9) of this section, or of a limit declared or
established pursuant to this section or R.C. § 4511.21 by the Director or local
authorities, and of the limitation in division (d) of this section. If the
court finds a violation of division (b)(1)A., (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(6),
(b)(7), (b)(8) or (b)(9) of, or a limit declared or established pursuant to,
this section or R.C. § 4511.21 has occurred, it shall enter a judgment of
conviction under that division and dismiss the charge under division (d) of
this section. If it finds no violation of division (b)(1)A., (b)(2), (b)(3),
(b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7), (b)(8) or (b)(9) of, or a limit declared or established
pursuant to, this section or R.C. § 4511.21, it shall then consider whether the
evidence supports a conviction under division (d) of this section.
   (g)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(G), points shall be assessed for a
violation of a limitation under division (d) of this section in accordance with
R.C. § 4510.036.
(R.C. § 4511.21(A) - (G))
   (h)   Whenever, in accordance with R.C. § 4511.21(H) through (N), the
maximum prima facie speed limitations as established herein have been altered,
either higher or lower, and the appropriate signs giving notice have been
erected as required, operators of motor vehicles shall be governed by the speed
limitations set forth on those signs. It is prima facie unlawful for any person
to exceed the speed limits posted upon the signs.
   (i)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   COMMERCIAL BUS. A motor vehicle designed for carrying more than
nine passengers and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.
      (2)   DIVIDED. Means a roadway having two or more travel lanes for
vehicles moving in opposite directions and that is separated by a median of
more than four feet, excluding turn lanes.
      (3)   INTERSTATE SYSTEM. Has the same meaning as in 23 U.S.C. § 101.
      (4)   NONCOMMERCIAL BUS. Includes but is not limited to a school bus, or
a motor vehicle operated solely for the transportation of persons associated
with a charitable or nonprofit organization.
      (5)   OUTERBELT. A portion of a freeway that is part of the interstate
system and is located in the outer vicinity of a major municipal corporation or
group of municipal corporations, as designated by the Director.
      (6)   RURAL. Means an area outside urbanized areas and outside of a
business or urban district, and areas that extend within urbanized areas where
the roadway characteristics remain mostly unchanged from those outside the
urbanized areas.
      (7)   URBANIZED AREA. Has the same meaning as in 23 U.S.C. § 101.
(R.C. § 4511.21(O))
   (j)   Penalty.
      (1)   A violation of any provision of this section is one of the
following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (j)(1)B., (j)(1)C., (j)
(2) and (j)(3) of this section, a minor misdemeanor;
         B.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of any provision of this
section, R.C. § 4511.21, or any provision of any other municipal ordinance that
is substantially equivalent to any provision of that section, a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree; and
         C.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of any
provision of this section, R.C. § 4511.21, or any provision of any other
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any provision of that
section, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   If the offender operated a motor vehicle faster than 35 miles an
hour in a business district of the municipality, faster than 50 miles an hour
in other portions of the municipality, or faster than 35 miles an hour in a
school zone during recess or while children are going to or leaving school
during the school's opening or closing hours, a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. This division does not apply if penalties may be imposed under division
(j)(1)B. or (j)(1)C. of this section.
      (3)   Notwithstanding division (j)(1) of this section, if the offender
operated a motor vehicle in a construction zone where a sign was then posted in
accordance with R.C. § 4511.98, the court, in addition to all other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a fine of two times the usual
amount imposed for the violation. No court shall impose a fine of two times the
usual amount imposed for the violation upon an offender if the offender
alleges, in an affidavit filed with the court prior to the offender’s
sentencing, that the offender is indigent and is unable to pay the fine imposed
pursuant to this division (j)(3) and if the court determines that the offender
is an indigent person and unable to pay the fine.
      (4)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.21(P))
§ 434.035 SPEED LIMITS ON PRIVATE ROADS AND DRIVEWAYS.
   (a)   The owner of a private road or driveway located in a private
residential area containing 20 or more dwelling units may establish a speed
limit on the road or driveway by complying with all of the following
requirements:
      (1)   The speed limit is not less than 25 mph and is indicated by a sign
that is in a proper position, is sufficiently legible to be seen by an
ordinarily observant person, and meets the specifications for the basic speed
limit sign included in the Manual adopted by the Department of Transportation
pursuant to R.C. § 4511.09; and
      (2)   The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the private road or
driveway that is in plain view and clearly informs persons entering the road or
driveway that they are entering private property, a speed limit has been
established for the road or driveway, and the speed limit is enforceable by law
enforcement officers under state law.
   (b)   No person shall operate a vehicle upon a private road or driveway as
provided in division (a) of this section at a speed exceeding any speed limit
established and posted pursuant to division (a).
   (c)   When a speed limit is established and posted in accordance with
division (a) of this section, a law enforcement officer may apprehend a person
violating the speed limit of the residential area by utilizing any of the means
described in R.C. § 4511.091 or by any other accepted method of determining the
speed of a motor vehicle and may stop and charge the person with exceeding the
speed limit.
   (d)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.211(D), points shall be assessed for violation
of a speed limit established and posted in accordance with division (a) of this
section in accordance with R.C. § 4510.036.
   (e)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   OWNER. Includes but is not limited to a person who holds title to
the real property in fee simple, a condominium owners’ association, a property
owners’ association, a board of directors or trustees of a private community,
and a nonprofit corporation governing a private community.
      (2)   PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL AREA CONTAINING 20 OR MORE DWELLING UNITS. Does
not include a Chautauqua assembly as defined in R.C. § 4511.90.
   (f)   Penalty.
      (1)   A violation of division (b) of this section is one of the
following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (f)(1)B. and (f)(1)C.
of this section, a minor misdemeanor;
         B.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of this section, R.C. §
4511.211(B), or any other municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent
to that division, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
         C.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this
section, R.C. § 4511.211(B), or any other municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to that division, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under § 408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.211)
§ 434.04 SLOW SPEED; POSTED MINIMUM SPEEDS.
   (a)   No person shall stop or operate a vehicle at such an unreasonably slow
speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic,
except when stopping or reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or to
comply with law.
   (b)   Whenever the Director of Transportation or local authorities determine
on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that slow speeds on
any part of a controlled-access highway, expressway or freeway consistently
impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, the Director or local
authority may declare a minimum speed limit below which no person shall operate
a motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe operation or in compliance with
the law. No minimum speed limit established hereunder shall be less than 30
mph, greater than 50 mph, nor effective until the provisions of R.C. § 4511.21
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, relating to appropriate
signs, have been fulfilled and local authorities have obtained the approval of
the Director.
   (c)   In a case involving a violation of this section, the trier of fact, in
determining whether the vehicle was being operated at an unreasonably slow
speed, shall consider the capabilities of the vehicle and its operator.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (d), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (e)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.22)
§ 434.05 SPEED LIMITATIONS OVER BRIDGES.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle over any bridge or other
elevated structure constituting a part of a highway at a speed which is greater
than the maximum speed that can be maintained with safety to the bridge or
structure, when the structure is posted with signs as provided in this section.
      (2)   The Department of Transportation upon request from any local
authority shall, or upon its own initiative may, conduct an investigation of
any bridge or other elevated structure constituting a part of a highway, and if
it finds that the structure cannot with safety withstand traffic traveling at
the speed otherwise permissible under this Traffic Code, the Department shall
determine and declare the maximum speed of traffic which the structure can
withstand, and shall cause or permit suitable signs stating the maximum speed
to be erected and maintained at a distance of a least 100 feet before each end
of the structure.
      (3)   Upon the trial of any person charged with a violation of this
section, proof of such determination of the maximum speed by the Department and
the existence of the signs shall constitute prima facie evidence of the maximum
speed which can be maintained with safety to the bridge or structure.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.23)
§ 434.06 SPEED EXCEPTIONS FOR EMERGENCY OR SAFETY VEHICLES.
   The prima facie speed limitations set forth in R.C. § 4511.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance do not apply to emergency vehicles
or public safety vehicles when they are responding to emergency calls and are
equipped with and displaying at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating
light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet
to the front of the vehicle, and when the drivers thereof sound audible signals
by bell, siren or exhaust whistle. This section does not relieve the driver of
an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons using the street or highway.
(R.C. § 4511.24)
§ 434.07 STREET RACING, STUNT DRIVING AND STREET TAKEOVERS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Burnout." A maneuver performed while operating a vehicle whereby
the vehicle is kept in a stationary position, but the wheels of the vehicle are
spun, which may cause the tires of the vehicle to become heated and emit smoke
from the friction.
      (2)   "Doughnut." A maneuver performed while operating a vehicle whereby
the front or rear of the vehicle is rotated around the opposite set of wheels
in a continuous motion, which may cause a
circular skid-mark pattern of rubber on the driving surface, or the tires of
the vehicle to become heated and emit smoke from the friction, or both.
      (3)   "Drifting." A maneuver performed while operating a vehicle whereby
the vehicle is driven in a manner that causes a controlled, sideways skid
during a turn, with the front wheels pointing in a direction that is the
opposite of the direction of the turn.
      (4)   "Street racing." The operation of two or more vehicles from a point
side by side at accelerating speeds in a competitive attempt to out-distance
each other or the operation of one or more vehicles over a common selected
course, from the same point to the same point, wherein timing is made of the
participating vehicles involving competitive accelerations or speeds. The
operation of two or more vehicles side by side either at speeds in excess of
prima-facie lawful speeds established by R.C. § 4511.21(B)(1)(a) to (B)(9) or
rapidly accelerating from a common starting point to a speed in excess of such
prima-facie lawful speeds shall be prima-facie evidence of street racing.
      (5)   "Street takeover." Blocking or impeding the regular flow of vehicle
or pedestrian traffic on a public road, street, or highway or on private
property that is open to the general public for the purpose of street racing or
stunt driving.
      (6)   "Stunt driving." Performing or engaging in burnouts, doughnuts,
drifting, or wheelies, or allowing a passenger to ride either partially or
fully outside of the vehicle while operating that vehicle.
      (7)   "Wheelie." A maneuver performed while operating a vehicle whereby
the front wheel or wheels of the vehicle are raised off of the ground or
whereby two wheels that are on the same side of the vehicle are raised off of
the ground.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly participate in street racing, stunt driving,
or street takeover upon any public road, street, or highway, or on private
property that is open to the general public.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of street racing, stunt
driving, or street takeover, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to
any other sanctions, the court shall suspend the offender's driver's license,
commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege for not less than 30 days or more
than three years. No judge shall suspend the first 30 days of any suspension of
an offender's license, permit, or privilege imposed under this division.
   (d)   Persons rendering assistance in any manner to street racing, stunt
driving, or street takeover shall be equally charged as the participants.
   (e)   This section does not apply to the competitive operation of vehicles
on public or private property when the political subdivision with jurisdiction
of the location or owner of the property knowingly permits such operation
thereon.
(R.C. § 4511.251)
§ 434.08 VEHICULAR HOMICIDE; VEHICULAR MANSLAUGHTER; VEHICULAR ASSAULT.
   (a)   No person, while operating or participating in the operation of a
motor vehicle, motorcycle, utility vehicle, mini-truck, snowmobile, locomotive,
watercraft, or aircraft, shall cause the death of another or the unlawful
termination of another's pregnancy in any of the following ways:
      (1)   A.   As the proximate result of committing a violation of R.C. §
4511.19(A) or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
         B.   As the proximate result of committing a violation of R.C. §
1547.11(A) or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance; or
         C.   As the proximate result of committing a violation of R.C. §
4561.15(A)(3) or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   In one of the following ways:
         A.   Recklessly; or
         B.   As the proximate result of committing, while operating or
participating in the operation of a motor vehicle, utility vehicle, mini-truck,
or motorcycle in a construction zone, a reckless operation offense, provided
that this division applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose
pregnancy is unlawfully terminated is in the construction zone at the time of
the offender's commission of the reckless operation offense in the construction
zone and does not apply as described in division (d) of this section.
      (3)   In one of the following ways:
         A.   Negligently; or
         B.   As the proximate result of committing, while operating or
participating in the operation of a motor vehicle, utility vehicle, mini-truck,
or motorcycle in a construction zone, a speeding offense, provided that this
division applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose pregnancy is
unlawfully terminated is in the construction zone at the time of the offender's
commission of the speeding offense in the construction zone and does not apply
as described in division (d) of this section.
      (4)   As the proximate result of committing a violation of any provision
of any section contained in R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor or of a
municipal ordinance that, regardless of the penalty set by ordinance for the
violation, is substantially equivalent to any provision of any section
contained in R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is
guilty of aggravated vehicular homicide, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (a)(3) of this section is guilty of
vehicular homicide. Except as otherwise provided in this division, vehicular
homicide is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Vehicular homicide committed in
violation of division (a)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving
under a suspension or cancellation imposed under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other
provision of the Ohio Revised Code or was operating a motor vehicle or
motorcycle, did not have a valid driver's license, commercial driver's license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege, and was not eligible for renewal of the offender's driver's license
or commercial driver's license without examination under R.C. § 4507.10 or if
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation
of this section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault
offense.
         B.   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to this
division, the court shall impose upon the offender a class four suspension of
the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
      (3)   A.   Whoever violates division (a)(4) of this section is guilty of
vehicular manslaughter. Except as otherwise provided in this division (b)(3)A.,
vehicular manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the second degree. Vehicular
manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the first degree if, at the time of the
offense, the offender was driving under a suspension or cancellation imposed
under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Revised Code or was
operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle, did not have a valid driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license
or nonresident operating privilege, and was not eligible for renewal of the
offender’s driver’s license or commercial driver’s license without examination
under R.C. § 4507.10 or if the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or any traffic-related homicide,
manslaughter or assault offense.
         B.   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to this
division (b)(3)B., the court shall impose upon the offender a class six
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident operating
privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6); or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this
section, any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter or assault offense, or a
traffic-related murder, felonious assault or attempted murder offense, a class
four suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
   (c)   The court shall impose a mandatory jail term of at least 15 days on an
offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation of
division (a)(3)B. of this section and may impose upon the offender a longer
jail term as authorized pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24.
   (d)   Divisions (a)(2)B. and (a)(3)B. of this section do not apply in a
particular construction zone unless signs of the type described in R.C. §
2903.081 are erected in that construction zone in accordance with the
guidelines and design specifications established by the Director of
Transportation under R.C. § 5501.27. The failure to erect signs of the type
described in R.C. § 2903.081 in a particular construction zone in accordance
with those guidelines and design specifications does not limit or affect the
application of division (a)(1), (a)(2)A., (a)(3)A. or (a)(4) of this section in
that construction zone or the prosecution of any person who violates any of
those divisions in that construction zone.
   (e)   (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   CONSTRUCTION ZONE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5501.27.
         B.   MANDATORY PRISON TERM and MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 2929.01.
         C.   MOTOR VEHICLE, MINI-TRUCK, and UTILITY VEHICLE. Have the same
meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
         D.   RECKLESS OPERATION OFFENSE. A violation of R.C. § 4511.20 or a
municipal ordinance substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.20.
         E.   SPEEDING OFFENSE. A violation of R.C. § 4511.21 or a municipal
ordinance pertaining to speed.
         F.   TRAFFIC-RELATED HOMICIDE, MANSLAUGHTER OR ASSAULT OFFENSE. A
violation of R.C. § 2903.04 in circumstances in which division (D) of that
section applies, a violation of R.C. § 2903.06 or 2903.08, or a violation of
R.C. § 2903.06, 2903.07 or 2903.08 as they existed prior to March 23, 2000.
         G.   TRAFFIC-RELATED MURDER, FELONIOUS ASSAULT OR ATTEMPTED MURDER
OFFENSE. A violation of R.C. § 2903.01 or 2903.02 in circumstances in which the
offender used a motor vehicle as the means to commit the violation, a violation
of R.C. § 2903.11(A)(2) in circumstances in which the deadly weapon used in the
commission of the violation is a motor vehicle, or an attempt to commit
aggravated murder or murder in violation of R.C. § 2923.02 in circumstances in
which the offender used a motor vehicle as the means to attempt to commit the
aggravated murder or murder.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, when a penalty or suspension is
enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified law or a prior
or current specified offense, the reference to the violation of the specified
law or the specified offense includes any violation of any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this state, or current or former
law of this or another state or the United States.
(R.C. § 2903.06)
   (f)   Vehicular assault.
      (1)   No person, while operating or participating in the operation of a
motor vehicle, motorcycle, utility vehicle, or mini-truck, shall cause serious
physical harm to another person or another's unborn as the proximate result of
committing, while operating or participating in the operation of a motor
vehicle, utility vehicle, mini-truck, or motorcycle in a construction zone, a
speeding offense, provided that this division applies only if the person to
whom the serious physical harm is caused or to whose unborn the serious
physical harm is caused is in the construction zone at the time of the
offender's commission of the speeding offense in the construction zone and does
not apply as described in division (f)(4) of this section.
      (2)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, vehicular
assault committed in violation of division (f)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Vehicular assault committed in violation of
division (f)(1) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving under a
suspension imposed under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Ohio
Revised Code or if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (f)(1) of this section, R.C. § 2903.08, or
any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense.
         B.   In addition to any other sanctions imposed, the court shall
impose upon the offender a class four suspension of the offender's driver's
license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
      (3)   The court shall impose a mandatory jail term of at least seven days
on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation
of division (f)(1) of this section and may impose upon the offender a longer
jail term as authorized pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24.
      (4)   Division (f)(1) of this section does not apply in a particular
construction zone unless signs of the type described in R.C. § 2903.081 are
erected in that construction zone in accordance with the guidelines and design
specifications established by the Director of Transportation under R.C. §
5501.27.
      (5)   As used in this division (f):
         A.   CONSTRUCTION ZONE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5501.27.
         B.   MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
         C.   SPEEDING OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.06.
         D.   TRAFFIC-RELATED HOMICIDE, MANSLAUGHTER, OR ASSAULT OFFENSE. Has
the same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.06.
      (6)   For the purposes of this division (f), when a penalty or suspension
is enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified law or a
prior or current specified offense, the reference to the violation of the
specified law or the specified offense includes any violation of any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this state, or
current or former law of another state or the United States.
(R.C. 2903.08(A)(3), (C)(3), (D)(3), (E) - (G))
Statutory reference:
   Trial court to suspend driver’s license, see R.C. §§ 4510.05, 4510.10
   Vehicular assault and aggravated vehicular assault, felony offenses, see
R.C. § 2903.08
§ 434.09 OPERATION RESTRICTED FOR MINI-TRUCKS AND LOW-SPEED, UNDER-SPEED, OR
UTILITY VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall operate a low-speed vehicle upon any street or
highway having an established speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour.
      (2)   No person shall operate an under-speed or utility vehicle or a
mini-truck upon any street or highway except as follows:
         A.   Upon a street or highway having an established speed limit not
greater than 35 miles per hour and only upon such streets or highways where the
municipality has granted permission for such operation in accordance with
division (e) of this section;
         B.   A state park or political subdivision employee or volunteer
operating a utility vehicle exclusively within the boundaries of state parks or
political subdivision parks for the operation or maintenance of state or
political subdivision park facilities.
      (3)   No person shall operate a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter upon
any street or highway having an established speed limit greater than 45 miles
per hour.
   (b)   This section does not prohibit either of the following:
      (1)   A person operating a low-speed, under-speed, or utility vehicle or
a mini-truck from proceeding across an intersection of a street or highway
having a speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour;
      (2)   A person operating a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter from
proceeding across an intersection of a street or highway having a speed limit
greater than 45 miles per hour.
   (c)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the municipality from adopting
more stringent local ordinances, resolutions, or regulations governing the
operation of a low-speed vehicle or a mini-truck, or a motor-driven cycle or
motor scooter.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If within one year of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.214)
   (e)   By ordinance or resolution, the municipality may authorize the
operation of under-speed or utility vehicles or mini-trucks on a public street
or highway under its jurisdiction. The municipality shall do all of the
following:
      (1)   Limit the operation of those vehicles to streets and highways
having an established speed limit not greater than 35 miles per hour;
      (2)   Require the vehicle owner who wishes to operate an under-speed or
utility vehicle or a mini- truck on the public streets or highways to submit
the vehicle to an inspection conducted by a local law enforcement agency that
complies with inspection requirements established by the Department of Public
Safety under R.C. § 4513.02;
      (3)   Permit the operation on public streets or highways of only those
vehicles that successfully pass the required vehicle inspection, are registered
in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4503, and are titled in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 4505;
      (4)   Notify the Director of Public Safety, in a manner the Director
determines, of the authorization for the operation of under-speed or utility
vehicles or mini-trucks.
   (f)   The municipality may establish additional requirements for the
operation of under-speed or utility vehicles or mini-trucks on its streets and
highways.
(R.C. § 4511.215)
   (g)   Notwithstanding divisions (a) through (f) of this section, a person
may operate a utility vehicle on any public roads or right-of-way, other than a
freeway, when traveling from one farm field to another for agricultural
purposes if the vehicle is displaying a triangular slow-moving vehicle emblem
as described in R.C. § 4513.112.
(R.C. § 4511.216)
   (h)   (1)   Except as provided in this division (h) and divisions (e) and
(f) of this section, no person shall operate a mini-truck within this
municipality.
      (2)   A person may operate a mini-truck on a farm for agricultural
purposes only when the owner of the farm qualifies for the current agricultural
use valuation tax credit. A mini-truck may be operated by or on behalf of such
a farm owner on public roads and rights-of-way only when traveling from one
farm field to another.
      (3)   A person may operate a mini-truck on property owned or leased by a
dealer who sells mini-trucks at retail.
      (4)   Whoever violates this division (h) shall be penalized as provided
in division (d) of this section.
(R.C. § 4519.401)
§ 434.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and 408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.
CHAPTER 436: LICENSING; ACCIDENTS
Section
   
436.01   Driver’s or commercial driver’s license required
   
436.02   Possession of more than one license prohibited
   
436.03   Driving with temporary instruction permit without licensed driver
   
436.035   Driving with probationary license
   
436.04   Certain acts prohibited
   
436.05   Owner or operator allowing another to drive
   
436.06   Display of license
   
436.07   Driving under suspension or revocation or without proof of financial
responsibility or in violation of license restrictions (Repealed)
   
436.071   Driving under suspension or in violation of license restriction
   
436.072   Operating motor vehicle or motorcycle without valid license
   
436.073   Driving under O.V.I. suspension
   
436.074   Driving under financial responsibility law suspension or
cancellation; driving under a nonpayment of judgment suspension
   
436.075   Failure to reinstate license
   
436.08   Operation or sale without certificate of title
   
436.09   Display of license plates; registration; obstructions
   
436.10   Use of illegal license plates
   
436.11   Failure to stop after accident
   
436.12   Stopping after accident on other than public roads or highways
   
436.13   Vehicle accident resulting in damage to realty
   
436.14   Removal of vehicles after accidents
   
436.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Driver’s license law, see R.C. Ch. 4507
   Employment of a minor to operate a taxicab prohibited, see R.C. § 4507.321
   Glass removal from street after accident, see §
412.01
   Licensing requirements of snowmobile, off-highway and all-purpose vehicle
operator, see §
476.05
   Motor vehicle licensing law, see R.C. Ch. 4503
   Power of trial court of record to suspend license for certain violations,
see R.C. §§ 4510.05, 4510.15
   Snowmobile, off-highway and all-purpose vehicle accident reports, see §
476.06
   State accident reports, see R.C. §§ 4509.01, 4509.06, 4509.74, 5502.11
   State point system suspension, see R.C. § 4507.021
   Suspension of driver’s license, see §§
408.04,
698.07
§ 436.01 DRIVER’S OR COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall permit the operation of a motor vehicle upon any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking, knowing the operator does not have a valid driver’s license issued
to the operator by the Registrar of Motor Vehicle or a deputy registrar under
R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid commercial driver’s license issued under R.C.
Chapter 4506. Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
this division is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an
unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03, R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
(R.C. § 4507.02(A)(1))
   (b)   (1)   No person shall be required to obtain a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license for the purpose of temporarily driving, operating, drawing,
moving or propelling a road roller or road machinery upon a street or highway.
      (2)   No person shall be required to obtain a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license for the purpose of temporarily driving, operating, drawing,
moving or propelling any agricultural tractor or implement of husbandry upon a
street or highway at a speed of 25 mph or less.
      (3)   No person shall drive, operate, draw, move or propel any
agricultural tractor or implement of husbandry upon a street or highway at a
speed greater than 25 mph unless the person has a current, valid driver’s or
commercial driver’s license.
      (4)   No person having a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license
shall be required to have a motorcycle operator’s endorsement to operate a
motorcycle having three wheels with a motor of not more than 50 cubic
centimeters piston displacement.
      (5)   No person having a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license
shall be required to have a motorcycle operator’s endorsement to operate an
autocycle or a cab-enclosed motorcycle.
      (6)   Every person on active duty in the military or naval forces of the
United States, when furnished with a driver’s permit and when operating an
official motor vehicle in connection with that duty, is exempt from the license
requirements of R.C. Chapters 4506 and 4507. Every person on active duty in the
military or naval forces of the United States or in service with the Peace
Corps, Volunteers in Service to America or the foreign service of the United
States is exempt from the license requirements of such sections for the period
of the person’s active duty or service and for six months thereafter, provided
the person was a licensee under such sections at the time the person commenced
the person’s active duty or service. This section does not prevent such a
person or the person’s spouse or dependent from making an application, as
provided in R.C. § 4507.10(C), for the renewal of a driver’s license or
motorcycle operator’s endorsement or as provided in R.C. § 4506.14 for the
renewal of a commercial driver’s license during the period of the person’s
active duty or service.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (b)(3) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.03)
   (c)   Nonresidents, permitted to drive upon the highways of their own state,
may operate any motor vehicle upon any highway in this state without
examination or license under R.C. §§ 4507.01 to 4507.39, inclusive, upon
condition that the nonresident may be required at any time or place to prove
lawful possession or their right to operate the motor vehicle, and to establish
proper identity.
(R.C. § 4507.04)
§ 436.02 POSSESSION OF MORE THAN ONE LICENSE PROHIBITED.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall receive a driver’s license, or a motorcycle
operator’s endorsement of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card unless and until the person
surrenders to the Registrar or a deputy registrar all valid licenses, temporary
instruction permits, and identification cards issued to the person by another
jurisdiction recognized by this state.
      (2)   The Registrar shall report the cancellation of a license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card to the issuing authority, together
with information that the license, temporary instruction permit, or
identification card is now issued in this state. The Registrar or a deputy
registrar shall destroy any such license, temporary instruction permit, or
identification card that is not returned to the issuing authority.
      (3)   No person shall possess more than one valid license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card at any time.
(R.C. § 4507.02(A)(2))
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4507.99)
§ 436.03 DRIVING WITH TEMPORARY INSTRUCTION PERMIT WITHOUT LICENSED DRIVER.
   (a)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under R.C. §
4507.05(A) shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or
private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking
in violation of the conditions established under R.C. § 4507.05(A).
   (b)   Except as provided in division (c) of this section, no holder of a
temporary instruction permit that is issued under R.C. § 4507.05(A) and that is
issued on or after July 1, 1998, and who has not attained the age of 18 years,
shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property
used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the
hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m.
   (c)   The holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under R.C. §
4507.05(A) on or after July 1, 1998, who has not attained the age of 18 years,
may operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property
used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the
hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. if, at the time of the operation, the holder is
accompanied by the holder’s parent, guardian or custodian, and the parent,
guardian or custodian holds a current valid driver’s or commercial driver’s
license issued by this state, is actually occupying a seat beside the permit
holder, and does not have a prohibited concentration of alcohol in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine as provided in R.C. § 4511.19(A).
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4507.05(F), (I))
§ 436.035 DRIVING WITH PROBATIONARY LICENSE.
   (a)   (1)   A.   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held
the license for less than 12 months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a
highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. unless
the holder is accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian.
         B.   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held the
license for 12 months or longer shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. unless the
holder is accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian.
      (2)   A.   Subject to division (c)(1) of this section, division (a)(1)A.
of this section does not apply to the holder of a probationary driver’s license
who is doing either of the following:
            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours of midnight and 6:
00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession
written documentation from the holder’s employer.
            2.   Traveling to or from an official function sponsored by the
school the holder attends between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided
that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession written documentation
from an appropriate official of the school;
            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious event between the
hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official
affiliated with the event.
         B.   Division (a)(1)B. of this section does not apply to the holder of
a probationary driver’s license who is doing either of the following:
            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
5:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession
written documentation from the holder’s employer.
            2.   Traveling to or from an official function sponsored by the
school the holder attends between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.,
provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession written
documentation from an appropriate official of the school;
            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious event between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official
affiliated with the event.
      (3)   An employer, school official, or official affiliated with a
religious event is not liable in damages in a civil action for any injury,
death, or loss to person or property that allegedly arises from, or is related
to, the fact that the employer, school official, or official affiliated with a
religious event provided the holder of a probationary driver’s license with the
written documentation described in division (a)(2) of this section. The
Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall make available at no cost a form to serve as
the written documentation described in division (a)(2) of this section, and
employers, school officials, officials affiliated with religious events, and
holders of probationary driver’s licenses may utilize that form or may choose
to utilize any other written documentation to meet the requirements of that
division.
      (4)   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held the
license for less than 12 months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking with more than one person who is not a family member
occupying the vehicle unless the probationary license holder is accompanied by
the probationary license holder’s parent, guardian, or custodian.
   (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of division (a)(1)A. or
(a)(1)B. of this section if, at the time of the violation, an emergency existed
that required the holder of the probationary driver’s license to operate a
motor vehicle in violation of division (a)(1)A. or (a)(1)B. of this section or
the holder was an emancipated minor.
   (c)   (1)   If a person is issued a probationary driver’s license prior to
attaining the age of 17 years and the person pleads guilty to, is convicted of,
or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a moving violation
during the six-month period commencing on the date on which the person is
issued the probationary driver’s license, the court with jurisdiction over the
violation may order that the holder must be accompanied by the holder’s parent
or guardian whenever the holder is operating a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking for a period not to exceed six months or the date the holder
attains the age of 17 years, whichever occurs first.
      (2)   Any person who is subject to the operating restrictions established
under division (c)(1) of this section as a result of a first moving violation
may petition the court for driving privileges without being accompanied by the
holder’s parent or guardian during the period of time determined by the court
under that division. In granting the driving privileges, the court shall
specify the purposes of the privileges and shall issue the person appropriate
forms setting forth the privileges granted. If a person is convicted of, pleads
guilty to, or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a second or
subsequent moving violation, the court with jurisdiction over the violation may
terminate any driving privileges previously granted under this division.
      (3)   No person shall violate any operating restriction imposed under
division (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section.
   (d)   No holder of a probationary license shall operate a motor vehicle upon
a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking unless the total number of occupants of the vehicle
does not exceed the total number of occupant restraining devices originally
installed in the motor vehicle by its manufacturer, and each occupant of the
vehicle is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted
occupant restraining device.
   (e)   A restricted license may be issued to a person who is 14 or 15 years
of age under proof of hardship satisfactory to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles.
   (f)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether each occupant of the motor vehicle is wearing all of the
available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device as
required by division (d) of this section, or for the sole purpose of issuing a
ticket, citation or summons if that requirement has been or is being violated,
or for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a
violation of that requirement.
   (g)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (a)(1)A. or (a)(1)B. of this
section has been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a
ticket, citation or summons for such a violation or for causing the arrest or
commencing a prosecution of a person for such a violation.
   (h)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   FAMILY MEMBER OF A PROBATIONARY LICENSE HOLDER. Includes any of the
following:
         A.   A spouse;
         B.   A child or stepchild;
         C.   A parent, stepparent, grandparent or parent-in-law;
         D.   An aunt or uncle;
         E.   A sibling, whether of the whole or half blood or by adoption, a
brother-in-law or a sister-in-law;
         F.   A son or daughter of the probationary license holder’s stepparent
if the stepparent has not adopted the probationary license holder; or
         G.   An eligible adult, as defined in R.C. § 4507.05.
      (2)   MOVING VIOLATION. Any violation of any statute or ordinance that
regulates the operation of vehicles on the highways or streets. MOVING
VIOLATION does not include a violation of R.C. § 4513.263 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of any statute or ordinance
regulating pedestrians or the parking of vehicles, vehicle size or load
limitations, vehicle fitness requirements or vehicle registration.
      (3)   OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4513.263.
   (i)   Whoever violates divisions (a)(1), (a)(4), (c)(3) or (d) of this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4507.071(B) - (J))
§ 436.04 CERTAIN ACTS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Display or cause or permit to be displayed, or possess any
identification card, driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit
knowing the same to be fictitious, or to have been canceled, suspended or
altered;
      (2)   Lend to a person not entitled thereto, or knowingly permit a person
not entitled thereto to use any identification card, driver’s or commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver’s license
temporary instruction permit issued to the person so lending or permitting the
use thereof;
      (3)   Display, or represent as one’s own, any identification card,
driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit or
commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit not issued to the
person so displaying the same;
      (4)   Fail to surrender to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, upon the
Registrar’s demand, any identification card, driver’s or commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit that has been suspended or canceled; and
      (5)   In any application for an identification card, driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit or any renewal, reprint, or
duplicate thereof, knowingly conceal a material fact or present any physician’s
statement required under R.C. § 4507.08 or 4507.081 when knowing the same to be
false or fictitious.
   (b)   Whoever violates any division of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.30)
§ 436.05 OWNER OR OPERATOR ALLOWING ANOTHER TO DRIVE.
   (a)   No person shall permit a motor vehicle owned by the person or under
the person’s control to be driven by another if any of the following apply:
      (1)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person does not have a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit or valid nonresident driving privileges;
      (2)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privileges have been suspended or canceled under R.C. Chapter 4510 or
any other provision of the Revised Code;
      (3)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s act of driving the motor vehicle would violate any prohibition
contained in R.C. Chapter 4509;
      (4)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s act of driving would violate R.C. § 4511.19 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance; or
      (5)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
vehicle is the subject of an immobilization waiver order issued under R.C.
4503.235 and the other person is prohibited from operating the vehicle under
that order.
   (b)   Without limiting or precluding the consideration of any other evidence
in determining whether a violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4)
or (a)(5) of this section has occurred, it shall be prima facie evidence that
the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the operator of the
motor vehicle owned by the offender or under the offender’s control is in a
category described in division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4) or (a)(5) of this
section if any of the following applies:
      (1)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (a)(1), (a)(3) or (a)(5) of this section, the offender and the
operator of the motor vehicle reside in the same household and are related by
consanguinity or affinity;
      (2)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (a)(2) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor
vehicle reside in the same household, and the offender knows or has reasonable
cause to believe that the operator has been charged with or convicted of any
violation of law or ordinance, or has committed any other act or omission, that
would or could result in the suspension or cancellation of the operator’s
license, permit or privilege; or
      (3)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (a)(4) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor
vehicle occupied the motor vehicle together at the time of the offense.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of wrongful entrustment of a
motor vehicle, and shall be punished as provided in divisions (c) to (h) of
this section.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(2) of this section, whoever
violates division (a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section is guilty of an
unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the
offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   A.   If, within three years of a violation of division (a)(1), (a)
(2) or (a)(3) of this section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or
been convicted of two or more violations of division (a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3)
of this section, R.C. § 4511.203(A)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
         B.   Whoever violates division (a)(4) or (a)(5) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   For any violation of this section, in addition to the penalties
imposed under this Code or R.C. Chapter 2929, the court may impose a class
seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7), and, if
the vehicle involved in the offense is registered in the name of the offender,
the court may order one of the following.
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(3)B. or (c)(3)C. of
this section, the court may order, for 30 days, the immobilization of the
vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license
plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and enforced under R.C. §
4503.233.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one violation of this section, R.C. § 4511.203, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order, for 60 days, the
immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of
that vehicle’s license plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and
enforced under R.C. § 4503.233.
         C.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section, R.C. § 4511.203, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order the criminal
forfeiture to the state of the vehicle involved in the offense. If issued, the
order shall be issued and enforced under R.C. § 4503.234.
      (4)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order for
criminal forfeiture under division (c)(3)C. of this section is assigned or
transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in addition to or
independent of any other penalty established by law, the court may fine the
offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the National
Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds from any fine imposed under this
division (c)(4) shall be distributed in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234(C)(2).
   (d)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under division
(c)(3)A. or (c)(3)B. of this section, the court shall not release the vehicle
from the immobilization before the termination of the period of immobilization
ordered unless the court is presented with current proof of financial
responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
   (e)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under division
(c)(3)C. of this section, upon receipt of the order from the court, neither the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor any deputy registrar shall accept any
application for the registration or transfer of registration of any motor
vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the order. The period of denial
shall be five years after the date the order is issued, unless, during that
five-year period, the court with jurisdiction of the offense that resulted in
the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar of the
termination. If the court terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar,
the Registrar shall take all necessary measures to permit the person to
register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to transfer the
registration of the vehicle.
   (f)   This section does not apply to motor vehicle rental dealers or motor
vehicle leasing dealers, as defined in R.C. § 4549.65.
   (g)   Evidence of a conviction of, plea of guilty to, or adjudication as a
delinquent child for a violation of this section shall not be admissible as
evidence in any civil action that involves the offender or delinquent child who
is the subject of the conviction, plea or adjudication and that arises from the
wrongful entrustment of a motor vehicle.
   (h)   For purposes of this section, a vehicle is owned by a person if, at
the time of a violation of this section, the vehicle is registered in the
person’s name.
(R.C. § 4511.203)
§ 436.06 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   (a)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall display the operator’s driver’s
license, or furnish satisfactory proof that the operator has a driver’s
license, upon demand of any peace officer or of any person damaged or injured
in any collision in which the licensee may be involved. When a demand is
properly made, and the operator has the operator’s driver’s license on or about
the operator’s person, the operator shall not refuse to display the license. A
person’s failure to furnish satisfactory evidence that the person is licensed
under R.C. Chapter 4507 when the person does not have the person’s license on
or about the person’s person shall be prima facie evidence of the person’s not
having obtained a driver’s license.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(2) of this section, whoever
violates this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section,
R.C. § 4507.35, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.35)
§ 436.07 DRIVING UNDER SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OR WITHOUT PROOF OF FINANCIAL
RESPONSIBILITY OR IN VIOLATION OF LICENSE RESTRICTIONS (REPEALED).
Editor’s note:
   Section 436.07 was repealed as part of the 2003 updating and revision of
these Codified Ordinances because substantially equivalent state law (R.C. §§
4507.02(B) through (H)) was repealed by the Ohio General Assembly. See §§
436.071 through 436.075 for current provisions.
§ 436.071 DRIVING UNDER SUSPENSION OR IN VIOLATION OF LICENSE RESTRICTION.
   (a)   Driving under suspension or in violation of license restriction.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2) of this section, division (b)
of this section, §
436.11 and in R.C. §§ 4510.111 and 4510.16, no person whose driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege has
been suspended under any provision of the Revised Code, other than R.C. Chapter
4509, or under any applicable law in any other jurisdiction in which the
person’s license or permit was issued shall operate any motor vehicle upon the
public roads and highways or upon any public or private property used by the
public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking within this municipality
during the period of suspension unless the person is granted limited driving
privileges and is operating the vehicle in accordance with the terms of the
limited driving privileges.
      (2)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking in this municipality in violation of any restriction of the person’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit imposed under R.C. § 4506.10
(D) or § 4507.14.
      (3)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth and Social Security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under
suspension at the time of the alleged violation of division (a)(1) of this
section or the person operated a motor vehicle in violation of a restriction at
the time of the alleged violation of division (a)(2) of this section. The
person charged with a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section
may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
      (4)   A.   Whoever violates division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court may impose upon the
offender a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. §
4510.02(A)(7).
         B.   1.   Except as provided in division (a)(4)B.2. or (a)(4)B.3. of
this section, the court, in addition to any other penalty that it imposes on
the offender and if the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111
or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court, in
addition to or independent of any other sentence that it imposes upon the
offender, may order the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense
for 30 days and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license plates for 30 days in
accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
            2.   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to two violations of this section, or any combination of
two violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a
substantially similar municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to any other
sentence that it imposes on the offender, may order the immobilization of the
vehicle involved in the offense for 60 days and the impoundment of that
vehicle’s license plates for 60 days in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
            3.   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this section, or any
combination of three or more violations of this section or R.C. § 4510.11,
4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a substantially similar municipal ordinance, the
court, in addition to any other sentence that it imposes on the offender, may
order the criminal forfeiture of the vehicle involved in the offense to the
state.
      (5)   Any order for immobilization and impoundment under this section
shall be issued and enforced under R.C. §§ 4503.233 and 4507.02, as applicable.
The court shall not release a vehicle from immobilization ordered under this
section unless the court is presented with current proof of financial
responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
      (6)   Any order of criminal forfeiture under this section shall be issued
and enforced under R.C. § 4503.234. Upon receipt of the copy of the order from
the court, neither the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor a deputy registrar shall
accept any application for the registration or transfer of registration of any
motor vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the declaration of
forfeiture. The period of registration denial shall be five years after the
date of the order, unless, during that period, the court having jurisdiction of
the offense that led to the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the
registrar of the termination. The registrar then shall take necessary measures
to permit the person to register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to
transfer registration of the vehicle.
      (7)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
698.02(f) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during or after
committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(R.C. § 4510.11)
   (b)   Driving under suspension in violation of other provisions.
      (1)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking in this municipality whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license
has been suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2151.354, 2151.87, 2935.27, 3123.58,
4301.99, 4510.032, 4510.22 or 4510.33, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
      (2)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth and Social Security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under
suspension at the time of the alleged violation of division (b)(1) or (b)(2) of
this section. The person charged with a violation of division (b)(1) or (b)(2)
of this section may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (b)(1) of this section is guilty of
driving under suspension and shall be punished as provided in division (b)(3)A.
or division (b)(3)B. of this section.
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(3)B. of this
section, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. The offender shall be
sentenced pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
         B.   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously
was convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (b)(1)
or (b)(2) of this section, or any combination of two or more violations of
division (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16,
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor
of the fourth degree, and the offender shall provide the court with proof of
financial responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, then in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. §
2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an
accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the
offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing the
offense for which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(R.C. § 4510.111)
   (c)   Repeat traffic offender; point system suspension. Any person whose
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privileges are suspended as a repeat traffic offender under R.C. § 4510.037 and
who, during the suspension, operates any motor vehicle upon any public roads
and highways is guilty of driving under a 12-point suspension, a misdemeanor of
the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to a minimum term of
three days in jail. No court shall suspend the first three days of jail time
imposed pursuant to this division (c).
(R.C. § 4510.037(J))
   (d)   Affirmative defense. It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution
brought under this section that the alleged offender drove under suspension,
without a valid permit or driver's or commercial driver's license, or in
violation of a restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no
other person was reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
§ 436.072 OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE OR MOTORCYCLE WITHOUT VALID LICENSE.
   (a)   (1)   No person, except those expressly exempted under R.C. §§
4507.03, 4507.04 and 4507.05, shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public
road or highway or any public or private property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this municipality unless the person
has a valid driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a commercial
driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4506.
      (2)   No person, except a person expressly exempted under R.C. §§
4507.03, 4507.04 and 4507.05, shall operate any motorcycle upon a public road
or highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking in this municipality unless the person has a valid
license as a motorcycle operator that was issued upon application by the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. Chapter 4507. The license shall be in
the form of an endorsement, as determined by the Registrar, upon a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, if the person has a valid license to operate a
motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle, or in the form of a restricted
license as provided in R.C. § 4507.14, if the person does not have a valid
license to operate a motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle.
   (b)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth and Social Security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the person did not have either a valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license at the time of the alleged violation of
division (a)(1) of this section or a valid license as a motorcycle operator
either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or a restricted license at the time of the alleged violation of
division (a)(2) of this section. The person charged with a violation of
division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section may offer evidence to rebut this
prima facie evidence.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle
or motorcycle without a valid license and shall be punished as follows.
      (1)   If the trier of fact finds that the offender never has held a valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license issued by this state or any other
jurisdiction, or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the
offender, if the offender has never held a valid license as a motorcycle
operator, either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or in the form of a restricted license, except as otherwise
provided in this division (c)(1), the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor.
When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be
sentenced pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case. If the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation of this section or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
      (2)   If the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit
or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the offender, the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license bearing the motorcycle
endorsement or the offender’s restricted license was expired at the time of the
offense, except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(2), the offense is a
minor misdemeanor. If within three years of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of
this section or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is
a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   The court shall not impose a license suspension for a first violation
of this section or if more than three years have passed since the offender’s
last violation of R.C. § 4510.12, this section, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (e)   If the offender is sentenced under division (c)(2) of this section, if
within three years of the offense the offender previously was convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one or more violations of R.C. § 4510.12, this section, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance within the past three years, and
if the offender’s license was expired for more than six months at the time of
the offense, the court may impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s
driver license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
(R.C. § 4510.12)
§ 436.073 DRIVING UNDER O.V.I. SUSPENSION.
   (a)   No person whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege has been suspended under R.C. § 4511.19,
4511.191 or 4511.196 or under R.C. § 4510.07 for a conviction of a violation of
a municipal O.V.I. ordinance shall operate any motor vehicle upon the public
roads or highways within this municipality during the period of the suspension.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of driving under O.V.I.
suspension. The court shall sentence the offender under R.C. Chapter 2929,
subject to the differences authorized or required by this section.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this
section, driving under O.V.I. suspension is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         A.   A mandatory jail term of three consecutive days. The three-day
term shall be imposed, unless, subject to division (c) of this section, the
court instead imposes a sentence of not less than 30 consecutive days of house
arrest with electronic monitoring. A period of house arrest with electronic
monitoring imposed under this division (b)(1)A. shall not exceed six months. If
the court imposes a mandatory three-day jail term under this division (b)(1)A.,
the court may impose a jail term in addition to that term, provided that in no
case shall the cumulative jail term imposed for the offense exceed six months;
         B.   A fine of not less than $250 and not more than $1,000;
         C.   A license suspension under division (e) of this section; and
         D.   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, immobilization for 30 days of the
offender’s vehicle and impoundment for 30 days of the identification license
plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization and impoundment shall be
issued and enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
      (2)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section or one
equivalent offense, driving under O.V.I. suspension is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         A.   A mandatory jail term of ten consecutive days. Notwithstanding
the jail terms provided in R.C. § 2929.21 to 2929.28, the court may sentence
the offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year. The ten-day
mandatory jail term shall be imposed unless, subject to division (c) of this
section, the court instead imposes a sentence of not less than 90 consecutive
days of house arrest with electronic monitoring. The period of house arrest
with electronic monitoring shall not exceed one year;
         B.   Notwithstanding the fines provided for in R.C. Chapter 2929, a
fine of not less than $500 and not more than $2,500;
         C.   A license suspension under division (e) of this section; and
         D.   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, immobilization of the offender’s
vehicle for 60 days and the impoundment for 60 days of the identification
license plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization and impoundment
shall be issued and enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
      (3)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section
or two or more equivalent offenses, driving under O.V.I. suspension is a
misdemeanor. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         A.   A mandatory jail term of 30 consecutive days. Notwithstanding the
jail terms provided in R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, the court may sentence the
offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year. The court shall not
sentence the offender to a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring in
lieu of the mandatory portion of the jail term;
         B.   Notwithstanding the fines set forth in R.C. Chapter 2929, a fine
of not less than $500 and not more than $2,500;
         C.   A license suspension under division (e) of this section; and
         D.   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, criminal forfeiture to the state
of the offender’s vehicle. The order of criminal forfeiture shall be issued and
enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234. If title to a motor vehicle that
is subject to an order for criminal forfeiture under this division (b)(3)D. is
assigned or transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, the court
may fine the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of
the National Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds from any fine so
imposed shall be distributed in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234(C)(2).
   (c)   (1)   No court shall impose an alternative sentence of house arrest
with electronic monitoring under division (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section
unless, within 60 days of the date of sentencing, the court issues a written
finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail
where the offender is required to serve the jail term imposed, the offender
will not be able to begin serving that term within the 60-day period following
the date of sentencing.
      (2)   An offender sentenced under this section to a period of house
arrest with electronic monitoring shall be permitted work release during that
period.
   (d)   Fifty percent of any fine imposed by a court under division (b)(1),
(b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section shall be deposited into the Municipal Indigent
Drivers’ Alcohol Treatment Fund under the control of that court, as created by
the municipality pursuant to R.C. § 4511.191(H).
   (e)   In addition to or independent of all other penalties provided by law
or ordinance, the trial judge of any court of record or the Mayor of a Mayor’s
Court shall impose on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of this section a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
      (1)   When permitted as specified in R.C. § 4510.021, if the court grants
limited driving privileges during a suspension imposed under this section, the
privileges shall be granted on the additional condition that the offender must
display restricted license plates, issued under R.C. § 4503.231, on the vehicle
driven subject to the privileges, except as provided in R.C. § 4503.231(B).
      (2)   A suspension of a commercial driver’s license under this section
shall be concurrent with any period of suspension or disqualification under
R.C. § 3123.58 or 4506.16. No person who is disqualified for life from holding
a commercial driver’s license under R.C. § 4506.16 shall be issued a driver’s
license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period for which the commercial
driver’s license was suspended under this section, and no person whose
commercial driver’s license is suspended under this section shall be issued a
driver’s license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period of the suspension.
   (f)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
698.02(f) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during or after
committing the offense that is a misdemeanor of the first degree under this
section for which the offender is sentenced.
   (g)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   ELECTRONIC MONITORING. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      (2)   EQUIVALENT OFFENSE. Any of the following:
         A.   A violation of a municipal ordinance, law of another state or law
of the United States that is substantially equivalent to division (a) of this
section;
         B.   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to division (a) of this section.
      (3)   JAIL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      (4)   MANDATORY JAIL TERM. The mandatory term in jail of three, ten or 30
consecutive days that must be imposed under division (b)(1), (b)(2) or (b)(3)
of this section upon an offender convicted of a violation of division (a) of
this section and in relation to which all of the following apply:
         A.   Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term
must be served in a jail.
         B.   Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term
cannot be suspended, reduced or otherwise modified pursuant to any provision of
the Ohio Revised Code.
(R.C. § 4510.14)
   (h)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
Statutory reference:
   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal
forfeiture of vehicle, see R.C. § 4510.161
§ 436.074 DRIVING UNDER FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY LAW SUSPENSION OR
CANCELLATION; DRIVING UNDER A NONPAYMENT OF JUDGMENT SUSPENSION.
   (a)   No person, whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or temporary
instruction permit or nonresident’s operating privilege has been suspended or
canceled pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4509, shall operate any motor vehicle within
this municipality, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by the person to
be operated by another person in the municipality, during the period of the
suspension or cancellation, except as specifically authorized by R.C. Chapter
4509. No person shall operate a motor vehicle within this municipality, or
knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by the person to be operated by
another person in the municipality, during the period in which the person is
required by R.C. § 4509.45 to file and maintain proof of financial
responsibility for a violation of R.C. § 4509.101, unless proof of financial
responsibility is maintained with respect to that vehicle.
   (b)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any public
or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking in this municipality if the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or temporary instruction permit or nonresident operating privilege has
been suspended pursuant to R.C. § 4509.37 or 4509.40 for nonpayment of a
judgment.
   (c)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth and Social Security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (a) or (b) of this section may be admitted into evidence
as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under either a
financial responsibility law suspension at the time of the alleged violation of
division (a) of this section or a nonpayment of judgment suspension at the time
of the alleged violation of division (b) of this section. The person charged
with a violation of division (a) or (b) of this section may offer evidence to
rebut this prima facie evidence.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of driving
under financial responsibility law suspension or cancellation and shall be
punished as provided in this division (d). Whoever violates division (b) of
this section is guilty of driving under a nonpayment of judgment suspension and
shall be punished as provided in this division (d).
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (d)(2) of this
section, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an
unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously was
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section, or
any combination of two violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or
4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. § 2929.28 in
an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident
or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s
operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense for
which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(R.C. § 4510.16)
   (e)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
Statutory reference:
   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal
forfeiture of vehicle, see R.C. § 4510.161
§ 436.075 FAILURE TO REINSTATE LICENSE.
   (a)   No person whose driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit or nonresident’s operating privilege has been
suspended shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public road or highway or any
public or private property after the suspension has expired unless the person
has complied with all license reinstatement requirements imposed by the court,
the Bureau of Motor Vehicles or another provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
   (b)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth and Social Security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (a) of this section may be admitted into evidence as
prima facie evidence that the license of the person had not been reinstated by
the person at the time of the alleged violation of division (a) of this
section. The person charged with a violation of division (a) of this section
may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to reinstate a
license, and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(2) of this section, whoever
violates this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of a violation of division (a) of this
section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two
or more violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.21 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (3)   In all cases, the court may impose upon the offender a class seven
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
(R.C. § 4510.21)
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
§ 436.08 OPERATION OR SALE WITHOUT CERTIFICATE OF TITLE.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in this municipality a motor vehicle for which a
certificate of title is required without having that certificate in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 4505 or, if a physical certificate of title has not been
issued for a motor vehicle, operate the motor vehicle in this state knowing
that the ownership information relating to the vehicle has not been entered
into the automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of Common
Pleas;
      (2)   Display or display for sale or sell as a dealer or acting on behalf
of a dealer, a motor vehicle without having obtained a manufacturer’s or
importer’s certificate, a certificate of title, or an assignment of a
certificate of title for it as provided in R.C. Chapter 4505;
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title or any certificate of
registration or license plates upon cancellation of the same by the Registrar
of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed in R.C. Chapter
4505;
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas as provided in R.C. Chapter 4505 in case of the destruction or
dismantling or change of a motor vehicle in such respect that it is not the
motor vehicle described in the certificate of title;
      (5)   Violate any rules adopted pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4505;
      (6)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapters 4505 and 4517, sell
at wholesale a motor vehicle ownership of which is not evidenced by an Ohio
certificate of title, or the current certificate of title issued for the motor
vehicle, or the manufacturer’s certificate of origin, and all title assignments
that evidence the seller’s ownership of the motor vehicle, and an odometer
disclosure statement that complies with R.C. § 4505.06 and subchapter IV of the
Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act, 86 Stat. 961 (1972), 15 U.S.C.
§ 1981; or
      (7)   Operate in this state a motor vehicle knowing that the certificate
of title to the vehicle or ownership of the vehicle as otherwise reflected in
the automated title processing system has been canceled.
   (b)   This section does not apply to persons engaged in the business of
warehousing or transporting motor vehicles for the purpose of salvage
disposition.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
(Ord. 1990-64, passed 3-19-1990)
Statutory reference:
   Prohibited acts, see R.C. § 4505.18
§ 436.09 DISPLAY OF LICENSE PLATES; REGISTRATION; OBSTRUCTIONS.
   (a)   (1)   No person who is the owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall
fail to display in plain view on the front and rear of the motor vehicle the
distinctive number and registration mark, including any county identification
sticker and any validation sticker issued under R.C. §§ 4503.19 and 4503.191,
furnished by the Director of Public Safety, except that a manufacturer of motor
vehicles or dealer therein, the holder of an in-transit permit and the owner or
operator of a motorcycle, motorized bicycle, manufactured home, mobile home,
trailer or semitrailer shall display on the rear only. A motor vehicle that is
issued two license plates shall display the validation sticker only on the rear
license plate, except that a commercial tractor that does not receive an
apportioned license plate under the international registration plan shall
display the validation sticker on the front of the commercial tractor. An
apportioned vehicle receiving an apportioned license plate under the
international registration plan shall display the license plate only on the
front of a commercial tractor and on the rear of all other vehicles. All
license plates shall be securely fastened so as not to swing, and shall not be
covered by any material that obstructs its visibility.
      (2)   No person to whom a temporary license placard or windshield sticker
has been issued for the use of a motor vehicle under R.C. § 4503.182, and no
operator of that motor vehicle, shall fail to display the temporary license
placard in plain view from the rear of the vehicle either in the rear window or
on an external rear surface of the motor vehicle, or fail to display the
windshield sticker in plain view on the rear window of the motor vehicle. No
temporary license placard or windshield sticker shall be covered by any
material that obstructs its visibility.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided by R.C. §§ 4503.103, 4503.173, 4503.41,
4503.43 and 4503.46, no person who is the owner or chauffeur of a motor vehicle
operated or driven upon the public roads or highways shall fail to file
annually the application for registration or to pay the tax therefor.
   (c)   No person shall operate or drive upon the highways of this
municipality a motor vehicle acquired from a former owner who has registered
the motor vehicle, while the motor vehicle displays the distinctive number or
identification mark assigned to it upon its original registration.
   (d)   No person who is the owner of a motor vehicle and a resident of this
state shall operate or drive the motor vehicle upon the highways of this
municipality while it displays a distinctive number or identification mark
issued by or under the authority of another state, without complying with the
laws of this state relating to the registration and identification of motor
vehicles.
   (e)   No person shall park or operate any vehicle upon any public street or
highway upon which are displayed any license plates for any period of time
which has expired, or any license plates issued in another state for which the
period of reciprocal agreement with the state of issue has expired.
   (f)   No person shall park or operate any vehicle upon any public street or
highway upon which are displayed any license plates not legally registered and
issued for such vehicle, or upon which are displayed any license plates that
were issued on an application for registration that contains any false
statement by the applicant.
   (g)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, upon which license plates are
required by law to be displayed, unless the license plates legally registered
and issued for such vehicle are fastened in such a manner, and not covered,
obscured or concealed by any part or accessory of such vehicle, to be readable
in their entirety from left to right.
   (h)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
(Ord. 1990-64, passed 3-19-1990)
Statutory reference:
   Display of license plates and validation stickers or temporary license
placard or windshield sticker, see R.C. § 4503.21(A)
   Operating with number of former owner, see R.C. § 4549.11(A)
   Owner or chauffeur of motor vehicle operated or driven upon public roads;
owner required to file application, taxes. see R.C. § 4503.11(A)
   Resident operating with number issued by foreign state, see R.C. § 4549.12
(A)
§ 436.10 USE OF ILLEGAL LICENSE PLATES.
   (a)   No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle upon the public roads
and highways in this municipality if it displays a license plate or a
distinctive number or identification mark that meets any of the following
criteria:
      (1)   It is fictitious;
      (2)   It is a counterfeit or an unlawfully made copy of any distinctive
number or identification mark; or
      (3)   It belongs to another motor vehicle, provided that this section
does not apply to a motor vehicle that is operated on the public roads and
highways in this municipality when the motor vehicle displays license plates
that originally were issued for a motor vehicle that previously was owned by
the same person who owns the motor vehicle that is operated on the public roads
and highways in this municipality during the 30-day period described in R.C. §
4503.12(A)(4).
   (b)   A person who fails to comply with the transfer of registration
provisions of R.C. § 4503.12 and is charged with a violation of that section
shall not be charged with a violation of this section.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section is
guilty of operating a motor vehicle bearing an invalid license plate or
identification mark, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and
a misdemeanor of the third degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4549.08)
§ 436.11 FAILURE TO STOP AFTER ACCIDENT.
   (a)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision with
persons or property on a public road or highway, the operator of the motor
vehicle, having knowledge of the accident or collision, immediately shall stop
the operator’s motor vehicle at the scene of the accident or collision. The
operator shall remain at the scene of the accident or collision until the
operator has given the operator’s name and address and, if the operator is not
the owner, the name and address of the owner of that motor vehicle, together
with the registered number of that motor vehicle, to all of the following:
         A.   Any person injured in the accident or collision;
         B.   The operator, occupant, owner, or attendant of any motor vehicle
damaged in the accident or collision;
         C.   The police officer at the scene of the accident or collision.
      (2)   In the event an injured person is unable to comprehend and record
the information required to be given under division (a)(1) of this section, the
other operator involved in the accident or collision shall notify the nearest
police authority concerning the location of the accident or collision, and the
operator’s name, address, and the registered number of the motor vehicle the
operator was operating. The operator shall remain at the scene of the accident
or collision until a police officer arrives, unless removed from the scene by
an emergency vehicle operated by a political subdivision or an ambulance.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely
attach the information required to be given in this section, in writing, to a
conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after an accident. Except as otherwise provided in division (b)
(2) or (b)(3) of this section, failure to stop after an accident is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm to a
person, failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a person,
failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend the first six months
of suspension of an offender’s license, permit, or privilege required by this
division.
      (5)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. §
2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.02)
§ 436.12 STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT ON OTHER THAN PUBLIC ROADS OR HIGHWAYS.
   (a)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision resulting
in injury or damage to persons or property on any public or private property
other than a public road or highway, the operator of the motor vehicle, having
knowledge of the accident or collision, shall stop at the scene of the accident
or collision. Upon request of any person who is injured or damaged, or any
other person, the operator shall give that person the operator’s name and
address, and, if the operator is not the owner, the name and address of the
owner of that motor vehicle, together with the registered number of that motor
vehicle, and, if available, exhibit the operator’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license.
      (2)   If the operator of the motor vehicle involved in the accident or
collision does not provide the information specified in division (a)(1) of this
section, the operator shall give that information, within 24 hours after the
accident or collision, to the police department of the city or village in which
the accident or collision occurred, or if it occurred outside the corporate
limits of a city or village, to the sheriff of the county in which the accident
or collision occurred.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely
attach the information required under division (a)(1) of this section, in
writing, to a conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor
vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident. Except as otherwise provided
in division (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section, failure to stop after a nonpublic
road accident is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm to a
person, failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a person,
failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend the first six months
of suspension of an offender’s license, permit, or privilege required by this
division.
      (5)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. §
2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.021)
§ 436.13 VEHICLE ACCIDENT RESULTING IN DAMAGE TO REALTY.
   (a)   (1)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in
damage to real property, or personal property attached to real property,
legally upon or adjacent to a public road or highway immediately shall stop and
take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of the
property of that fact, of the driver’s name and address, and of the
registration number of vehicle the driver is driving and, upon request and if
available, shall exhibit the driver’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license.
      (2)   If the owner or person in charge of the property cannot be located
after reasonable search, the driver of the vehicle involved in the accident
resulting in damage to the property within 24 hours after the accident, shall
forward to the Police Department of the municipality the same information
required to be given to the owner or person in control of the property and give
the location of the accident and a description of the damage insofar as it is
known.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after an accident involving the property of others, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
698.02(f) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during or after
committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.03)
§ 436.14 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES AFTER ACCIDENTS.
   (a)   If a motor vehicle accident occurs on any highway, public street, or
other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel and if any
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property that has been damaged or spilled as
a result of the motor vehicle accident is blocking the highway, street, or
other property or is otherwise endangering public safety, a public safety
official may do either of the following without the consent of the owner but
with the approval of the law enforcement agency conducting any investigation of
the accident:
      (1)   Remove, or order the removal of, the motor vehicle if the motor
vehicle is unoccupied, cargo, or personal property from the portion of the
highway, public street, or property ordinarily used for vehicular travel on the
highway, public street, or other property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel.
      (2)   If the motor vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle, allow the owner
or operator of the vehicle the opportunity to arrange for the removal of the
motor vehicle within a period of time specified by the public safety official.
If the public safety official determines that the motor vehicle cannot be
removed within the specified period of time, the public safety official shall
remove or order the removal of the motor vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(2) of this section, the
Department of Transportation, any employee of the Department of Transportation,
or a public safety official who authorizes or participates in the removal of
any unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property as authorized by
division (a) of this section, regardless of whether the removal is executed by
a private towing service, is not liable for civil damages for any injury,
death, or loss to person or property that results from the removal of that
unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property. Further, except as
provided in division (b)(2) of this section, if a public safety official
authorizes, employs, or arranges to have a private towing service remove any
unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property as authorized by division
(a) of this section, that private towing service is not liable for civil
damages for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that results from
the removal of that unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
         A.   Any person or entity involved in the removal of an unoccupied
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property pursuant to division (a) of this
section if that removal causes or contributes to the release of a hazardous
material or to structural damage to the roadway;
         B.   A private towing service that was not authorized, employed, or
arranged by a public safety official to remove an unoccupied motor vehicle,
cargo, or personal property under this section;
         C.   Except as provided in division (b)(2)D. of this section, a
private towing service that was authorized, employed, or arranged by a public
safety official to perform the removal of the unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo,
or personal property but the private towing service performed the removal in a
negligent manner;
         D.   A private towing service that was authorized, employed, or
arranged by a public safety official to perform the removal of the unoccupied
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property that was endangering public safety
but the private towing service performed the removal in a reckless manner.
   (c)   As used in divisions (a) and (b) of this section:
      (1)   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.232.
      (2)   PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICIAL. Means any of the following:
         A.   The sheriff of the county, or the chief of a law enforcement
agency in the municipal corporation, township, port authority, conservancy
district, university campus police department, park district police force, or
township or joint police district, in which the accident occurred;
         B.   A state highway patrol trooper;
         C.   The chief of the fire department having jurisdiction where the
accident occurred;
         D.   A duly authorized subordinate acting on behalf of an official
specified in divisions A. to C. of this definition.
         E.   A natural resources officer or a wildlife officer.
(R.C. § 4513.66)
   (d)   If a towing service is removing a motor vehicle, and the removal was
not authorized under R.C. § 4513.60, 4513.601, 4513.61, or 4513.66, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, prior to removing the motor
vehicle, the towing service shall provide a written estimate of the price for
the removal to the operator of the motor vehicle, if requested.
   (e)   The towing service shall ensure that any estimate provided under
division (d) of this section includes the fees, services to be rendered, and
destination of the vehicle.
   (f)   If a towing service fails to provide a written estimate as required by
this section, the towing service shall not charge fees for the towing and
storage of the motor vehicle that exceed 25% of any applicable fees established
by the public utilities commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25(B)(4)
or, if the vehicle was towed within a municipal corporation that has
established vehicle removal and storage fees, 25% of the fees established by
the municipal corporation.
   (g)   Any storage facility that accepts towed vehicles shall conspicuously
post a notice at the entrance to the storage facility that states the
limitation on fees established under division (f) of this section.
(R.C. § 4513.68)
§ 436.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and 408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.
CHAPTER 438: SAFETY AND EQUIPMENT
Section
   
438.01   Driving unsafe vehicles; application
   
438.02   Lighted lights; measurement of distances and heights
   
438.03   Headlights on motor vehicles and motorcycles
   
438.04   Tail light; illumination of rear license plate
   
438.05   Rear red reflectors
   
438.06   Safety lighting on commercial vehicles
   
438.07   Obscured lights on vehicles in combination
   
438.08   Red light or red flag on extended loads
   
438.09   Lights on parked or stopped vehicles
   
438.10   Lights, emblems, and reflectors on slow-moving vehicles, farm
machinery, agricultural tractors, and animal-drawn vehicles
   
438.11   Spotlight and auxiliary lights
   
438.12   Cowl, fender and back-up lights
   
438.13   Two lights displayed
   
438.14   Use of headlight beams
   
438.15   Lights of less intensity on slow-moving vehicles
   
438.16   Number of lights permitted; red and flashing lights
   
438.165   Lights and sound-producing devices on coroners’ vehicles
   
438.17   Vehicles transporting preschool children
   
438.18   Focus and aim of headlights
   
438.19   Motor vehicle and motorcycle brakes
   
438.20   Horn, siren and theft alarm signal
   
438.21   Muffler; muffler cutout; excessive smoke, gas or noise
   
438.22   Rear-view mirror; clear view to front, both sides and rear
   
438.23   Windshield required; sign or poster upon windshield; windshield wiper
   
438.235   Tinted glass; materials on glass
   
438.24   Limited load extension on left side of passenger vehicle
   
438.25   Motor vehicle stop lights
   
438.26   Bumpers
   
438.27   Air breather or cleaner required
   
438.28   Use of child restraints
   
438.29   Use of occupant restraining devices
   
438.30   Ignition interlock devices (Repealed)
   
438.31   Amber lights on snow plowing vehicles
   
438.32   Air bags
   
438.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Bicycle equipment, see §
474.05
   Collector’s vehicles, see R.C. §§ 4513.38, 4513.41
   Improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle, see §
672.04
   Occupying travel trailers while in motion, see §
440.08
   Snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle and all-purpose vehicle equipment, see §
476.02
   Towing requirements; exception to size and weight restrictions, see §
440.05
   Use of stop and turn signals, see §
432.13
   Vehicles transporting explosives, see §
440.04
   Warning devices for commercial vehicles disabled upon freeways, see R.C. §
4513.28
   Wheel protectors for commercial vehicles, see §
440.03
§ 438.01 DRIVING UNSAFE VEHICLES; APPLICATION.
   (a)   No person shall drive or move, or cause or knowingly permit to be
driven or moved, on any highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is
in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.02(A), (H))
§ 438.02 LIGHTED LIGHTS; MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCES AND HEIGHTS.
   (a)   Every vehicle, other than a motorized bicycle, operated upon a street
or highway within this state shall display lighted lights and illuminating
devices as required by R.C. §§ 4513.04 through 4513.37 during all of the
following times:
      (1)   The time from sunset to sunrise;
      (2)   At any other time when, due to insufficient natural light or
unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons, vehicles and substantial objects
on the highway are not discernible at a distance of 1,000 feet ahead; and
      (3)   At any time when the windshield wipers of the vehicle are in use
because of precipitation on the windshield.
   (b)   Every motorized bicycle shall display at such times lighted lights
meeting the rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under R.C. §
4511.521. No motor vehicle, during any time specified in this section, shall be
operated upon a street or highway within this state using only parking lights
as illumination.
   (c)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the distance
from which certain lamps and devices shall render objects visible, or within
which such lamps or devices shall be visible, such distance shall be measured
upon a straight level unlighted highway under normal atmospheric conditions
unless a different condition is expressly stated.
   (d)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the mounted
height of lights or devices, it shall mean from the center of such light or
device to the level ground upon which the vehicle stands.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a vehicle being operated upon a
street or highway within this state to stop the vehicle solely because the
officer observes that a violation of division (a)(3) of this section has been
or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation or
summons for a violation of that division, or causing the arrest of or
commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of that division.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.03)
§ 438.03 HEADLIGHTS ON MOTOR VEHICLES AND MOTORCYCLES.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, shall be equipped
with at least two headlights with at least one near each side of the front of
the motor vehicle.
      (2)   Every motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one and not more
than two headlights.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.04)
§ 438.04 TAIL LIGHT; ILLUMINATION OF REAR LICENSE PLATE.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer or
vehicle which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles shall be
equipped with at least one tail light mounted on the rear which, when lighted,
shall emit a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear,
provided that in the case of a train of vehicles only the tail light on the
rearmost vehicle need be visible from the distance specified.
      (2)   Either a tail light or a separate light shall be so constructed and
placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration plate, when
the registration plate is required, and render it legible from a distance of 50
feet to the rear. Any tail light, together with any separate light for
illuminating the rear registration plate, shall be so wired as to be lighted
whenever the headlights or auxiliary driving lights are lighted, except where
separate lighting systems are provided for trailers for the purpose of
illuminating the registration plate.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.05)
§ 438.05 REAR RED REFLECTORS.
   (a)   (1)   Every new motor vehicle sold after September 6, 1941, and
operated on a highway, other than a commercial tractor to which a trailer or
semitrailer is attached, shall carry at the rear, either as a part of the tail
lamps or separately, two red reflectors meeting the requirements of this
section, except that vehicles of the type mentioned in R.C. § 4513.07 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall be equipped with reflectors
as required by the regulations provided for in that section.
      (2)   Every such reflector shall be of a size and characteristics and so
maintained as to be visible at night from all distances within 300 feet to 50
feet from the vehicle.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.06)
§ 438.06 SAFETY LIGHTING ON COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   When the Director of Public Safety prescribes and promulgates
regulations relating to clearance lights, marker lights, reflectors and stop
lights on buses, trucks, commercial tractors, trailers, semitrailers and pole
trailers, when operated upon any highway, these vehicles shall be equipped as
required by the regulations, and the equipment shall be lighted at all times
mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
except that clearance lights and side marker lights need not be lighted on any
such vehicle when it is operated within the municipality where there is
sufficient light to reveal any person or substantial object on the highway at a
distance of 500 feet.
      (2)   This equipment shall be in addition to all other lights
specifically required by R.C. §§ 4513.03 through 4513.16, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinances.
      (3)   Vehicles operated under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities
Commission are not subject to this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.07)
§ 438.07 OBSCURED LIGHTS ON VEHICLES IN COMBINATION.
   Whenever motor and other vehicles are operated in combination during the
time that lights are required, any light, except tail lights, which by reason
of its location on a vehicle of the combination would be obscured by another
vehicle of the combination, need not be lighted, but this section does not
affect the requirement that lighted clearance lights be displayed on the front
of the foremost vehicle required to have clearance lights or that all lights
required on the rear of the rearmost vehicle of any combination shall be
lighted.
(R.C. § 4513.08)
§ 438.08 RED LIGHT OR RED FLAG ON EXTENDED LOADS.
   (a)   Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four feet or
more beyond the bed or body of this vehicle, there shall be displayed at the
extreme rear end of the load, at the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, a red light or lantern plainly
visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the sides and rear. The red
light or lantern required by this section is in addition to the red rear light
required upon every vehicle. At any other time there shall be displayed at the
extreme rear end of the load a red flag or cloth not less than 16 inches
square.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.09)
§ 438.09 LIGHTS ON PARKED OR STOPPED VEHICLES.
   (a)   Except in case of an emergency, whenever a vehicle is parked or
stopped upon a roadway open to traffic or a shoulder adjacent thereto, whether
attended or unattended, during the times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the vehicle shall be equipped
with one or more lights which shall exhibit a white or amber light on the
roadway side visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle,
and a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear. No lights need
be displayed upon any such vehicle when it is stopped or parked within the
municipality where there is sufficient light to reveal any person or
substantial object within a distance of 500 feet upon the highway. Any lighted
headlights upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed.
(R.C. § 4513.10)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 438.10 LIGHTS, EMBLEMS, AND REFLECTORS ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES, FARM
MACHINERY, AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS, AND ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES.
   (a)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      (1)   BOAT TRAILER. Means any vehicle designed and used exclusively to
transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a
marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a distance of no more
than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less.
      (2)   SLOW-MOVING VEHICLE and SMV. Mean a boat trailer, unit of farm
machinery, road construction machinery, or other machinery designed by the
manufacturer to operate at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less. The term does
not include a bicycle, motorized bicycle, electric bicycle, or animal- drawn
vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.11)
   (b)   Generally.
      (1)   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall operate
either of the following vehicles unless it is equipped with and displays the
lamps described in division (b)(2) of this section:
         A.   A vehicle not specifically required to be equipped with lamps or
other lighting devices by R.C. §§ 4513.03 to 4513.10;
         B.   A vehicle referred to in R.C. § 4513.02(G).
      (2)   Vehicles described in division (b)(1) of this section shall be
equipped with both of the following:
         A.   At least one lamp displaying a white light visible from a
distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the front of the vehicle;
         B.   Two lamps displaying red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear of the vehicle, or as an alternative, one lamp
displaying a red light visible from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to
the rear and two red reflectors visible from all distances of 600 feet to 100
feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams of headlamps.
      (3)   A.   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall
operate a multi- wheel agricultural tractor model year 2001 or earlier on a
street or highway unless it is equipped with and displays reflectors and
illuminated amber lamps so that the extreme left and right projections of the
tractor are indicated by all of the following:
            1.   Flashing lamps displaying amber light, visible to the front
and the rear. The lamps need not flash simultaneously and need not flash in
conjunction with any directional signals of the tractor.
            2.   Amber reflectors, all visible to the front;
            3.   Red reflectors, all visible to the rear.
         B.   Rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under R.C. §
4513.111 governing the lamps and reflectors described in division (b)(3)A. of
this section and their placement correlate with and, as far as possible,
conform with paragraphs 4.1.4.1, 4.1.7.1, and 4.1.7.2 respectively of the
American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S279.10 OCT 98,
Lighting and Marking of Agricultural Equipment on Highways.
      (4)   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall operate a
unit of farm machinery model year 2002 or later on a street or highway unless
it is equipped with and displays markings and illuminated lamps that meet or
exceed the lighting, illumination, and marking standards and specifications
that are applicable to that type of farm machinery for the unit's model year
specified in the American society of agricultural engineers standard ANSI/ASAE
S279.10 OCT 98, lighting and marking of agricultural equipment on highways.
      (5)   Any unit of farm machinery designed by its manufacturer to operate
at a speed of 25 miles per hour or greater or any SMV may be equipped with and
display a red flashing light that is visible from a distance of not less than
1,000 feet to the rear at all times specified in R.C. § 4513.03. When a double-
faced light is used, it shall display amber light to the front and red light to
the rear.
      (6)   Lights and reflectors required under divisions (b)(3) and (b)(4) of
this section and authorized under division (b)(5) of this section are in
addition to other lights required or permitted by this division (b) or R.C. §
4513.17.
      (7)   The Ohio Director of Public Safety shall adopt rules in accordance
R.C. Chapter 119 Code that establish standards and specifications for lamps and
reflectors required or authorized by this section. Lamps and reflectors
required or authorized by this section shall meet those standards and
specifications.
      (8)   This division (b) does not apply to a bicycle, motorized bicycle,
electric bicycle, or animal-drawn vehicle.
      (9)   Whoever violates this division (b) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.111)
   (c)   Slow-moving vehicles.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall
operate an SMV on a street or highway as follows:
         A.   At a speed exceeding 25 miles per hour;
         B.   Without displaying the triangular SMV emblem mounted in
accordance with division (c)(2) of this section.
      (2)   The SMV emblem shall be mounted so as to be visible from a distance
of not less than 500 feet to the rear. In accordance with R.C. Chapter 119, the
Ohio Director of Public Safety shall adopt standards and specifications for the
design and position of mounting the SMV emblem. The standards and
specifications for the SMV emblem correlate with and, so far as possible,
conform with those approved by the American Society of Agricultural Engineers.
      (3)   A person may operate an SMV on a street or highway without
displaying the triangular SMV emblem when any of the following apply:
         A.   The SMV is being used in actual construction and maintenance work
in an area guarded by a flagperson, or where flares are used.
         B.   The SMV is operating or traveling within the limits of a
construction area designated by the Ohio Director of Transportation, a city
engineer, or the county engineer of the several counties, when such
construction area is marked in accordance with requirements of the Ohio
Director of Transportation and the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices,
as set forth in R.C. § 4511.09.
      (4)   No person shall display an SMV emblem on any of the following:
         A.   Any vehicle not required to use the SMV emblem by this division
(c) or R.C. § 4513.113 or 4513.114;
         B.   An SMV being transported upon any other vehicle;
         C.   Any stationary object on the highway.
      (5)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate an SMV, except a unit
designed to be completely mounted on a primary power unit that is manufactured
or assembled on or after April 1, 1966, unless it is equipped with an SMV
emblem mounting device.
      (6)   Whoever violates this division (c) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.112)
   (d)   Farm machinery and agricultural tractors.
      (1)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate on a street or
highway any unit of farm machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to
operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the unit displays both
of the following:
         A.   The SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. § 4513.112(B);
         B.   A speed identification symbol that does both of the following:
            1.   Meets the specifications contained in the American Society of
Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005, Agricultural Equipment:
Speed Identification Symbol (SIS);
            2.   Indicates the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the
unit of farm machinery is designed by its manufacturer to operate.
      (2)   No person operating a tractor on a street or highway that is
designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per
hour and that is towing, pulling, or otherwise drawing a unit of farm machinery
while operating at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour shall fail to display
both of the following on the unit of farm machinery:
         A.   The SMV emblem;
         B.   The speed identification symbol that matches the speed
identification symbol required to be displayed on the agricultural tractor.
      (3)   No person shall operate an agricultural tractor that is designed by
its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless
the person possesses documentation published or provided by the manufacturer
indicating the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the manufacturer
designed the agricultural tractor to operate.
      (4)   Whoever violates this division (d) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.113)
   (e)   Animal-drawn vehicles.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (e)(4) of this section, no
person shall operate an animal-drawn vehicle on a street or highway unless it
is equipped with and displays, at the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, both
of the following:
         A.   At least one lamp displaying a white light visible from a
distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the front of the animal-drawn vehicle;
         B.   Two lamps displaying red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear of the animal-drawn vehicle, or as an
alternative, one lamp displaying a red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear and two red reflectors visible from all
distances of 600 feet to one hundred feet to the rear when illuminated by the
lawful lower beams of headlamps.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (e)(4) of this section, no
person shall operate an animal-drawn vehicle on a street or highway unless it
is equipped with and displays, at all times, all of the following:
         A.   One yellow flashing lamp displaying yellow light that is visible
from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet and that is mounted in either of
the following positions:
            1.   On the top most portion of the rear of the animal-drawn
vehicle;
            2.   On the top of the animal-drawn vehicle.
         B.   At least one of the following:
            1.   An SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. § 4513.112(B);
            2.   Micro-prism reflective tape that is visible from a distance of
not less than 500 feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams
of headlamps;
            3.   Both an SMV emblem and micro-prism reflective tape, as
specified in this division.
         C.   Lamps and micro-prism reflective tape required by this section
shall meet standards and specifications adopted by the Ohio Director of Public
Safety under R.C. § 4513.114.
      (3)   The Ohio Director of Public Safety, in accordance with R.C. Chapter
119, shall adopt rules establishing standards and specifications for the
position and mounting of the lamps and micro- prism reflective tape required by
R.C. § 4513.114. The rules permit the micro-prism reflective tape to be red,
amber, white, or silver in color.
      (4)   A.   Divisions (e)(1) and (e)(2) of this section do not apply to
the operator of animal-drawn agricultural equipment who is not transporting any
livestock or a person other than the operator.
         B.   No operator described in division (e)(4)A. of this section shall
operate animal-drawn agricultural equipment unless it is equipped with and
displays, at all times, the SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. §
4513.112(B).
         C.   As used in division (e)(4) of this section, “animal-drawn
agricultural equipment” means equipment drawn by the muscular power of an
animal that is used solely for agricultural purposes. “Animal-drawn
agricultural equipment” includes any of the following:
            1.   A plow;
            2.   A manure spreader;
            3.   A thresher.
      (5)   Whoever violates this division (e) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.114)
   (f)   Strict liability offenses. The offenses established under this section
are strict liability offenses, and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The
designation of these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be
construed to imply that any other offense, for which there is no specified
degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. § 4513.115)
§ 438.11 SPOTLIGHT AND AUXILIARY LIGHTS.
   (a)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one
spotlight and every lighted spotlight shall be so aimed and used upon
approaching another vehicle that no part of the high-intensity portion of the
beam will be directed to the left of the prolongation of the extreme left side
of the vehicle, nor more than 100 feet ahead of the vehicle.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than three
auxiliary driving lights mounted on the front of the vehicle. Any such lights
which do not conform to the specifications for auxiliary driving lights and the
regulations for their use prescribed by the Director of Public Safety shall not
be used.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.12)
§ 438.12 COWL, FENDER AND BACK-UP LIGHTS.
   (a)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with side cowl or fender
lights which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with lights on each side thereof
which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.
      (3)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with back-up lights, either
separately or in combination with another light. No back-up lights shall be
continuously lighted when the motor vehicle is in forward motion.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.13)
§ 438.13 TWO LIGHTS DISPLAYED.
   (a)   At all times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, at least two lighted lights shall be displayed, one near
each side of the front of every motor vehicle, except when the vehicle is
parked subject to the regulations governing lights on parked vehicles.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.14)
§ 438.14 USE OF HEADLIGHT BEAMS.
   (a)   Whenever a motor vehicle is being operated on a roadway or shoulder
adjacent thereto during the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the driver shall use a
distribution of light, or composite beam, directed high enough and of
sufficient intensity to reveal persons, vehicles and substantial objects at a
safe distance in advance of the vehicle, subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming vehicle,
the driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam, so aimed that
the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the oncoming driver; and
      (2)   Every new motor vehicle registered in this state which has
multiple-beam road lighting equipment shall be equipped with a beam indicator,
which shall be lighted whenever the uppermost distribution of light from the
headlights is in use, and shall not otherwise be lighted. This indicator shall
be so designed and located that, when lighted, it will be readily visible
without glare to the driver of the vehicle.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.15)
§ 438.15 LIGHTS OF LESS INTENSITY ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES.
   (a)   Any motor vehicle may be operated under the conditions specified in
R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance when it is
equipped with two lighted lights upon the front thereof capable of revealing
persons and substantial objects 75 feet ahead, in lieu of lights required in
R.C. § 4513.14, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, provided
that the vehicle shall not be operated at a speed in excess of 20 mph.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.16)
§ 438.16 NUMBER OF LIGHTS PERMITTED; RED AND FLASHING LIGHTS.
   (a)   Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlights is also equipped
with any auxiliary lights or spotlight or any other light on the front thereof
projecting a beam of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower, not more than a
total of five of any such lights on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted at
any one time when the vehicle is upon a highway.
   (b)   Any lighted light or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle, other
than headlights, spotlights, signal lights or auxiliary driving lights, that
projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower shall be
so directed that no part of the beam will strike the level of the roadway on
which the vehicle stands at a distance of more than 75 feet from the vehicle.
   (c)   (1)   Flashing lights are prohibited on motor vehicles, except as a
means for indicating a right or a left turn, or in the presence of a vehicular
traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching, or overtaking or passing.
      (2)   The prohibition in division (c)(1) of this section does not apply
to any of the following:
         A.   Emergency vehicles, road service vehicles servicing or towing a
disabled vehicle, stationary waste collection vehicles actively collecting
garbage, refuse, trash, or recyclable materials on the roadside, rural mail
delivery vehicles, vehicles as provided in R.C. § 4513.182, highway maintenance
vehicles, and similar equipment operated by state or local authorities,
provided such vehicles are equipped with and display, when used on a street or
highway for the special purpose necessitating such lights, a flashing,
oscillating, or rotating amber light;
         B.   Vehicles or machinery permitted by R.C. § 4513.111 to have a
flashing red light;
         C.   Farm machinery and vehicles escorting farm machinery, provided
such machinery and vehicles are equipped with and display, when used on a
street or highway, a flashing, oscillating, or rotating amber light. Farm
machinery also may display the lights described in R.C. § 4513.111.
         D.   A funeral hearse or funeral escort vehicle, provided that the
funeral hearse or funeral escort vehicle is equipped with and displays, when
used on a street or highway for the special purpose necessitating such lights,
a flashing, oscillating, or rotating purple or amber light.
         E.   A vehicle being used for emergency preparedness, response, and
recovery activities, as those terms are defined in R.C. § 5502.21, that is
equipped with and displays, when used on a street or highway for the special
purpose necessitating such lights, a flashing, oscillating, or rotating amber
or red and white light, provided that the vehicle is being operated by a person
from one of the following and the vehicle is clearly marked with the applicable
agency's or authority's insignia:
            1.   The Ohio Emergency Management Agency;
            2.   A countywide emergency management agency established under
R.C. § 5502.26;
            3.   A regional authority for emergency management established
under R.C. § 5502.27;
            4.   A program for emergency management established under R.C. §
5502.271.
      (3)   Division (c)(1) of this section does not apply to animal-drawn
vehicles subject to R.C. § 4513.114.
   (d)   (1)   Except a person operating a public safety vehicle, as defined in
R.C. § 4511.01(E), an emergency management agency vehicle, as described in
division (c)(2)E. of this section, or a school bus, no person shall operate,
move, or park upon, or permit to stand within the right-of-way of any public
street or highway any vehicle or equipment that is equipped with and displaying
a flashing red or a flashing combination red and white light, or an oscillating
or rotating red light, or a combination red and white oscillating or rotating
light.
      (2)   Except a public law enforcement officer, or other person sworn to
enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state, operating a public safety
vehicle when on duty, no person shall operate, move, or park upon, or permit to
stand within the right-of-way of any street or highway any vehicle or equipment
that is equipped with, or upon which is mounted, and displaying a flashing blue
or a flashing combination blue and white light, or an oscillating or rotating
blue light, or a combination blue and white oscillating or rotating light.
   (e)   This section does not prohibit the use of warning lights required by
law or the simultaneous flashing of turn signals on disabled vehicles or on
vehicles being operated in unfavorable atmospheric conditions in order to
enhance their visibility. This section also does not prohibit the simultaneous
flashing of turn signals or warning lights whether on farm machinery or
vehicles escorting farm machinery when used on a street or highway.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.17)
§ 438.165 LIGHTS AND SOUND-PRODUCING DEVICES ON CORONERS’ VEHICLES.
   (a)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a motor vehicle operated
by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator may be equipped with a
flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and siren, whistle or bell
capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of
not less than 500 feet. Such a vehicle may display the flashing, oscillating or
rotating red or blue light and may give the audible signal of the siren,
whistle or bell only when responding to a fatality or a fatal motor vehicle
accident on a street or highway and only at those locations where the stoppage
of traffic impedes the ability of the coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s
investigator to arrive at the site of the fatality.
   (b)   This section does not relieve the coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s
investigator operating a motor vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard
for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.171)
§ 438.17 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING PRESCHOOL CHILDREN.
   (a)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle owned, leased or hired by a
nursery school, kindergarten or child care center, while transporting preschool
children to or from such an institution, unless the motor vehicle is equipped
with and displaying two amber flashing lights mounted on a bar attached to the
top of the vehicle, and a sign bearing the designation "caution — children,"
which shall be attached to the bar carrying the amber flashing lights in such a
manner as to be legible to persons both in front of and behind the vehicle. The
lights and sign shall meet standards and specifications adopted by the Ohio
Director of Public Safety.
   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle displaying the lights and sign
required by this section for any purpose other than the transportation of
preschool children as provided in this section.
(R.C. § 4513.182)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 438.18 FOCUS AND AIM OF HEADLIGHTS.
   (a)   No person shall use any lights mentioned in R.C. §§ 4513.03 through
4513.18, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, upon any motor
vehicle, trailer or semitrailer unless these lights are equipped, mounted and
adjusted as to focus and aim in accordance with regulations which are
prescribed by the Director of Public Safety.
   (b)   The headlights on any motor vehicle shall comply with the headlamp
color requirements contained in Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number
108, 49 C.F.R. § 571.108. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in violation
of this division.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.19)
§ 438.19 MOTOR VEHICLE AND MOTORCYCLE BRAKES.
   (a)   The following requirements govern as to brake equipment on vehicles.
      (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, when operated upon a
highway shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and
to stop and hold the motor vehicle, including two separate means of applying
the brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at
least two wheels. If these two separate means of applying the brakes are
connected in any way, then on those motor vehicles, manufactured or assembled
after January 1, 1942, they shall be so constructed that failure of any one
part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the motor vehicle without
brakes on at least two wheels.
      (2)   Every motorcycle, when operated upon a highway shall be equipped
with at least one adequate brake, which may be operated by hand or by foot.
      (3)   Every motorized bicycle shall be equipped with brakes meeting the
rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety under R.C. § 4511.521.
      (4)   When operated upon the highways, the following vehicles shall be
equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and to
hold the vehicle, designed to be applied by the driver of the towing motor
vehicle from its cab, and also designed and connected so that, in case of a
breakaway of the towed vehicle, the brakes shall be automatically applied:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every trailer or
semitrailer, except a pole trailer, with an empty weight of 2,000 pounds or
more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1942; and
         B.   Every manufactured home or travel trailer with an empty weight of
2,000 pounds or more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 2001.
      (5)   Every watercraft trailer with a gross weight or manufacturer’s
gross vehicle weight rating of 3,000 pounds or more that is manufactured or
assembled on or after January 1, 2008, shall have separate brakes equipped with
hydraulic surge or electrically operated brakes on two wheels.
      (6)   In any combination of motor-drawn trailers or semitrailers equipped
with brakes, means shall be provided for applying the rearmost brakes in
approximate synchronism with the brakes on the towing vehicle, and developing
the required braking effort on the rearmost wheels at the fastest rate; or
means shall be provided for applying braking effort first on the rearmost
brakes; or both of the above means, capable of being used alternatively, may be
employed.
      (7)   Every vehicle and combination of vehicles, except motorcycles and
motorized bicycles, and except trailers and semitrailers of a gross weight of
less than 2,000 pounds, and pole trailers, shall be equipped with parking
brakes adequate to hold the vehicle on any grade on which it is operated, under
all conditions of loading, on a surface free from snow, ice or loose material.
The parking brakes shall be capable of being applied in conformance with the
foregoing requirements by the driver’s muscular effort or by spring action or
by equivalent means. Their operation may be assisted by the service brakes or
other source of power provided that failure of the service brake actuation
system or other power assisting mechanism will not prevent the parking brakes
from being applied in conformance with the foregoing requirements. The parking
brakes shall be so designed that when once applied they shall remain applied
with the required effectiveness despite exhaustion of any source of energy or
leakage of any kind.
      (8)   The same brake drums, brake shoes and lining assemblies, brake shoe
anchors and mechanical brake shoe actuation mechanism normally associated with
the wheel brake assemblies may be used for both the service brakes and the
parking brakes. If the means of applying the parking brakes and the service
brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed that failure of
any one part shall not leave the vehicle without operative brakes.
      (9)   Every motor vehicle or combination of motor-drawn vehicles shall,
at all times and under all conditions of loading, be capable of being stopped
on a dry, smooth, level road free from loose material, upon application of the
service or foot brake, within the following specified distances, or shall be
capable of being decelerated at a sustained rate corresponding to these
distances:
         A.   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles having brakes on all wheels
shall come to a stop in 30 feet or less from a speed of 20 mph; and
         B.   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles not having brakes on all
wheels shall come to a stop in 40 feet or less from a speed of 20 mph.
      (10)   All brakes shall be maintained in good working order and shall be
so adjusted as to operate as equally as practicable with respect to the wheels
on opposite sides of the vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.20)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 438.20 HORN, SIREN AND THEFT ALARM SIGNAL.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle when operated upon a highway shall be
equipped with a horn which is in good working order and capable of emitting
sound audible, under normal conditions, from a distance of not less than 200
feet.
      (2)   No motor vehicle shall be equipped with, nor shall any person use
upon a vehicle, any siren, whistle or bell. Any vehicle may be equipped with a
theft alarm signal device which shall be so arranged that it cannot be used as
an ordinary warning signal. Every emergency vehicle shall be equipped with a
siren, whistle or bell, capable of emitting sound audible under normal
conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet and of a type approved by
the Director of Public Safety. The equipment shall not be used except when the
vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or is in the immediate
pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in which case the driver
of the emergency vehicle shall sound the equipment when it is necessary to warn
pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.21)
§ 438.21 MUFFLER; MUFFLER CUTOUT; EXCESSIVE SMOKE, GAS OR NOISE.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle with an internal combustion
engine shall at all times be equipped with a muffler which is in good working
order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise, and no
person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device upon a motor
vehicle on a highway. Every motorcycle muffler shall be equipped with baffle
plates.
      (2)   No person shall own, operate or have in the person’s possession any
motor vehicle or motorcycle equipped with a device for producing excessive
smoke or gas, or so equipped as to permit oil or any other chemical to flow
into or upon the exhaust pipe or muffler of the vehicle, or equipped in any way
to produce or emit smoke or dangerous or annoying gases from any portion of the
vehicle, other than the ordinary gases emitted by the exhaust of an internal
combustion engine under normal operation.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.22)
§ 438.22 REAR-VIEW MIRROR; CLEAR VIEW TO FRONT, BOTH SIDES AND REAR.
   (a)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle shall be equipped with a mirror so
located as to reflect to the operator a view of the highway to the rear of the
vehicle or motorcycle. Operators of vehicles and motorcycles shall have a clear
and unobstructed view to the front and to both sides of their vehicles and
motorcycles and shall have a clear view to the rear of their vehicles and
motorcycles by mirror.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.23)
§ 438.23 WINDSHIELD REQUIRED; SIGN OR POSTER UPON WINDSHIELD; WINDSHIELD WIPER.
   (a)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle on a street or highway in this
municipality, other than a motorcycle or motorized bicycle, that is not
equipped with a windshield.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle, other than a bus, with
any sign, poster or other nontransparent material upon the front windshield,
sidewings, side or rear windows of the vehicle other than a certificate or
other paper required to be displayed by law, except that there may be in the
lower left-hand or right-hand corner of the windshield a sign, poster or decal
not to exceed four inches in height by six inches in width. No sign, poster or
decal shall be displayed in the front windshield in such a manner as to conceal
the vehicle identification number for the motor vehicle when, in accordance
with federal law, that number is located inside the vehicle passenger
compartment and so placed as to be readable through the vehicle glazing without
moving any part of the vehicle.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a passenger car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if either of
the following apply to the device:
         A.   It is a VEHICLE SAFETY TECHNOLOGY as defined in 49 C.F.R. § 393.5
and complies with 49 C.F.R. § 393.60(e)(1)(ii).
         B.   It does not restrict the vehicle operator's sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals, and it does not conceal the vehicle
identification number.
      (3)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a commercial car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if either of
the following apply to the device:
         A.   It is a VEHICLE SAFETY TECHNOLOGY as defined in 49 C.F.R. § 393.5
and complies with 49 C.F.R. § 393.60(e)(1)(ii).
         B.   It does not restrict the vehicle operator's sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals, and it is mounted not more than 8.5 inches
below the upper edge of the windshield.
   (c)   The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device
for cleaning rain, snow or other moisture from the windshield. The device shall
be maintained in good working order and so constructed as to be controlled or
operated by the operator of the vehicle.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.24)
§ 438.235 TINTED GLASS; MATERIALS ON GLASS.
   (a)   No person shall operate, on any highway or other public or private
property open to the public for vehicular travel or parking, lease or rent any
motor vehicle that is registered in this state unless the motor vehicle
conforms to the requirements concerning tinted glass and reflectorized material
of R.C. § 4513.241 and of any applicable rule adopted under that section.
   (b)   No person shall install in or on any motor vehicle any glass or other
material that fails to conform to the requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or of any
rule adopted under that section.
   (c)   (1)   No used motor vehicle dealer or new motor vehicle dealer, as
defined in R.C. § 4517.01, shall sell any motor vehicle that fails to conform
to the requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or of any rule adopted under that
section.
      (2)   No manufacturer, remanufacturer, or distributor, as defined in R.C.
§ 4517.01, shall provide to a motor vehicle dealer licensed under R.C. Chapter
4517 or to any other person, a motor vehicle that fails to conform to the
requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or of any rule adopted under that section.
   (d)   No reflectorized materials shall be permitted upon or in any front
windshield, side windows, sidewings or rear window.
   (e)   This section does not apply to the manufacturer’s tinting or glazing
of motor vehicle windows or windshields that is otherwise in compliance with or
permitted by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 205.
   (f)   With regard to any side window behind a driver’s seat or any rear
window other than any window on an emergency door, this division (f) does not
apply to any school bus used to transport a child with disabilities pursuant to
R.C. Chapter 3323, whom it is impossible or impractical to transport by regular
school bus in the course of regular route transportation provided by a school
district. As used in this division (f), CHILD WITH DISABILITIES has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 3323.01.
   (g)   This section does not apply to any school bus that is to be sold and
operated outside the municipality.
   (h)   (1)   This section does not apply to a motor vehicle used by a law
enforcement agency under either of the following circumstances:
         A.   The vehicle does not have distinctive markings of a law
enforcement vehicle but is operated by or on behalf of the law enforcement
agency in an authorized investigation or other activity requiring that the
presence and identity of the vehicle occupants be undisclosed.
         B.   The vehicle primarily is used by the law enforcement canine unit
for transporting a police dog.
      (2)   As used in this division, LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY means a police
department, the office of a sheriff, the State Highway Patrol, a county
prosecuting attorney, or a federal, state, or local governmental body that
enforces criminal laws and that has employees who have a statutory power of
arrest.
(R.C. § 4513.241(C) - (J))
   (i)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a), (c)(2) or (d) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (c)(1) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor if the dealer or the dealer’s agent knew of the nonconformity
at the time of sale.
      (3)   A.   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree, except that an organization may not be
convicted unless the act of installation was authorized by the board of
directors, trustees, partners, or by a high managerial officer acting on behalf
of the organization, and installation was performed by an employee of the
organization acting within the scope of the person’s employment.
         B.   In addition to any other penalty imposed under this section,
whoever violates division (b) of this section is liable in a civil action to
the owner of a motor vehicle on which was installed the nonconforming glass or
material for any damages incurred by that person as a result of the
installation of the nonconforming glass or material, costs of maintaining the
civil action, and attorney fees.
         C.   In addition to any other penalty imposed under this section, if
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation
of division (b) of this section and the offender is a motor vehicle repair
operator registered under R.C. Chapter 4775 or a motor vehicle dealer licensed
under R.C. Chapter 4517, whoever violates division (b) of this section is
subject to a registration or license suspension, as applicable, for a period of
not more than 180 days.
(R.C. § 4513.241(K))
Statutory reference:
   Administrative regulations, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-41
§ 438.24 LIMITED LOAD EXTENSION ON LEFT SIDE OF PASSENGER VEHICLE.
   (a)   No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on a highway with any load
carried on the vehicle which extends more than six inches beyond the line of
the fenders on the vehicle’s left side.
(R.C. § 4513.30)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 438.25 MOTOR VEHICLE STOP LIGHTS.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer and pole trailer when
operated upon a highway shall be equipped with two or more stop lights, except
that passenger cars manufactured or assembled prior to January 1, 1967,
motorcycles and motor-driven cycles shall be equipped with at least one stop
light. Stop lights shall be mounted on the rear of the vehicle, actuated upon
application of the service brake, and may be incorporated with other rear
lights. These stop lights when actuated shall emit a red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear; provided that in the case of a train of
vehicles only the stop lights on the rearmost vehicle need be visible from the
distance specified.
      (2)   These stop lights when actuated shall give a steady warning light
to the rear of a vehicle or train of vehicles to indicate the intention of the
operator to diminish the speed of or stop a vehicle or train of vehicles.
      (3)   When stop lights are used as required by this section, they shall
be constructed or installed so as to provide adequate and reliable illumination
and shall conform to the appropriate rules and regulations established under
R.C. § 4513.19.
      (4)   Historical motor vehicles as defined in R.C. § 4503.181, not
originally manufactured with stop lights, are not subject to this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.071)
§ 438.26 BUMPERS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING. The manufacturer’s gross vehicle
weight rating established for that vehicle.
      (2)   MANUFACTURER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      (3)   MULTIPURPOSE PASSENGER VEHICLE. A motor vehicle with motive power,
except a motorcycle, designed to carry ten persons or less, that is constructed
either on a truck chassis or with special features for occasional off-road
operation.
      (4)   PASSENGER CAR. Any motor vehicle with motive power, designed for
carrying ten persons or less, except a multipurpose passenger vehicle or
motorcycle.
      (5)   TRUCK. Every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers,
designed and used to carry property and having a gross vehicle weight rating of
10,000 pounds or less.
   (b)   Rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety, in accordance with
R.C. Chapter 119, shall govern the maximum bumper height or, in the absence of
bumpers and in cases where bumper height has been lowered or modified, the
maximum height to the bottom of the frame rail of any passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck.
   (c)   No person shall operate upon a street or highway any passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this state that does not
conform to the requirements of this section or any applicable rule adopted
pursuant to R.C. § 4513.021.
   (d)   No person shall modify any motor vehicle registered in this state in
such a manner as to cause the vehicle body or chassis to come in contact with
the ground, expose the fuel tank to damage from collision, or cause the wheels
to come in contact with the body under normal operation, and no person shall
disconnect any part of the original suspension system of the vehicle to defeat
the safe operation of that system.
   (e)   Nothing contained in this section or in the rules adopted pursuant to
R.C. § 4513.021 shall be construed to prohibit either of the following:
      (1)   The installation upon a passenger car, multipurpose passenger
vehicle or truck registered in this state of heavy duty equipment, including
shock absorbers and overload springs; or
      (2)   The operation on a street or highway of a passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle, or truck registered in this state with normal
wear to the suspension system if the normal wear does not adversely affect the
control of the vehicle.
   (f)   This section and the rules adopted pursuant to R.C. § 4513.021 do not
apply to any specially designed or modified passenger car, multipurpose
passenger vehicle or truck when operated off a street or highway in races and
similar events.
   (g)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.021)
Statutory reference:
   Maximum height on bumpers, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-43
§ 438.27 AIR BREATHER OR CLEANER REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate upon any street, alley or other public place any
motor vehicle which is not equipped with a functioning air cleaner, except for
motor vehicles equipped with electronic fuel-injection engines.
§ 438.28 USE OF CHILD RESTRAINTS.
   (a)   When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that is required by the United States
Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of
manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions in a child
restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age; and
      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.
   (b)   When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, that is owned,
leased or otherwise under the control of a nursery school or child care center,
the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions in a child restraint system
that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age; and
      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.
   (c)   When any child who is less than eight years of age and less than four
feet nine inches in height, who is not required by division (a) or (b) of this
section to be secured in a child restraint system, is being transported in a
motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 4511.01 or a vehicle that is regulated under R.C. § 5104.015, that is
required by the United States Department of Transportation to be equipped with
seat belts at the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor
vehicle shall have the child properly secured in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions on a booster seat that meets federal motor vehicle
safety standards.
   (d)   When any child who is at least eight years of age but not older than
15 years of age, and who is not otherwise required by division (a), (b) or (c)
of this section to be secured in a child restraint system or booster seat, is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that is required by the United States
Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of
manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly restrained either in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions
in a child restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards
or in an occupant restraining device as defined in R.C. § 4513.263.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause an operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (c) or (d) of this section has been
or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation or
summons for a violation of division (c) or (d) of this section or causing the
arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of division
(c) or (d) of this section, and absent another violation of law, a law
enforcement officer’s view of the interior or visual inspection of a motor
vehicle being operated on any street or highway may not be used for the purpose
of determining whether a violation of division (c) or (d) of this section has
been or is being committed.
   (f)   The Director of Public Safety shall adopt such rules as are necessary
to carry out this section.
   (g)   The failure of an operator of a motor vehicle to secure a child in a
child restraint system, a booster seat or in an occupant restraining device as
required in this section is not negligence imputable to the child, is not
admissible as evidence in any civil action involving the rights of the child
against any other person allegedly liable for injuries to the child, is not to
be used as a basis for a criminal prosecution of the operator of the motor
vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section, and is not
admissible as evidence in any criminal action involving the operator of the
motor vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section.
   (h)   This section does not apply when an emergency exists that threatens
the life of any person operating or occupying a motor vehicle that is being
used to transport a child who otherwise would be required to be restrained
under this section. This section does not apply to a person operating a motor
vehicle who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4731 or a chiropractor licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4734 that states that the child who otherwise would be
required to be restrained under this section has a physical impairment that
makes use of a child restraint system, booster seat or an occupant restraining
device impossible or impractical, provided that the person operating the
vehicle has safely and appropriately restrained the child in accordance with
any recommendations of the physician or chiropractor as noted on the affidavit.
   (i)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any person to
carry with the person the birth certificate of a child to prove the age of the
child, but the production of a valid birth certificate for a child showing that
the child was not of an age to which this section applies is a defense against
any ticket, citation or summons issued for violating this section.
   (j)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a), (b), (c) or (d) of this section
shall be punished as follows, provided that the failure of an operator of a
motor vehicle to secure more than one child in a child restraint system,
booster seat or occupant restraining device as required by this section that
occurred at the same time, on the same day and at the same location is deemed
to be a single violation of this section.
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (j)(1)B. of this
section, the offender is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not
less than $25 nor more than $75.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (a), (b),(c) or (d) of this section or of a
state law or municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent any of those
divisions, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   All fines imposed pursuant to division (j)(1) of this section shall
be forwarded to the State Treasurer for deposit in the Child Highway Safety
Fund created by R.C. § 4511.81(I).
(R.C. § 4511.81(A) - (H), (K), (L))
§ 438.29 USE OF OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICES.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   AUTOMOBILE. Any commercial tractor, passenger car, commercial car
or truck that is required to be factory-equipped with an occupant restraining
device for the operator or any passenger by regulations adopted by the United
States Secretary of Transportation pursuant to the National Traffic and Motor
Vehicle Safety Act of 1966, 80 Stat. 719, 15 U.S.C. § 1392.
      (2)   COMMERCIAL TRACTOR, PASSENGER CAR AND COMMERCIAL CAR. Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      (3)   OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE. A seat safety belt, shoulder belt,
harness or other safety device for restraining a person who is an operator of
or passenger in an automobile and that satisfies the minimum federal vehicle
safety standards established by the United States Department of Transportation.
      (4)   PASSENGER. Any person in an automobile, other than its operator,
who is occupying a seating position for which an occupant restraining device is
provided.
      (5)   TORT ACTION. A civil action for damages for injury, death or loss
to person or property. TORT ACTION includes a product liability claim, as
defined in R.C. § 2307.71, and as asbestos claim, as defined in R.C. § 2307.91,
but does not include a civil action for damages for breach of contract or
another agreement between persons.
      (6)   VEHICLE and MOTOR VEHICLE. As used in the definitions of the terms
set forth above, have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   (b)   Prohibited acts. No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless he or she is
wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device, or operate a school bus that has an occupant restraining
device installed for use in its operator’s seat unless he or she is wearing all
of the available elements of the device, as properly adjusted;
      (2)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless each
passenger in the automobile who is subject to the requirement set forth in
division (b)(3) of this section is wearing all of the available elements of a
properly adjusted occupant restraining device;
      (3)   Occupy, as a passenger, a seating position on the front seat of an
automobile being operated on any street or highway unless he or she is wearing
all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining
device; or
      (4)   Operate a taxicab on any street or highway unless all factory-
equipped occupant restraining devices in the taxicab are maintained in usable
form.
   (c)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Division (b)(3) of this section does not apply to a person who is
required by R.C. § 4511.81 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to
be secured in a child restraint device or booster seat.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
an employee of the United States Postal Service or of a newspaper home delivery
service, during any period in which the person is engaged in the operation of
an automobile to deliver mail or newspapers to addressees.
      (3)   Divisions (b)(1) and (b)(3) of this section do not apply to a
person who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4731 or a chiropractor licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4734 that states the following:
         A.   That the person has a physical impairment that makes use of an
occupant restraining device impossible or impractical;
         B.   Whether the physical impairment is temporary, permanent, or
reasonably expected to be permanent;
         C.   If the physical impairment is temporary, how long the physical
impairment is expected to make the use of an occupant restraining device
impossible or impractical.
      (4)   Divisions (b)(1) and (b)(3) of this section do not apply to a
person who has registered with the Registrar of Motor Vehicles in accordance
with division (c)(5) of this section.
      (5)   A person who has received an affidavit under division (c)(3) of
this section stating that the person has a permanent or reasonably expected to
be permanent physical impairment that makes use of an occupant restraining
device impossible or impracticable may register with the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles attesting to that fact. Upon such registration, the Registrar shall
make that information available in the law enforcement automated data system. A
person included in the database under division (c)(5) of this section is not
required to have the affidavit obtained in accordance with division (c)(3) of
this section in their possession while operating or occupying an automobile.
      (6)   A physician or chiropractor who issues an affidavit for the
purposes of division (c)(3) or (c)(4) of this section is immune from civil
liability arising from any injury or death sustained by the person who was
issued the affidavit due to the failure of the person to wear an occupant
restraining device unless the physician or chiropractor, in issuing the
affidavit, acted in a manner that constituted willful, wanton, or reckless
misconduct.
      (7)   The Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall adopt rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 establishing a process for a person to be included in the
database under division (c)(5) of this section. The information provided and
included in the database under division (c)(5) of this section is not a public
record subject to inspection or copying under R.C. § 149.43.
   (d)   Officers not permitted to stop cars to determine violation.
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement
officer shall cause an operator of an automobile being operated on any street
or highway to stop the automobile for the sole purpose of determining whether a
violation of division (b) of this section has been or is being committed or for
the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation or summons for the violation or
for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for the
violation. No law enforcement officer shall view the interior or visually
inspect any automobile being operated on any street or highway for the sole
purpose of determining whether the violation has been or is being committed.
   (e)   Use of fines for educational program. All fines collected for
violations of division (b) of this section shall be forwarded to the State
Treasurer for deposit in the funds as set forth in R.C. § 4513.263(E).
   (f)   Limitations on evidence used for prosecution.
      (1)   Subject to division (f)(2) of this section, the failure of a person
to wear all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device in violation of division (b)(1) or (b)(3) of this section or
the failure of a person to ensure that each minor who is a passenger of an
automobile being operated by that person is wearing all of the available
elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device in violation of
division (b)(2) of this section shall not be considered or used by the trier of
fact in a tort action as evidence of negligence or contributory negligence.
But, the trier of fact may determine based on evidence admitted consistent with
the Ohio Rules of Evidence that the failure contributed to the harm alleged in
the tort action and may diminish a recovery of compensatory damages that
represents non-economic loss, as defined in R.C. § 2307.011, in a tort action
that could have been recovered but for the plaintiff’s failure to wear all of
the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device.
Evidence of that failure shall not be used as a basis for a criminal
prosecution of the person other than a prosecution for a violation of this
section; and shall not be admissible as evidence in a criminal action involving
the person other than a prosecution for a violation of this section.
      (2)   If, at the time of an accident involving a passenger car equipped
with occupant restraining devices, any occupant of the passenger car who
sustained injury or death was not wearing an available occupant restraining
device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a device, or was
not wearing such a device as properly adjusted, then, consistent with the Rules
of Evidence, the fact that the occupant was not wearing the available occupant
restraining device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a
device, or was not wearing such a device as properly adjusted is admissible in
evidence in relation to any claim for relief in a tort action to the extent
that the claim for relief satisfies all of the following:
         A.   It seeks to recover damages for injury or death to the occupant;
         B.   The defendant in question is the manufacturer, designer,
distributor or seller of the passenger car; and
         C.   The claim for relief against the defendant in question is that
the injury or death sustained by the occupant was enhanced or aggravated by
some design defect in the passenger car or that the passenger car was not
crashworthy.
   (g)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (b)(1) of this section shall be fined
$30.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b)(2) of this section shall be subject
to the penalty set forth in §
408.02.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (b)(3) of this section shall be fined
$20.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (g)(4), whoever
violates division (b)(4) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation
of division (b)(4) of this section, whoever violates division (b)(4) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4513.263)
§ 438.30 IGNITION INTERLOCK DEVICES (REPEALED).
Editor’s note:
   Section 438.30 was repealed as part of the 2003 updating and revision of
these Codified Ordinances because substantially equivalent state law (R.C. §§
4511.83(A), (B), (E)) was repealed by the Ohio General Assembly.
§ 438.31 AMBER LIGHTS ON SNOW PLOWING VEHICLES.
   All motor vehicles engaged in snow plowing operations in the city shall have
a flashing amber light in prominent display to give warning to passing
motorists.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
§ 438.32 AIR BAGS.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   AIR BAG. Has the same meaning as in 49 C.F.R. § 579.4, as amended.
      (2)   COUNTERFEIT AIR BAG. An air bag displaying a mark identical or
similar to the genuine mark of a motor vehicle manufacturer, without the
authorization of the motor vehicle manufacturer.
      (3)   NONFUNCTIONAL AIR BAG. Any of the following:
         A.   A replacement air bag that has been previously deployed or
damaged;
         B.   A replacement air bag that has an electrical fault that is
detected by the air bag diagnostic system of a vehicle after the air bag is
installed;
         C.   A counterfeit air bag, air bag cover, or some other object that
is installed in a vehicle to deceive an owner or operator of the vehicle into
believing that a functional air bag has been installed.
   (b)   No person shall install or reinstall in any motor vehicle a
counterfeit or nonfunctional air bag or any object intended to fulfill the
function of an air bag other than an air bag that was designed in conformance
with or that is regulated by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208
for the make, model, and model year of the vehicle, knowing that the object is
not in accordance with that standard.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly manufacture, import, sell, or offer for sale
any of the following:
      (1)   A counterfeit air bag;
      (2)   A nonfunctional air bag;
      (3)   Any other object that is intended to be installed in a motor
vehicle to fulfill the function of an air bag and that is not in conformance
with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208 for the make, model, and
model year of the vehicle in which the object is intended to be installed.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly sell, install, or reinstall a device in a
motor vehicle that causes the diagnostic system of a vehicle to inaccurately
indicate that the vehicle is equipped with a functional air bag.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates division (b) or (d) of this section is guilty
of improper replacement of a motor vehicle air bag, a misdemeanor of the first
degree on a first offense. On each subsequent offense, or if the violation
results in serious physical harm to an individual, the person is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (c) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Each manufacture, importation, installation, reinstallation, sale,
or offer for sale in violation of this section shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation.
(R.C. § 4549.20)
§ 438.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 440: COMMERCIAL AND HEAVY VEHICLES
Section
   
440.01   Load limits
   
440.02   Maximum width, height and length
   
440.03   Wheel protectors
   
440.04   Vehicles transporting explosives
   
440.05   Towing requirements; exception to size and weight restrictions
   
440.06   Loads dropping or leaking; tracking mud; removal required
   
440.07   Vehicles with spikes, lugs and chains
   
440.08   Occupying travel trailer, fifth wheel vehicle, or manufactured or
mobile home while in motion
   
440.09   Route and load information
   
440.10   Shifting load; loose loads
   
440.11   Chauffeured limousines
   
440.12   Removal of excess load
   
440.13   Moving construction and heavy vehicles and structures; permit required
   
440.14   Warning devices on disabled vehicles
   
440.15   Through and truck routes
   
440.16   Use of engine retarders
   
440.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Arrest notice of drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14
   Bus stops and taxicab stands, see §
452.10
   Display of certificates of registration, see R.C. § 4549.18
   Fatigued or ill drivers, see §
442.09
   Riding in cargo storage areas, see §
416.06
   Slow-moving equipment at grade crossings, see §
432.33
   Stopping at grade crossings, see §§
432.34
   Truck loading zones, see §
452.09
§ 440.01 LOAD LIMITS.
   (a)   State regulations.
      (1)   A.   The municipality, with respect to highways under their
jurisdiction, upon application in writing, shall issue a special regional heavy
hauling permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or
combination of vehicles as follows:
            1.   At a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum
specified in R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or otherwise not in conformity with
R.C. §§ 4513.01 to 4513.37.
            2.   Upon any highway under the jurisdiction of municipality except
those highways with a condition insufficient to bear the weight of the vehicle
or combination of vehicles as stated in the application.
            3.   Issuance of a special regional heavy hauling permit is subject
to the payment of a fee established by the municipality in accordance with this
section.
         B.   In circumstances where a person is not eligible to receive a
permit under division (a)(1)A. of this section, the municipality, with respect
to highways under its jurisdiction, upon application in writing and for good
cause shown, may issue a special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to
operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight of
vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in R.C. §§ 5577.01 through
5577.09, or otherwise not in conformity with R.C. §§ 4513.01 through 4513.37,
upon any highway under its jurisdiction.
      (2)   A.   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 715.22 and 723.01, the holder of a
permit issued by the Director of Transportation under R.C. § 4513.34 may move
the vehicle or combination of vehicles described in the permit on any highway
that is a part of the state highway system when the movement is partly within
and partly without the corporate limits of the municipality. No local authority
shall require any other permit or license or charge any license fee or other
charge against the holder of a permit for the movement of a vehicle or
combination of vehicles on any highway which is a part of the state highway
system. The Ohio Director of Transportation shall not require the holder of a
permit issued by the municipality to obtain a special permit for the movement
of vehicles or combination of vehicles on highways within the jurisdiction of
the municipality.
         B.   Except as provided in R.C. § 4513.34(B)(3), permits may be issued
for any period of time not to exceed one year, as the local authority in its
discretion determines advisable or for the duration of any public construction
project.
      (3)   A.   The application for a permit issued under this section shall
be in the form that the municipality prescribes. The municipality may prescribe
a permit fee to be imposed and collected when any permit described in this
section is issued. The permit fee may be in an amount sufficient to reimburse
the municipality for the administrative costs incurred in issuing the permit,
and also to cover the cost of normal and expected damage caused to the roadway
or a street or highway structure as the result of the operation of the
nonconforming vehicle or combination of vehicles.
          B.   For the purposes of this section and of rules adopted by the
Director under R.C. § 4513.34, milk transported in bulk by vehicle is deemed a
nondivisible load.
         C.   For purposes of this section and of rules adopted by the Director
under R.C. § 4513.34, three or fewer aluminum coils, transported by a vehicle,
are deemed a nondivisible load. The Director shall adopt rules establishing
requirements for an aluminum coil permit that are substantially similar to the
requirements for a steel coil permit under O.A.C. Chapter 5501:2-1.
      (4)   The municipality shall issue a special regional heavy hauling
permit under division (a)(1)A. of this section upon application and payment of
the applicable fee. However, the municipality may issue or withhold a special
permit specified in division (a)(1)B. of this section. If a permit is to be
issued, the municipality may limit or prescribe conditions of operation for the
vehicle and may require the posting of a bond or other security conditioned
upon the sufficiency of the permit fee to compensate for damage caused to the
roadway or a street or highway structure. In addition, the municipality, as a
condition of issuance of an overweight permit, may require the applicant to
develop and enter into a mutual agreement with the municipality to compensate
for or to repair excess damage caused to the roadway by travel under the
permit.
      (5)   Every permit issued under this section shall be carried in the
vehicle or combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to
inspection by any police officer or authorized agent of any authority granting
the permit. No person shall violate any of the terms of a permit.
      (6)   The Director of Transportation may debar an applicant from applying
for a special permit under this section upon a finding based on a reasonable
belief that the applicant has done any of the actions specified in R.C. §
4513.34(F).
      (7)   Notice and procedures for debarment shall be as provided in R.C. §
4513.34(G).
      (8)   A.   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under
this section that relate to gross load limits.
         B.   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this
section that relate to axle load by more than 2,000 pounds per axle or group of
axles.
         C.   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this
section that relate to an approved route except upon order of a law enforcement
officer or authorized agent of the issuing authority.
      (9)   A permit issued by the municipality under this section for the
operation of a vehicle or combination of vehicles is valid for the purposes of
the vehicle operation in accordance with the conditions and limitations
specified on the permit. Such a permit is voidable by law enforcement only for
operation of a vehicle or combination of vehicles in violation of the weight,
dimension, or route provisions of the permit. However, a permit is not voidable
for operation in violation of a route provision of a permit if the operation is
upon the order of a law enforcement officer.
(R.C. § 4513.34)
   (b)   Violations. Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
   (c)   Local streets. No person shall operate a vehicle exceeding a size as
specified R.C. §§ 5577.01 through 5577.09, or otherwise not in conformity with
R.C. §§ 4513.01 through 4513.37, or exceeding a gross weight of five tons, upon
any street in the municipality other than state routes and county roads, except
those local streets designated as a truck route and marked as such by
appropriate traffic signs, and except when the operation is necessary to load
or unload property, to go to or from the usual place of storage of the vehicle
or to perform any other legitimate business or act other than passage through
the municipality. Operators of vehicles so deviating from either a state route
or a designated truck route within the municipality shall confine the deviation
to that required in order to accomplish the purpose of the departure. On county
roads, Council or other duly designated local authority shall establish
reasonable weight limits commensurate with the construction and material
specifications for the roads and the load resistance of the roads as determined
by the County Engineer. County roads shall be posted with signs indicating the
weight limits.
   (d)   Local permit and conditions. Upon application and for good cause, the
Police Chief may issue a local permit authorizing an applicant to move an
oversize or overweight vehicle or combination of vehicles upon local streets
and highways.
      (1)   No permittee shall be required to obtain a special permit from the
Ohio Director of Transportation for the movement of the vehicle or combination
of vehicles on streets or highways under local jurisdiction. However, the
approval of the Ohio Director of Transportation shall be required for movement
upon state routes as provided in division (a) of this section.
      (2)   The Police Chief may grant a permit for a single or round trip, or
for such period of time, not to exceed one year, as the Police Chief in his or
her discretion deems advisable, or for the duration of any construction
project. The Police Chief may limit or prescribe terms or conditions of
operation for the vehicle or combination of vehicles by designating the route,
hours, speed or such other restrictions as may be necessary for the
preservation of the public peace, property, health and safety. The Police Chief
may require the posting of bond or other security necessary to compensate for
any damage to a roadway or road structure.
      (3)   For each such permit, the Police Chief shall charge $25, and for
each hour of time or any part thereof spent by the Police Department in
supervising the movement of the vehicle, the applicant shall pay the sum of
$50.
   (4)   Except as provided in divisions (a) and (b) of this section, streets
and highways shall be posted with signs indicating “no thru trucks - gross
weight five tons” or words of similar import to inform drivers of the
limitations imposed by this section. No driver shall disobey the instructions
indicated on any such sign.
      (5)   Violation of any of the limitations, terms or conditions of the
permit granted by the Police Chief shall be cause for immediate revocation or
suspension of the permit and denial of request for any future permit. This
violation shall also subject the violator to the penalties prescribed by §§
408.01 and
408.02.
§ 440.02 MAXIMUM WIDTH, HEIGHT AND LENGTH.
   (a)   No vehicle shall be operated upon the public highways, streets,
bridges and culverts within this municipality whose dimensions exceed those
specified in this section.
   (b)   No such vehicle shall have a width:
      (1)   In excess of 104 inches for passenger bus type vehicles operated
exclusively within the municipality;
      (2)   In excess of 102 inches, excluding such safety devices as are
required by law, for passenger bus type vehicles operated over freeways, and
other state roads with minimum pavement widths of 22 feet, except those roads
or portions of roads over which operation of 102-inch buses is prohibited by
order of the Director of Transportation;
      (3)   In excess of 132 inches for traction engines;
      (4)   In excess of 102 inches for recreational vehicles, excluding safety
devices and retracted awnings and other appurtenances of six inches or less in
width and except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch
recreational vehicles on designated state highways or portions of highways; or
      (5)   In excess of 102 inches, including load, for all other vehicles,
except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch vehicles on the
state highways or portions of state highways as the Director designates.
   (c)   No such vehicle shall have a length:
      (1)   In excess of 66 feet for passenger bus type vehicles and
articulated passenger bus type vehicles operated by a regional transit
authority pursuant to R.C. §§ 306.30 to 306.54;
      (2)   In excess of 45 feet for all other passenger bus type vehicles;
      (3)   In excess of 53 feet for any semitrailer when operated in a
commercial tractor-semitrailer combination, with or without load, except that
the Director may prohibit the operation of any such commercial tractor-
semitrailer combination on the state highways or portions of state highways as
the Director designates;
      (4)   In excess of 28.5 feet for any semitrailer or trailer when operated
in a commercial tractor- semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-semitrailer-
semitrailer combination, except that the Director may prohibit the operation of
any such commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-
semitrailer-semitrailer combination on the state highways or portions of state
highways as the Director designates;
      (5)   A.   In excess of 97 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle
transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle
transporter combinations when operated on any interstate, United States route
or state route, including reasonable access travel on all other roadways for a
distance not to exceed one road mile from any interstate, United States route
or state route, not to exceed three saddlemounted vehicles, but which may
include one fullmount; and
         B.   In excess of 75 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle
transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle
transporter combinations when operated on any roadway not designated as an
interstate, United States route or state route, not to exceed three
saddlemounted vehicles, but which may include one fullmount.
      (6)   In excess of 65 feet for any other combination of vehicles coupled
together, with or without load, except as provided in division (c)(3) and (c)
(4) and in division (e) below;
      (7)   In excess of 45 feet for recreational vehicles; and
      (8)   In excess of 50 feet for all other vehicles, except trailers and
semitrailers, with or without load.
   (d)   No such vehicle shall have a height in excess of 13.5 feet, with or
without load.
   (e)   An automobile transporter or boat transporter shall be allowed a
length of 65 feet, and a stinger- steered automobile transporter or stinger-
steered boat transporter shall be allowed a length of 75 feet, except that the
load thereon may extend no more than four feet beyond the rear of such vehicles
and may extend no more than three feet beyond the front of the vehicles, and
except further that the Director may prohibit the operation of a stinger-
steered automobile transporter, stinger-steered boat transporter, or a B-train
assembly on any state highway or portion of any state highway that the Director
designates.
   (f)   (1)   The widths prescribed in division (b) of this section shall not
include side mirrors, turn signal lamps, marker lamps, handholds for cab entry
and egress, flexible fender extensions, mud flaps, splash and spray suppressant
devices, and load-induced tire bulge.
      (2)   The widths prescribed in division (b)(5) of this section shall not
include automatic covering devices, tarp and tarp hardware, and tiedown
assemblies, provided these safety devices do not extend more than three inches
from either side of the vehicle.
      (3)   The lengths prescribed in divisions (c)(2) to (c)(7) shall not
include safety devices, bumpers attached to the front or rear of the bus or
combination, non-property carrying devices or components that do not extend
more than 24 inches beyond the rear of the vehicle and are needed for loading
or unloading, B-train assembly used between the first and second semitrailer of
a commercial tractor- semitrailer-semitrailer combination, energy conservation
devices as provided in any regulations adopted by the Secretary of the United
States Department of Transportation, or any noncargo-carrying refrigerator
equipment attached to the front of trailers and semitrailers. In special cases,
vehicles that dimensions exceed those prescribed by this section may operate in
accordance with rules adopted by the Director.
   (g)   (1)   This section does not apply to fire engines, fire trucks or
other vehicles or apparatus belonging to the municipality or to the volunteer
fire department thereof or used by that department in the discharge of its
functions. This section does not apply to vehicles and pole trailers used in
the transportation of wooden and metal poles, nor to the transportation of
pipes or well-drilling equipment, nor to farm machinery and equipment.
       (2)   The owner or operator of any vehicle, machinery or equipment not
specifically enumerated in this section but the dimensions of which exceed the
dimensions provided by this section, when operating the same on the highways
and streets of the municipality, shall comply with the rules of the Director
governing such movement. Any person adversely affected shall have the same
right of appeal as provided in R.C. Chapter 119.
      (3)   This section does not require the municipality or any railroad or
other private corporation to provide sufficient vertical clearance to permit
the operation of the vehicle, or to make any changes in or about existing
structures now crossing streets, roads and other public thoroughfares.
   (h)   As used in this section, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 4501.01.
(R.C. § 5577.05)
   (i)   No person shall violate any rule or regulation promulgated by the
Director of Transportation in accordance with R.C. § 5577.05.
(R.C. § 5577.06)
   (j)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second or subsequent offense, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 5577.99(C))
§ 440.03 WHEEL PROTECTORS.
   (a)   No person shall drive or operate, or cause to be driven or operated,
any commercial car, trailer or semitrailer, used for the transportation of
goods or property, the gross weight of which, with load, exceeds three tons,
upon the public highways, streets, bridges and culverts within the
municipality, unless the vehicle is equipped with suitable metal protectors or
substantial flexible flaps on the rearmost wheels of the vehicle or combination
of vehicles to prevent, as far as practicable, the wheels from throwing dirt,
water or other materials on the windshields of following vehicles. The
protectors or flaps shall have a ground clearance of not more than one-third of
the distance from the center of the rearmost axle to the center of the flaps
under any conditions of loading of the vehicle, and they shall be at least as
wide as the tires they are protecting. If the vehicle is so designed and
constructed that the requirements are accomplished by means of fenders, body
construction or other means of enclosure, then no such protectors or flaps are
required. Rear wheels not covered at the top by fenders, bodies or other parts
of the vehicle shall be covered at the top by protective means extending at
least to the centerline of the rearmost axle.
(R.C. § 5577.11)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $25.
(R.C. § 5577.99(E))
§ 440.04 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING EXPLOSIVES.
   (a)   Any person operating any vehicle transporting explosives upon a
highway shall at all times comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   The vehicle shall be marked or placarded on each side and on the
rear with the word “EXPLOSIVES” in letters not less than eight inches high, or
there shall be displayed on the rear of the vehicle a red flag not less than 24
inches square marked with the word “DANGER” in white letters six inches high,
or shall be marked or placarded in accordance with § 177.823 of the United
States Department of Transportation regulations.
      (2)   The vehicle shall be equipped with not less than two fire
extinguishers, filled and ready for immediate use, and placed at convenient
points on the vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.29)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 440.05 TOWING REQUIREMENTS; EXCEPTION TO SIZE AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   (a)   (1)   When one vehicle is towing another vehicle, the drawbar or other
connection shall be of sufficient strength to pull all the weight towed
thereby, and the drawbar or other connection shall not exceed 15 feet from one
vehicle to the other, except the connection between any two vehicles
transporting poles, pipe, machinery or other objects of structural nature which
cannot readily be dismembered.
      (2)   When one vehicle is towing another and the connection consists only
of a chain, rope or cable, there shall be displayed upon the connection a white
flag or cloth not less than 12 inches square.
      (3)   In addition to the drawbar or other connection, each trailer and
each semitrailer which is not connected to a commercial tractor by means of a
fifth wheel shall be coupled with stay chains or cables to the vehicle by which
it is being drawn. These chains or cables shall be of sufficient size and
strength to prevent the towed vehicle’s parting from the drawing vehicle in
case the drawbar or other connection should break or become disengaged. In case
of a loaded pole trailer, the connecting pole to the drawing vehicle shall be
coupled to the drawing vehicle with stay chains or cables of sufficient size
and strength to prevent the towed vehicle’s parting from the drawing vehicle.
      (4)   Every trailer or semitrailer, except pole and cable trailers and
pole and cable dollies operated by a public utility as defined in R.C. §
5727.01, shall be equipped with a coupling device which shall be so designed
and constructed that the trailer will follow substantially in the path of the
vehicle drawing it, without whipping or swerving from side to side. Vehicles
used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production materials
between a local place of storage and supply and the farm, when drawn or towed
on a street or highway at a speed of 25 mph or less, and vehicles designed and
used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina,
or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a
distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 mph or less, shall have
a drawbar or other connection, including the hitch mounted on the towing
vehicle, which shall be of sufficient strength to pull all the weight towed
thereby. Only one such vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or
agricultural production materials as provided in this section may be towed or
drawn at one time except as follows:
         A.   An agricultural tractor may tow or draw more than one such
vehicle; or
         B.   A pickup truck or straight truck designed by the manufacturer to
carry a load of not less than one-half ton and not more than two tons may tow
or draw not more than two such vehicles that are being used to transport
agricultural produce from the farm to a local place of storage. No vehicle
being so towed by such a pickup truck or straight truck shall be considered to
be a motor vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.32)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
   (c)   Exception to size and weight restrictions.
      (1)   The size and weight provisions of this chapter and R.C. Chapter
5577 do not apply to any of the following:
         A.   A person who is engaged in the initial towing or removal of a
wrecked or disabled motor vehicle from the site of an emergency on a public
highway where the vehicle became wrecked or disabled to the nearest site where
the vehicle can be brought into conformance with the requirements of this
chapter and R.C. Chapter 5577, to the nearest storage facility, or to the
nearest qualified repair facility;
         B.   A person who is en route to the site of an emergency on a public
highway to remove a wrecked or disabled motor vehicle;
         C.   A person who is returning from delivering a wrecked or disabled
motor vehicle to a site, storage facility, or repair facility as specified in
division (c)(1)A. of this section.
      (2)   Any subsequent towing of a wrecked or disabled vehicle shall comply
with the size and weight provisions of this chapter and R.C. Chapter 5577.
      (3)   No court shall impose any penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99 or
the civil liability established in R.C. § 5577.12 upon a person who is
operating a vehicle in the manner described in division (c)(1) of this section.
(R.C. § 5577.15)
§ 440.06 LOADS DROPPING OR LEAKING; TRACKING MUD; REMOVAL REQUIRED.
   (a)   (1)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the
vehicle is so constructed, loaded or covered as to prevent any of its load from
dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand or
other substances may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water
or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining
the roadway.
      (2)   Except for a farm vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or
agricultural production materials or a rubbish vehicle in the process of
acquiring its load, no vehicle loaded with garbage, swill, cans, bottles, waste
paper, ashes, refuse, trash, rubbish, waste, wire, paper, cartons, boxes,
glass, solid waste or any other material of an unsanitary nature that is
susceptible to blowing or bouncing from a moving vehicle shall be driven or
moved on any highway unless the load is covered with a sufficient cover to
prevent the load or any part of the load from spilling onto the highway.
(R.C. § 4513.31)
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
   (c)   No person shall operate any vehicle so as to track mud on any public
way or place.
   (d)   It shall be the duty of the driver of a vehicle who unlawfully drops
or deposits mud or permits the load or any portion thereof to be dropped or
deposited upon any public way or place to immediately remove the same or cause
it to be removed.
§ 440.07 VEHICLES WITH SPIKES, LUGS AND CHAINS.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2) of this section, no person
shall drive over the improved highways of this municipality a traction engine
or tractor with tires or wheels equipped with ice picks, spuds, spikes, chains
or other projections of any kind extending beyond the cleats, and no person
shall tow or in any way pull another vehicle over the improved highways of this
municipality which towed or pulled vehicle has tires or wheels equipped with
ice picks, spuds, spikes, chains or other projections of any kind. TRACTION
ENGINE or TRACTOR, as used in this section, applies to all self-propelling
engines equipped with metal-tired wheels operated or propelled by any form of
engine, motor or mechanical power.
      (2)   A person may operate a motor vehicle that is equipped with
retractable studded tires with the studs retracted at any time of the year, but
shall operate the motor vehicle with the studs extended only as provided in
division (a)(1) of this section.
   (b)   This municipality shall not adopt, enforce or maintain any ordinance,
rule or regulation contrary to or inconsistent with division (a), nor shall
this municipality require any license tax upon or registration fee for any
traction engine, tractor or trailer, or any permit or license to operate.
Operators of traction engines or tractors shall have the same rights upon the
public streets and highways as the drivers of any other vehicles, unless some
other safe and convenient way is provided, and no public road open to traffic
shall be closed to traction engines or tractors.
(R.C. § 5589.08)
   (c)   For the purposes of this section, STUDDED TIRE means any tire designed
for use on a vehicle and equipped with metal studs or studs of wear-resisting
material that project beyond the tread of the traction surface of the tire.
   (d)   (1)   Except as provided in division (d)(2) of this section, no person
shall operate any motor vehicle other than a public safety vehicle or school
bus that is equipped with studded tires on any street or highway in this
municipality, except during the period extending from the first day of November
of each year through the fifteenth day of April of the succeeding year.
      (2)   A person may operate a motor vehicle that is equipped with
retractable studded tires with the studs retracted at any time of the year, but
shall operate the motor vehicle with the studs extended only as provided in
division (d)(1) of this section.
   (e)   Division (d) of this section does not apply to the use of tire chains
when there is snow or ice on the streets or highways where the chains are being
used, or the immediate vicinity thereof.
(R.C. § 5589.081)
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 5589.99(B))
§ 440.08 OCCUPYING TRAVEL TRAILER, FIFTH WHEEL VEHICLE, OR MANUFACTURED OR
MOBILE HOME WHILE IN MOTION.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, no person shall
occupy any travel trailer, fifth wheel trailer, or manufactured or mobile home
while it is being used as a conveyance upon a street or highway.
   (b)   (1)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a fifth wheel
trailer when both of the following apply:
         A.   Any child riding in the fifth wheel trailer is properly secured
in the manner provided in R.C. § 4511.81.
         B.   The operator of the vehicle towing the fifth wheel trailer has
some means of viable communication with the passengers riding in the trailer.
      (2)   As used in this division, “viable communication” includes a
cellular or satellite telephone, a radio, or any other similar electronic
wireless communications device.
   (c)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   The offense established under this section is a strict liability
offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this offense as a
strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.
(R.C. § 4511.701)
§ 440.09 ROUTE AND LOAD INFORMATION.
   Drivers of vehicles described in this chapter are required, upon request by
a police officer, to give full and true information as to the route they are
following and the name of the consignor and consignee and place of delivery or
removal and the location of any consignment being hauled or goods being
removed, and upon a designation by such police officer of a route to be
followed, shall immediately adopt and pursue the route.
§ 440.10 SHIFTING LOAD; LOOSE LOADS.
   (a)   In addition to any other lawful requirements of load distribution, no
person shall operate any vehicle upon a street or highway unless the vehicle is
so laden as to prevent its contents from shifting or otherwise unbalancing the
vehicle to such an extent as to interfere with the safe operation of the same.
   (b)   No motor vehicle or trailer shall be driven unless the tailboard or
tailgate, tarpaulins, chains (except ground or contact chains), ropes, stakes,
poles and the like, or any part of the load, are securely fastened to prevent
dangling, flapping, swinging or falling from the side, end or top of the load
or body. All projecting cargo shall be properly guarded by a red flag or cloth
or a red light or lantern as required by R.C. § 4513.09, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
§ 440.11 CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINES.
   (a)   The operator of a chauffeured limousine shall accept passengers only
on the basis of prearranged contracts, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, and shall
not cruise in search of patronage unless the limousine is in compliance with
any statute or ordinance governing the operation of taxicabs or other similar
vehicles for hire.
   (b)   The operator of a chauffeured limousine may provide transportation to
passengers who arrange for the transportation through an intermediary,
including a digital dispatching service. Notwithstanding any law to the
contrary, when providing transportation arranged through an intermediary, the
operator of a chauffeured limousine may establish the fare and method of fare
calculation, so long as the method of fare calculation is provided to the
passenger upon request.
   (c)   No person shall advertise or hold himself or herself out as doing
business as a limousine service or livery service or other similar designation
unless each vehicle used by the person to provide the service is registered in
accordance with R.C. § 4503.24 and is in compliance with R.C. § 4509.80.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4511.85)
§ 440.12 REMOVAL OF EXCESS LOAD.
   Any police officer having reason to believe that the weight of a vehicle and
its load is unlawful may require the driver of such vehicle to stop and submit
to a weighing of it by means of portable or stationary scales and may require
that such vehicle be driven to the nearest public scales. Whenever such
officer, upon weighing a vehicle and load, determines that the weight is
unlawful, he or she may require the driver to stop the vehicle in a suitable
place and remain standing until such portion of the load is removed as is
necessary to reduce the gross weight of such vehicle to the limit permitted.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
§ 440.13 MOVING CONSTRUCTION AND HEAVY VEHICLES AND STRUCTURES; PERMIT
REQUIRED.
   (a)   No road roller, traction engine, power shovel, power crane or other
equipment used in construction work and not designed for, or employed in,
general highway transportation, no well-drilling machinery, ditch-digging
machinery, farm machinery and agricultural tractors and machinery used in the
production of horticultural, agricultural and vegetable products (as defined in
R.C. §§ 4501.01(A) and 4501.01(C)), and no self-propelled vehicles designed or
used for drawing such vehicles or wheeled machinery, but having no provisions
for carrying loads independently of such other vehicles, shall be moved or
stationed preparatory to moving on the streets of the city without a permit as
provided in this section.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
   (b)   The movement of structures is similarly regulated as provided in
division (a) of this section, except as otherwise provided in
Chapter 1468 of the Building and Housing Code.
   (c)   The permit shall specify the street or streets upon or over which such
vehicle or machinery is to be moved or transported, the nature thereof, its
aggregate weight and its width and length, and shall specify the date and the
hours within which such moving shall be done. The City Engineer shall issue and
keep a record of all permits issued.
   (d)   The City Engineer may require minimum cash deposit in the amount of
$2,500 or other amount as determined by the City Engineer and to the
satisfaction of the Director of Law to insure against any loss, damage or
injury to the street or highway by reason of such moving. In the event of any
such loss, damage or injury, the same shall be repaired by the city and the
cost thereof deducted from such deposit, and the balance returned to the
applicant. The permit form shall provide the following authorization: “In the
event of harm or damage to public facilities, I herewith authorize the city to
draw from such deposit such amount as shall be reasonably necessary to
reimburse the city or other public agency for its damage and expense, and
further will pay such additional amount as shall be necessary in the event the
damage be of greater cost.”
   (e)   The City Engineer, through the office of the Engineering Department,
shall charge and collect a fee in accordance with
Chapter 1424 for each permit issued by him or her under the provisions of this
section, in the case of a vehicle or machinery of an aggregate weight of 20
tons or more, which fee shall be payable to the city.
   (f)   In the case of a structure, vehicle or machinery of an aggregate
weight of 20 tons or more, the Police Chief and the City Engineer may designate
staff to supervise or observe (at direct cost to the applicant as determined by
the Police Chief or City Engineer) the moving of such structure, vehicle or
machinery, to the end that interference with traffic may be avoided and injury
to the highway prevented, and the person in charge of such structure, vehicle
or machinery shall comply with and conform to the instructions and orders of
such police officer in the matter of such moving.
   (g)   The City Engineer is hereby authorized and directed to promulgate
regulations to carry into effect the provisions of this section, including,
among other subjects, the requirements for providing evidence of public
liability insurance.
   (h)   Any permits issued pursuant to this section shall be submitted to the
Police Chief or his or her authorized representative for final approval.
   (i)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
third degree on each subsequent offense.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
§ 440.14 WARNING DEVICES ON DISABLED VEHICLES.
   (a)   Whenever any motor truck, bus, commercial tractor, trailer,
semitrailer or pole trailer is disabled upon any freeway, expressway, thruway
and connecting, entering or exiting ramps within the city, at any time when
lighted lamps are required on vehicles, the operator of such vehicle shall
display the following warning devices upon the highway during the time the
vehicle is so disabled on the highway except as provided in division (b) of
this section:
      (1)   A lighted fusee shall be immediately placed on the roadway at the
traffic side of such vehicle, unless red electric lanterns or red reflectors
are displayed.
      (2)   Within the burning period of the fusee and as promptly as possible,
three lighted flares or pot torches, or three red reflectors, or three red
electric lanterns, shall be placed on the roadway as follows:
         A.   One at a distance of 40 paces or approximately 100 feet in
advance of the vehicle;
         B.   One at a distance of 40 paces or approximately 100 feet to the
rear of the vehicle, except as provided in this section, each in the center of
the lane of traffic occupied by the disabled vehicle; and
         C.   One at the traffic side of the vehicle.
   (b)   Whenever any vehicle used in transporting flammable liquids in bulk,
or in transporting compressed flammable gases, is disabled upon a highway at
any time or place mentioned in division (a) of this section, the driver of such
vehicle shall display upon the roadway the following warning devices:
      (1)   One red electric lantern or one red reflector shall be immediately
placed on the roadway at the traffic side of the vehicle; and
      (2)   Two other red electric lanterns or two other red reflectors shall
be placed to the front and rear of the vehicle in the same manner prescribed
for flares in division (a) of this section.
   (c)   When a vehicle of a type specified in division (b) of this section is
disabled, the use of flares, fusees or any signal produced by flame as warning
signals is prohibited.
   (d)   Whenever any vehicle of a type referred to in this section is disabled
upon any freeway, expressway, thruway and connecting, entering or exiting ramps
within the city, at any time when the display of fusees, flares, red reflectors
or electric lanterns is not required, the operator of such vehicle shall
display two red flags upon the roadway in the lane of traffic occupied by the
disabled vehicle, one at a distance of 40 paces or approximately 100 feet in
advance of the vehicle, and one at a distance of 40 paces or approximately 100
feet to the rear of the vehicle, except as provided in this section.
   (e)   The flares, fusees, lanterns, red reflectors and flags to be displayed
as required in this section shall conform with the requirements of R.C. §
4513.27 applicable thereto.
   (f)   In the event the vehicle is disabled near a curve, crest of a hill or
other obstruction of view, the flare, flag, reflector or lantern in that
direction shall be placed as to afford ample warning to other users of the
highway, but in no case shall it be placed less than 40 paces or approximately
100 feet, nor more than 120 paces or approximately 300 feet from the disabled
vehicle.
   (g)   This section does not apply to the operator of any vehicle in a work
area designated by protection equipment devices that are displayed and used in
accordance with the manual adopted by the Ohio Department of Transportation
under R.C. § 4511.09.
   (h)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
Statutory reference:
   Warning devices displayed on disabled vehicles, see R.C. § 4513.28
§ 440.15 THROUGH AND TRUCK ROUTES.
   (a)   The Mayor is hereby authorized, pursuant to R.C. § 737.022, and
directed, to make and issue rules and regulations designating through routes
and truck routes within the city and to post adequate signs giving notice
thereof.
   (b)   All vehicular trucks, except three-quarter ton pick-up trucks and
panel trucks not intending to discharge cargo within the city, shall follow
designated state routes through the city.
   (c)   All through trucks shall use predetermined streets only within the
city as designated by the Mayor.
   (d)   Trucks shall be permitted to service industrial and commercial firms
located within the city, provided that trucks which exceed the weight limit or
prohibitions of any particular street within the city and which are destined
for a point of discharge owned, operated or leased by a person or company which
requires such traffic on more than one occasion within any three-month period,
shall be required to obtain a special permit from the Chief Building Official
pursuant to §
440.01(c). Further, trucks servicing industrial and commercial firms located
within the city shall follow state, county or municipal routes designated by
the Mayor/Director of Public Safety as through truck routes or truck routes, in
driving to the particular street of cargo discharge.
   (e)   All trucks making pick-ups or deliveries to residences located within
the city shall follow state, county or municipal routes designated by the
Mayor/Director of Public Safety as through truck routes or truck routes, in
driving to the particular street of cargo discharge. The owner, operator or
lessee of any residence which requires such traffic on more than one occasion
within any three-month period shall be required to obtain a permit from the
Chief Building Official as set forth in §
440.01(c), and to post an appropriate bond in order to insure the protection of
the public streets and property.
   (f)   The rules and regulations established by the Mayor designating through
routes and truck routes within the city shall be applicable to all trucks,
resident and nonresident, through and local, in the same manner and to the same
extent.
   (g)   All trucks and other construction vehicles engaged in construction or
servicing any construction site within the city shall follow all marked
construction routes as designated by the Mayor in the interest of public safety
and expedite the flow of traffic and eliminate congestion. Said construction
traffic routes shall be defined by signage clearly indicating the route to be
used by the trucks and other construction vehicles servicing the construction
site.
   (h)   Whoever violates division (g) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
second degree for a first offense and a misdemeanor of the first degree for a
second or subsequent offense within one year.
(Ord. 1999-54, passed 4-5-1999)
   (i)   Except as provided in division (h) hereof, whoever violates any
provision of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided in §§
408.01 and
408.02.
§ 440.16 USE OF ENGINE RETARDERS.
   The use of any and all “engine retarders” shall be prohibited within the
municipality. ENGINE RETARDERS shall be defined to include, without limitation,
C-Brakes, PacBrakes, TekBrakes, Jake Brakes and any other type of engine
retarder commonly utilized within the trucking industry. This restriction shall
not apply to emergency vehicles.
(Ord. 2002-265, passed 11-18-2002)
§ 440.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 442: DRIVERS OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
Section
   
442.01   Definitions
   
442.02   Use of actual gross weight in lieu of rating
   
442.03   Licensing requirements
   
442.04   Physical qualification to operate commercial motor vehicles
   
442.05   Criminal offenses
   
442.06   Application of 49 C.F.R. Part 383
   
442.07   Information required of prospective drivers by employers; unauthorized
driving
   
442.08   Authority of peace officers re drunk driving
   
442.09   Permitting or driving while fatigued or ill prohibited
   
442.10   Driver’s consecutive service and off-duty hours (Repealed)
   
442.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Arrest notice of drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14
   Driving under the influence, generally, see §
434.01
   Hours of service of truck drivers, see R.C. §§ 4921.30, 4923.16
   Load limits, see §
440.01
   Route and load information, see §
440.09
   Stopping after accidents, generally, see §§
436.11,
436.12
   Warning devices when disabled on freeways, see R.C. § 4513.28
§ 442.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   ALCOHOL CONCENTRATION. The concentration of alcohol in a person’s
blood, breath or urine. When expressed as a percentage, it means grams of
alcohol per the following:
      (1)   One hundred milliliters of whole blood, blood serum or blood
plasma;
      (2)   Two hundred ten liters of breath; and
      (3)   One hundred milliliters of urine.
   (b)   COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE.
      (1)   A license issued in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4506 that
authorizes an individual to drive a commercial motor vehicle. Except as
otherwise specifically provided, COMMERCIAL DRIVER'S LICENSE includes an
"enhanced commercial driver's license."
      (2)   ENHANCED COMMERCIAL DRIVER'S LICENSE means a commercial driver's
license issued in accordance with R.C. §§ 4507.021 and 4506.072 that denotes
citizenship and identity and is approved by the United States Secretary of
Homeland Security or other designated federal agency for purposes of entering
the United States.
   (c)   COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE INFORMATION SYSTEM. The information system
established pursuant to the requirements of the Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety
Act of 1986, 100 Stat. 3207-171, 49 U.S.C. App. 2701.
   (d)   COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Except when used in R.C. § 4506.25, any
motor vehicle designed or used to transport persons or property that meets any
of the following qualifications:
      (1)   Any combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight or combined
gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more, provided that the gross
vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight rating of the vehicle or vehicles being
towed is in excess of 10,000 pounds;
      (2)   Any single vehicle with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle
weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more;
      (3)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is not a class A
or class B vehicle, but is designed to transport 16 or more passengers
including the driver;
      (4)   Any school bus with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight
rating of less than 26,001 pounds that is designed to transport fewer than 16
passengers including the driver;
      (5)   Is transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is
required under 49 C.F.R. Part 172, Subpart F, as amended; or
      (6)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is designed to
be operated and to travel on a public street or highway and is considered by
the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration to be a commercial motor
vehicle, including but not limited to a motorized crane, a vehicle whose
function is to pump cement, a rig for drilling wells and a portable crane.
   (e)   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Includes all of the following:
      (1)   Any substance classified as a controlled substance under the
Controlled Substances Act, 80 Stat. 1242 (1970), 21 U.S.C. § 802(6), as
amended;
      (2)   Any substance included in Schedules I through V of 21 C.F.R. Part
1308, as amended; and
      (3)   Any drug of abuse.
   (f)   CONVICTION. An unvacated adjudication of guilt or a determination that
a person has violated or failed to comply with the law in a court of original
jurisdiction or an authorized administrative tribunal, an unvacated forfeiture
of bail or collateral deposited to secure the person’s appearance in court, a
plea of guilty or nolo contendere accepted by the court, the payment of a fine
or court cost, or violation of a condition of release without bail, regardless
of whether or not the penalty is rebated, suspended or probated.
   (g)   DISQUALIFICATION. Any of the following:
      (1)   The suspension, revocation or cancellation of a person’s privileges
to operate a commercial motor vehicle;
      (2)   Any withdrawal of a person’s privileges to operate a commercial
motor vehicle as the result of a violation of state or local law relating to
motor vehicle traffic control other than parking, vehicle weight or vehicle
defect violations; and
      (3)   A determination by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
that a person is not qualified to operate a commercial motor vehicle under 49
C.F.R. Part 391.
   (h)   DOMICILED. Having a true, fixed, principal, and permanent residence to
which an individual intends to return.
   (i)   DOWNGRADE. Any of the following, as applicable:
      (1)   A change in the commercial driver’s license, or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit, holder’s self-certified status as
described in division R.C. § 4506.10(A)(1);
      (2)   A change to a lesser class of vehicle; or
      (3)   Removal of commercial driver’s license privileges from the
individual’s driver’s license.
   (j)   DRIVE. To drive, operate or be in physical control of a motor vehicle.
   (k)   DRIVER. Any person who drives, operates or is in physical control of a
commercial motor vehicle or is required to have a commercial driver’s license.
   (l)   DRIVER’S LICENSE. A license issued by the Bureau of Motor Vehicles
that authorizes an individual to drive.
   (m)   DRUG OF ABUSE. Any controlled substance, dangerous drug as defined in
R.C. § 4729.01, harmful intoxicant as defined in R.C. § 2925.01, or over-the-
counter medication that, when taken in quantities exceeding the recommended
dosage, can result in impairment of judgment or reflexes.
   (n)   ELECTRONIC DEVICE. Includes a cellular telephone, a personal digital
assistant, a pager, a computer, and any other device used to input, write,
send, receive or read text.
   (o)   ELIGIBLE UNIT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. A village, township or county that
has a population of not more than 3,000 persons according to the most recent
federal census.
   (p)   EMPLOYER. Any person, including the federal government, any state and
a political subdivision of any state, that owns or leases a commercial motor
vehicle or assigns a person to drive such a motor vehicle.
   (q)   ENDORSEMENT. An authorization on a person’s commercial driver’s
license that is required to permit the person to operate a specified type of
commercial motor vehicle.
   (r)   FARM TRUCK. A truck controlled and operated by a farmer for use in the
transportation to or from a farm, for a distance of not more than 150 miles, of
products of the farm, including livestock and its products, poultry and its
products, floricultural and horticultural products, and in the transportation
to the farm, from a distance of not more than 150 miles, of supplies for the
farm, including tile, fence and every other thing or commodity used in
agricultural, floricultural, horticultural, livestock and poultry production,
and livestock, poultry and other animals and things used for breeding, feeding
or other purposes connected with the operation of the farm, when the truck is
operated in accordance with this definition and is not used in the operations
of a motor, as defined in R.C. § 4923.01.
   (s)   FATALITY. The death of a person as the result of a motor vehicle
accident occurring not more than 365 days prior to the date of death.
   (t)   FELONY. Any offense under federal or state law that is punishable by
death or imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and includes any offense
specifically classified as a felony under the law of this state, regardless of
the penalty that may be imposed.
   (u)   FOREIGN JURISDICTION. Any jurisdiction other than a state.
   (v)   GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING. The value specified by the manufacturer
as the maximum loaded weight of a single or a combination vehicle. The GROSS
VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING of a combination vehicle is the gross vehicle weight
rating of the power unit plus the gross vehicle weight rating of each towed
unit.
   (w)   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material that has been designated as
hazardous under 49 U.S.C. § 5103 and is required to be placarded under 49
C.F.R. Part 172, Subpart F or any quantity of a material listed as a select
agent or toxin in 42 C.F.R. Part 73, as amended.
   (x)   IMMINENT HAZARD. The existence of a condition that presents a
substantial likelihood that death, serious illness, severe personal injury or a
substantial endangerment to health, property or the environment may occur
before the reasonably foreseeable completion date of a formal proceeding begun
to lessen the risk of death, illness, injury or endangerment.
   (y)   MEDICAL VARIANCE. One of the following received by a driver from the
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration that allows the driver to be issued
a medical certificate:
      (1)   An exemption letter permitting operation of a commercial motor
vehicle under 49 C.F.R. Part 381, Subpart C or 49 C.F.R. § 391.64; and
      (2)   A skill performance evaluation certificate permitting operation of
a commercial motor vehicle pursuant to 49 C.F.R. § 391.49.
   (z)   MOBILE TELEPHONE. A mobile communication device that falls under or
uses any commercial mobile radio service as defined in 47 C.F.R. part 20,
except that mobile telephone does not include two-way or citizens band radio
services.
   (aa)   MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer or semitrailer
propelled or drawn by mechanical power used on highways, except that the term
does not include a vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer or semitrailer operated
exclusively on a rail.
   (bb)   OUT-OF-SERVICE ORDER. A declaration by an authorized enforcement
officer of a federal, state, local, Canadian or Mexican jurisdiction declaring
that the driver, commercial motor vehicle or commercial motor carrier operation
is out of service as defined in 49 C.F.R. Part 390.5.
   (cc)   PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
   (dd)   PORTABLE TANK. A liquid or gaseous packaging designed primarily to be
loaded on or temporarily attached to a vehicle and equipped with skids,
mountings or accessories to facilitate handling of the tank by mechanical
means.
   (ee)   PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01(E)
(1) and (E)(3).
   (ff)   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Includes every vehicle that is defined as a
recreational vehicle in R.C. § 4501.01 and is used exclusively for purposes
other than engaging in business for profit.
   (gg)   RESIDENCE. Any person’s residence determined in accordance with
standards prescribed in the rules adopted by the Registrar.
   (hh)   SCHOOL BUS. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   (ii)   SERIOUS TRAFFIC VIOLATION. Any of the following:
      (1)   A conviction arising from a single charge of operating a commercial
motor vehicle in violation of any provision of R.C. § 4506.03;
      (2)   A.   Except as provided in division (2)B. of this definition, a
violation while operating a commercial motor vehicle of a law of this state, or
any municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or any other
substantially equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of
another state, prohibiting either of the following:
            1.   Texting while driving;
            2.   Using a handheld mobile telephone.
         B.   It is not a serious traffic violation if the person was texting
or using a handheld mobile telephone to contact law enforcement or other
emergency services.
      (3)   A conviction arising from the operation of any motor vehicle that
involves any of the following:
         A.   A single charge of any speed in excess of the posted speed limit
by 15 mph or more;
         B.   Violations of R.C. § 4511.20 or 4511.201 or any substantially
equivalent ordinance or resolution, or of any substantially equivalent law of
another state or political subdivision of another state;
         C.   Violation of a law of this state or an ordinance or resolution
relating to traffic control, other than a parking violation, or of any
substantially equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of
another state, that results in a fatal accident;
         D.   Violation of R.C. § 4506.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or of any substantially
equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of another state, that
involves the operation of a commercial motor vehicle without a valid commercial
driver’s license with the proper class or endorsement for the specific vehicle
group being operated or for the passengers or type of cargo being transported;
         E.   Violation of R.C. § 4506.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or of any substantially
equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of another state, that
involves the operation of a commercial motor vehicle without a valid commercial
driver’s license being in the person’s possession;
         F.   Violation of R.C. § 4511.33 or 4511.34, or any municipal
ordinance or county or township resolution substantially equivalent to either
of those sections, or any substantially equivalent law of another state or
political subdivision of another state; and
         G.   Violation of any other law of this state, any law of another
state, or any ordinance or resolution of a political subdivision of this state
or another state that meets both of the following requirements:
            1.   It relates to traffic control, other than a parking violation;
            2.   It is determined to be a serious traffic violation by the
United States Secretary of Transportation and is designated by the director as
such by rule.
   (jj)   STATE. A state of the United States and includes the District of
Columbia.
   (kk)   TANK VEHICLE. Any commercial motor vehicle that is designed to
transport any liquid or gaseous materials within a tank or tanks that are
either permanently or temporarily attached to the vehicle  or its chassis and
have an individual rated capacity of more than 119 gallons and an aggregate
rated capacity of 1,000 gallons or more. The term does not include a commercial
motor vehicle transporting an empty storage container tank that is not designed
for transportation, has a rated capacity of 1,000 gallons or more, and is
temporarily attached to a flatbed trailer.
   (ll)   TESTER. A person or entity acting pursuant to a valid agreement
entered into pursuant to R.C. § 4506.09(B).
   (mm)   TEXTING. Manually entering alphanumeric text into, or reading text
from, an electronic device. TEXTING includes short message service (SMS), e-
mail, instant messaging, a command or request to access a world wide web page,
pressing more than a single button to initiate or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone, or engaging in any other form of
electronic text retrieval or entry, for present or future communication.
TEXTING does not include the following:
      (1)   Using voice commands to initiate, receive, or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone;
      (2)   Inputting, selecting, or reading information on a global
positioning system or navigation system;
      (3)   Pressing a single button to initiate or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone; or
      (4)   Using, for a purpose that is not otherwise prohibited by law, a
device capable of performing multiple functions, such as a fleet management
system, a dispatching device, a mobile telephone, a citizens band radio, or a
music player.
   (nn)   TEXTING WHILE DRIVING. Texting while operating a commercial motor
vehicle, with the motor running, including while temporarily stationary because
of traffic, a traffic-control device, or other momentary delays. Texting while
driving does not include operating a commercial motor vehicle with or without
the motor running when the driver has moved the vehicle to the side of, or off,
a highway and is stopped in a location where the vehicle can safely remain
stationary.
   (oo)   UNITED STATES. The 50 states and the District of Columbia.
   (pp)   UPGRADE. A change in the class of vehicles, endorsements or self-
certified status as described in division R.C. § 4506.10(A)(1) that expands the
ability of a current commercial driver’s license holder to operate commercial
motor vehicles under this chapter or R.C. Chapter 4506.
   (qq)   USE OF A HANDHELD MOBILE TELEPHONE.
      (1)   Using at least one hand to hold a mobile telephone to conduct a
voice communication;
      (2)   Dialing or answering a mobile telephone by pressing more than a
single button; or
      (3)   Reaching for a mobile telephone in a manner that requires a driver
to maneuver so that the driver is no longer in a seated driving position, or
restrained by a seat belt that is installed in accordance with 49 C.F.R. §
393.93 and adjusted in accordance with the vehicle manufacturer’s instructions.
   (rr)   VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(R.C. § 4506.01)
§ 442.02 USE OF ACTUAL GROSS WEIGHT IN LIEU OF RATING.
   For purposes of this chapter, the actual gross weight of a vehicle or
combination of vehicles may be used in lieu of a gross vehicle weight rating to
determine whether a vehicle or combination of vehicles qualifies as a
commercial motor vehicle if the gross vehicle weight rating specified by the
manufacturer for the vehicle of combination of vehicles is not determinable, or
if the manufacturer of the vehicle has not specified a gross vehicle weight
rating.
(R.C. § 4506.011)
§ 442.03 LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having in the person’s
possession or otherwise under the person’s control more than one valid driver’s
license issued by this state, any other state or by a foreign jurisdiction;
      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this municipality
in violation of an out-of-service order while the person’s driving privilege is
suspended, revoked or cancelled, or while the person is subject to
disqualification;
      (3)   Drive a motor vehicle on a highway in the municipality under the
authority of a commercial driver’s license issued by another state or a foreign
jurisdiction, after having been a resident of this state for 30 days or longer;
or
      (4)   Knowingly give false information in any application or
certification required by R.C. § 4506.07.
      (5)   Knowingly provide false statements or engage in any fraudulent act
related to testing for a commercial driver's license as required in R.C. §
4506.09.
   (b)   The municipality shall give every conviction occurring out of this
state and notice of which was received by the State Department of Public Safety
after December 31, 1989, full faith and credit and treat it for sanctioning
purposes under this chapter as though the conviction had occurred in this
state.
(R.C. § 4506.04(A), (B))
   (c)   No person shall drive any commercial motor vehicle for which an
endorsement is required under R.C. § 4506.12 unless the proper endorsement
appears on the person’s commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit. No person shall drive a commercial motor
vehicle in violation of a restriction established under R.C. § 4506.12 that
appears on the person’s commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit.
(R.C. § 4506.12(I))
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(1), (2) or (3) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(4) of this section is guilty of
falsification, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition, the provisions
of R.C. § 4507.19 apply.
(R.C. § 4506.04(C))
      (3)   Whoever violates division (a)(5) of this section is guilty of
falsification, a misdemeanor of the third degree. In addition, the provisions
of R.C. § 4507.19 apply.
      (4)   A.   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   The offenses established under division (c) of this section are
strict liability offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of
these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be construed to imply
that any other offense for which there is no specified degree of culpability,
whether in this section or another section of this code or the Ohio Revised
Code, is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. § 4506.12(J))
§ 442.04 PHYSICAL QUALIFICATION TO OPERATE COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (a)   No person who holds a valid commercial driver’s license shall drive a
commercial motor vehicle unless the person is physically qualified to do so.
      (1)   Any person applying for a commercial driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit, the renewal or upgrade of a
commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit, or the transfer of a commercial driver’s license from out
of state shall self-certify to the Registrar for purposes of 49 C.F.R. § 383.71
one of the following in regard to the applicant’s operation of a commercial
motor vehicle, as applicable:
         A.   1.   If the applicant operates or expects to operate a commercial
motor vehicle in interstate or foreign commerce and is subject to and meets the
requirements under 49 C.F.R. Part 391, the applicant shall self-certify that
the applicant is non-excepted interstate and shall provide the Registrar with
the original or a copy of a medical examiner’s certificate and each
subsequently issued medical examiner’s certificate prepared by a qualified
medical examiner to maintain a medically certified status on the applicant’s
commercial driver licensing system driver record; or
            2.   If the applicant operates or expects to operate a commercial
motor vehicle in interstate commerce, but engages in transportation or
operations excepted under 49 C.F.R. §§ 390.3(f), 391.2, 391.68 or 398.3 from
all or parts of the qualification requirements of 49 C.F.R. Part 391, the
applicant shall self-certify that the applicant is excepted interstate and is
not required to obtain a medical examiner’s certificate;
         B.   1.   If the applicant operates only in intrastate commerce and is
subject to state driver qualification requirements, the applicant shall self-
certify that the applicant is non-excepted intrastate; or
            2.   If the applicant operates only in intrastate commerce and is
excepted from all or parts of the state driver qualification requirements, the
applicant shall self-certify that the applicant is excepted intrastate.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the expiration date on a person’s commercial
driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit,
every commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit holder shall provide the Registrar with the certification
required by this section on or after January 30, 2012, but prior to January 30,
2014.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4506.10(A), (E))
§ 442.05 CRIMINAL OFFENSES.
   (a)   No person who holds a commercial driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit or who operates a motor vehicle
for which a commercial driver’s license or permit is required shall do any of
the following:
      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having a measurable or
detectable amount of alcohol or of a controlled substance in the person’s
blood, breath or urine;
      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of 0.04% or more by whole blood or breath;
      (3)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of 0.048% or more by blood serum or blood plasma;
      (4)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of 0.056% or more by urine;
      (5)   Drive a motor vehicle while under the influence of a controlled
substance;
      (6)   Drive a motor vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a municipal
O.V.I. ordinance as defined in R.C. § 4511.181;
      (7)   Use a vehicle in the commission of a felony;
      (8)   Refuse to submit to a test under R.C. § 4506.17 or R.C. § 4511.191,
or any substantially similar municipal ordinance;
      (9)   Operate a commercial motor vehicle while the person’s commercial
driver’s license or permit or other commercial driving privileges are revoked,
suspended, cancelled or disqualified;
      (10)   Cause a fatality through the negligent operation of a commercial
motor vehicle, including but not limited to the offenses of aggravated
vehicular homicide, vehicular homicide and vehicular manslaughter;
      (11)   Fail to stop after an accident in violation of R.C. §§ 4549.02 to
4549.03, or any substantially similar municipal ordinance;
      (12)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle in violation of any provision of
R.C. §§ 4511.61 to 4511.63 or any federal or local law or ordinance pertaining
to railroad-highway grade crossings; and
      (13)   Use a motor vehicle in the commission of a felony involving the
manufacture, distribution or dispensing of a controlled substance as defined in
R.C. § 3719.01 or the possession with intent to manufacture, distribute or
dispense a controlled substance;
      (14)   Use a commercial motor vehicle in the commission of a violation of
R.C. § 2905.32 or any other substantially equivalent offense established under
federal law or the laws of another state.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
   (c)   The offenses established under this section are strict liability
offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of these offenses
as strict liability offenses shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.
(R.C. § 4506.15)
Statutory reference:
   Alcohol or controlled substance testing, disqualification of drivers, see
R.C. § 4506.17
   Disqualification of drivers for violations, see R.C. § 4506.16
§ 442.06 APPLICATION OF 49 C.F.R. PART 383.
   (a)   The provisions of 49 C.F.R. Part 383, Subpart C (Notification
Requirements and Employer Responsibilities), as amended, shall apply to all
commercial drivers or persons who apply for employment as commercial drivers.
No person shall fail to make a report to the person’s employer as required by
this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4506.19)
§ 442.07 INFORMATION REQUIRED OF PROSPECTIVE DRIVERS BY EMPLOYERS; UNAUTHORIZED
DRIVING.
   (a)   Each employer shall require every applicant for employment as a driver
of a commercial vehicle to provide the applicant’s employment history for the
ten years preceding the date the employment application is submitted to the
prospective employer. The following information shall be submitted:
      (1)   A list of the names and addresses of the applicant’s previous
employers for which the applicant was the operator of a commercial motor
vehicle;
      (2)   The dates the applicant was employed by these employers; and
      (3)   The reason for leaving each of these employers.
   (b)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize any driver employed by
the employer to drive a commercial motor vehicle during any period in which any
of the following apply:
      (1)   The driver’s commercial driver’s license is suspended, revoked or
cancelled by any state or a foreign jurisdiction;
      (2)   The driver has lost the privilege to drive, or currently is
disqualified from driving, a commercial motor vehicle in any state or foreign
jurisdiction;
      (3)   The driver, the commercial motor vehicle the driver is driving, or
the motor carrier operation is subject to an out-of-service order in any state
or a foreign jurisdiction; and
      (4)   The driver has more than one driver’s license.
   (c)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a
commercial motor vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4506.15.
   (d)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a
commercial motor vehicle if the driver does not hold a valid, current
commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit bearing the proper class or endorsements for the vehicle. No
employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a commercial
motor vehicle in violation of the restrictions on the driver’s commercial
driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (a), (b) or (d) of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 4506.20)
§ 442.08 AUTHORITY OF PEACE OFFICERS RE DRUNK DRIVING.
   (a)   Within the jurisdictional limits of the appointing authority, any
peace officer shall stop and detain any person found violating R.C. § 4506.15,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, without obtaining a
warrant. When there is reasonable ground to believe that a violation of R.C. §
4506.15, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, has been
committed and a test or tests of the person’s whole blood, blood plasma or
blood serum, breath or urine is necessary, the peace officer shall take the
person to an appropriate place for testing. If a person refuses to submit to a
test after being warned as provided in R.C. § 4506.17(C), or submits to a test
that discloses the presence of a controlled substance or an alcohol
concentration of 0.04% or more by whole blood or breath, an alcohol
concentration of 0.048% or more by blood serum or blood plasma, or an alcohol
concentration of 0.056% or more by urine, the peace officer shall require that
the person immediately surrender the person’s commercial driver’s license to
the peace officer.
   (b)   As used in this section, JURISDICTIONAL LIMITS means the limits within
which a peace officer may arrest and detain a person without a warrant under
R.C. § 2935.03, except that the Superintendent and the troopers of the State
Highway Patrol may stop and detain, without warrant, any person who, in the
presence of the Superintendent or any trooper, is engaged in a violation of any
of the provisions of R.C. Chapter 4506.
(R.C. § 4506.23)
§ 442.09 PERMITTING OR DRIVING WHILE FATIGUED OR ILL PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle, as defined in R.C. §
4506.01, or a commercial car or commercial tractor, as defined in R.C. §
4501.01, while the person’s ability or alertness is so impaired by fatigue,
illness or other causes that it is unsafe for the person to drive the vehicle.
No driver shall use any drug which would adversely affect the driver’s ability
or alertness.
   (b)   No owner, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, of a commercial motor vehicle,
commercial car or commercial tractor, or a person employing or otherwise
directing the driver of the vehicle, shall require or knowingly permit a driver
in any such condition described in division (a) of this section to drive the
vehicle upon any street or highway.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section
or R.C. § 4511.79, or R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764 or
4511.77, or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of
those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.79)
§ 442.10 DRIVER’S CONSECUTIVE SERVICE AND OFF-DUTY HOURS (REPEALED).
Editor’s note:
   Section 442.10 was repealed as part of the 1992 updating and revision of
these Codified Ordinances because substantially equivalent state law (R.C. §
4511.80) was repealed by the General Assembly by Am. Sub. S.B. No. 382,
effective December 31, 1990.
§ 442.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 444: MOTOR TRANSPORTATION COMPANIES
Section
   
444.01   Compliance with State Public Utilities Commission rules
   
444.02   Display of tax card or equivalent
   
444.03   Route
   
444.04   Liability insurance or bond
   
444.05   Certificate of necessity required
   
444.06   Vehicle markings required
   
444.07   Log book; safety equipment
   
444.08   Vehicle identification
   
444.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Commercial and heavy vehicles, see
Ch. 440,
Ch. 442
   Private motor transportation companies, see R.C. Ch. 4923
   Public motor transportation companies, see R.C. Ch. 4921
   Public Utilities Commission, see R.C. Ch. 4901 et seq.
§ 444.01 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION RULES.
   (a)   No motor transportation company, as defined in R.C. §§ 4921.01 and
4921.02, or private motor carrier, as defined in R.C. §§ 4923.01 and 4923.02,
shall operate any motor vehicle on or over the roads, streets and highways of
the city in violation of any of the rules and regulations prescribed by the
State Public Utilities Commission.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
§ 444.02 DISPLAY OF TAX CARD OR EQUIVALENT.
   (a)   No motor transportation company or private motor carrier shall operate
any motor vehicle for the transportation of persons or property, or both, for
hire on any road, street or highway in the city, without carrying thereon an
annual tax card or an emergency tax receipt card or a reciprocity tax decal, as
required under any administrative order of the State Public Utilities
Commission, as authorized and provided under the terms and provisions of R.C.
§§ 4921.18, 4921.19 and 4923.11.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
§ 444.03 ROUTE.
   (a)   No motor transportation company or private motor carrier shall operate
any motor vehicle on any route other than the route provided for in the
certificate granted by the State Public Utilities Commission, except as
provided in R.C. § 4921.14.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
§ 444.04 LIABILITY INSURANCE OR BOND.
   (a)   No motor transportation company or private motor carrier shall operate
any motor vehicle in the city without having in full force and effect a
liability insurance certificate policy or bond satisfactory to the State Public
Utilities Commission, as required by R.C. §§ 4921.11 and 4923.08.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
§ 444.05 CERTIFICATE OF NECESSITY REQUIRED.
   (a)   No motor transportation company or private motor carrier shall operate
any motor vehicle in the city for the transportation of persons or property,
for compensation or for hire, without first obtaining a certificate of
necessity, as required by R.C. § 4921.07.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
§ 444.06 VEHICLE MARKINGS REQUIRED.
   (a)   No commercial vehicle shall be operated upon the streets, highways,
bridges or culverts within the city, which does not display on the side
thereof, in plain, legible letters and figures, the weight of the vehicle when
fully equipped, the manufacturer’s rated carrying capacity, and the tire widths
of the vehicle.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
§ 444.07 LOG BOOK; SAFETY EQUIPMENT.
   (a)   No motor transportation company or private motor carrier shall operate
any motor vehicle upon the roads, streets or highways in the city without
carrying a log book and safety equipment and without complying with all other
rules and regulations prescribed by the State Public Utilities Commission.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
§ 444.08 VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION.
   (a)   No motor transportation company or private motor carrier shall operate
any motor vehicle on the roads, streets or highways in the city without having
displayed on both sides thereof, in such places as to be easily seen by anyone
wishing to identify the vehicle, the following in letters and figures not less
than two inches in height and three-eighths of an inch in width:
      (1)   The company number of the vehicle; and
      (2)   The company name, location and state.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
§ 444.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 446: LIGHT MOTOR VEHICLE NOISE CONTROL
Section
   
446.01   Declaration of findings and policy
   
446.02   Scope
   
446.03   Definitions
   
446.04   Noise limit
   
446.05   Excessive noise
   
446.06   Stationary test
   
446.07   Audible signaling devices
   
446.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Mufflers; excessive noise, see §
438.21
   Noise control in loading zones, see §
452.09
   Noise control, see
Ch. 634
   “Peeling;” cracking exhaust noises, see §
432.35
§ 446.01 DECLARATION OF FINDINGS AND POLICY.
   Because excessive noise from light motor vehicles is a serious hazard to the
public health, welfare and safety and the quality of life; and because a
substantial body of science and technology now exists by which excessive noise
from light motor vehicles may be substantially abated, and because the people
have a right to and should be ensured an environment free from excessive noise
that may jeopardize their health, welfare or safety or degrade the quality of
life, it is the policy of the city to prevent excessive noise which may
jeopardize the health, welfare or safety of its residents or degrade the
quality of life.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
§ 446.02 SCOPE.
   This chapter shall apply to the control of all noise caused by light motor
vehicles and originating within the limits of the city.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
§ 446.03 DEFINITIONS.
   All terminology used in this chapter that is not defined below shall be in
conformity with applicable publications of the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) or its successor body.
   (a)   A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL. The sound pressure level in decibels as
measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so
read is designated dB(A) or dBA.
   (b)   LIGHT MOTOR VEHICLE. For purposes of §§
446.04 to
446.07, means any automobile, van, motorcycle, motor driven cycle, motor
scooter or light truck with a gross vehicular weight of less than 8,000 pounds.
   (c)   MODIFIED EXHAUST SYSTEM. An exhaust system in which one or more of the
following are true:
      (1)   The original noise abatement devices have been physically altered
causing them to be less effective in reducing noise;
      (2)   The original noise abatement devices have been either removed or
replaced by noise abatement devices which are not as effective in reducing
noise as the original devices; and/or
      (3)   Devices have been added to the original noise abatement devices,
such that noise levels are increased.
   (d)   NOISE. Any sound that annoys or disturbs humans or that causes or
tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans.
   (e)   NOISE LEVEL. The A-weighted sound level produced by a light motor
vehicle.
   (f)   PERSON. Any individual, association, partnership or corporation, and
includes any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality of a
state or any political subdivision of a state.
   (g)   RESIDENTIAL AREA. Areas set forth as R-1-A, R-1-B, R-1-C, R-1-D, R-1-
E, R-1-F, R-2, R-3, R-3-A or R-3-B in §§ 1262.01 and 1262.02 of the Planning
and Zoning Code.
   (h)   SOUND LEVEL METER. An instrument that includes a microphone,
amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output meter and
weighting networks and that is used to measure sound pressure levels. The
instrument shall comply with the standards for Type 1 or Type 2 sound level
meters as specified in American National Standards Institute Standard ANSI
S1.4-1971 or its successor.
   (i)   SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL. Twenty times the logarithm to the base ten of
the ratio of the RMS sound pressure to the reference pressure of 20
micropascals. The sound pressure level is expressed in decibels.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
§ 446.04 NOISE LIMIT.
   (a)   No person shall cause noise levels from the operation of a light motor
vehicle in excess of 80 dBA at any location within the corporate limits of the
city. Measurement can be made at any distance greater than or equal to 15 feet
from the closest approach to the vehicle at any suitable site in accordance
with procedures outlined in the Code of Recommended Practices on file with the
Clerk of Council.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the second degree on any
subsequent offense.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
§ 446.05 EXCESSIVE NOISE.
   (a)   No person shall operate a light motor vehicle such as to cause
excessive noise levels as a result of a defective or modified exhaust system,
or as a result of unnecessarily rapid acceleration, deceleration, revving or
tire squealing.
   (b)   No person shall play any radio, music player, such as a “boom box,”
tape cassette, disc player, television, audio system, musical instrument or any
other type of sound device upon any public road, street, highway or private
property in this municipality in a manner or at a volume so as to disturb the
quiet, comfort or repose of other persons.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the second degree on any
subsequent offense. In addition, the sound device used during the commission of
the offense shall be subject to seizure and payment of a judgment.
(Ord. 1991-193, passed 11-4-1991)
§ 446.06 STATIONARY TEST.
   At the request of the operator of the light motor vehicle, an officer can
administer a stationary motor vehicle noise test as outlined in the Code of
Recommended Practices on file with the Clerk of Council. If the officer cannot
administer the test at the time of the request, he or she will notify the
operator when and where the operator may have his or her vehicle tested. The
stationary motor vehicle noise test can provide information as to the extent of
defectiveness of the exhaust system or as to whether or not excessive noise
levels were caused by improper operation of the light motor vehicle.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
§ 446.07 AUDIBLE SIGNALING DEVICES.
   (a)   No person shall repeatedly operate any horn or other audible signaling
device on any light motor vehicle except in an emergency or when required by
law.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the second degree on any
subsequent offense.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
§ 446.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
TITLE EIGHT - PARKING
            Chap.
452.   Parking Generally
CHAPTER 452: PARKING GENERALLY
Section
   
452.01   Prohibition against parking on streets or highways
   
452.02   Police may remove illegally parked vehicle
   
452.03   Prohibited standing or parking places
   
452.04   Manner of parallel and angle parking; privileges for persons with
disabilities
   
452.05   Willfully leaving vehicles on private or public property
   
452.055   Parking prohibitions on private property; private tow-away zones
   
452.06   Unattended vehicles; duty to lock ignition, remove key, set brake and
the like
   
452.07   Opening doors on side available to traffic
   
452.08   Selling, washing or repairing vehicle upon roadway
   
452.09   Loading zones; noise control
   
452.10   Bus stops and taxicab stands
   
452.11   Parking in alleys and narrow streets; exceptions
   
452.12   Snow emergencies
   
452.13   Moving vehicles interfering with snow removal; charges
   
452.14   Overnight parking
   
452.15   Parking in driveways of city-owned property, multi- family dwellings
and in shopping center, store and school areas
   
452.16   Registered owner prima facie liable for unlawful parking
   
452.17   Waiver
   
452.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Handicapped parking, see
Ch. 1466
   Impounding; redemption, see §
404.05
   Lights on parked or stopped vehicles, see §
438.09
   Parking defined, see §
402.23
   Parking near stopped fire apparatus, see §
432.25
   Parking of bicycles; locks, see §
474.09
   Police may remove ignition key from unattended vehicle, see §
404.08
   Stop defined, see §
402.41
   Stopping and standing defined, see §
402.43
   Storage of junk vehicles, see §
660.07
§ 452.01 PROHIBITION AGAINST PARKING ON STREETS OR HIGHWAYS.
   (a)   (1)   Upon any highway, no person shall stop, park or leave standing
any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main traveled
part of the highway if it is practicable to stop, park or so leave the vehicle
off the paved or main traveled part of the highway. In every event a clear and
unobstructed portion of the highway opposite the standing vehicle shall be left
for the free passage of other vehicles, and a clear view of the stopped vehicle
shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in each direction upon the
highway.
      (2)   This section does not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is
disabled while on the paved or improved or main traveled portion of a highway
in such manner and to the extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and
temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in that position.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.66)
§ 452.02 POLICE MAY REMOVE ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE.
   (a)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a highway in
violation of R.C. § 4511.66 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
the officer may move the vehicle, or require the driver or other person in
charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the paved or improved
or main traveled part of the highway.
   (b)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any
highway, bridge or causeway, or in any tunnel, where the vehicle constitutes an
obstruction to traffic, the officer may provide for the removal of the vehicle
to the nearest garage or other place of safety.
(R.C. § 4511.67)
§ 452.03 PROHIBITED STANDING OR PARKING PLACES.
   (a)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with the provisions of this
Traffic Code, or while obeying the directions of a police officer or a traffic-
control device, in any of the following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk, except a bicycle;
      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;
      (3)   Within an intersection;
      (4)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;
      (5)   On a crosswalk;
      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      (7)   Within 30 feet of, and upon the approach to, any flashing beacon,
stop sign or traffic-control device;
      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by a traffic-control device;
      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      (10)   Within 20 feet of a driveway entrance to any fire station and, on
the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within 75
feet of the entrance when it is properly posted with signs;
      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
such standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      (12)   Alongside any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a
street;
      (13)   Upon any bridge or elevated structure upon a highway, or within a
highway tunnel;
      (14)   At any place where signs prohibit stopping;
      (15)   Within one foot of another parked vehicle;
      (16)   On the roadway portion of a freeway, expressway or thruway; and
      (17)   Within any fire lane as established by the Fire Chief pursuant to
Chapter 1660 of the Fire Prevention Code.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a)(17) of this section shall be fined $50
for each violation. Whoever violates any other provision of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. 1995-115, passed 7-17-1995)
Statutory reference:
   Parking - prohibited acts, see R.C. § 4511.68
§ 452.04 MANNER OF PARALLEL AND ANGLE PARKING; PRIVILEGES FOR PERSONS WITH
DISABILITIES.
   (a)   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there is an
adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of the
vehicle parallel with and not more than 12 inches from the right-hand curb,
unless it is impossible to approach so close to the curb; in this case the stop
shall be made as close to the curb as possible and only for the time necessary
to discharge and receive passengers or to load or unload merchandise. Local
authorities by ordinance may permit angle parking on any roadway under their
jurisdiction, except that angle parking shall not be permitted on a state route
within the municipality unless an unoccupied roadway width of not less than 25
feet is available for free- moving traffic.
   (b)   Local authorities by ordinance may permit parking of vehicles with the
left-hand wheels adjacent to and within 12 inches of the left-hand curb of a
one-way roadway.
   (c)   (1)   A.   Except as provided in division (c)(2) of this section, no
vehicle shall be stopped or parked on a road or highway with the vehicle facing
in a direction other than the direction of travel on that side of the road or
highway.
         B.   The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into an
angled parking space so that when the motorcycle is parked it is facing in a
direction other than the direction of travel on the side of the road or
highway.
      (2)   The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into a parking
space that is located on the side of, and parallel to, a road or highway. The
motorcycle may face any direction when so parked. Not more than two motorcycles
at a time shall be parked in a parking space as described in this division (c)
(2) of this section irrespective of whether or not the space is metered.
   (d)   Notwithstanding any statute or any rule, regulation, resolution or
ordinance, air compressors, tractors, trucks and other equipment, while being
used in the construction, reconstruction, installation, repair or removal of
facilities near, on, over or under a street or highway, may stop, stand or park
where necessary in order to perform the work, provided a flagperson is on duty
or warning signs or lights are displayed as may be prescribed by the Director
of Transportation.
   (e)   Accessible parking locations and privileges for persons with
disabilities that limit or impair the ability to walk shall be provided and
designated by all political subdivisions and by the state and all agencies and
instrumentalities thereof at all offices and facilities where parking is
provided, whether owned, rented or leased, and at all publicly owned parking
garages. The locations shall be designated through the posting of an elevated
sign, whether permanently affixed or movable, imprinted with the international
symbol of access and shall be reasonably close to exits, entrances, elevators
and ramps. All elevated signs posted in accordance with this division and R.C.
§ 3781.111(C) shall be mounted on a fixed or movable post, and the distance
from the ground to the bottom edge of the sign shall measure not less than five
feet. If a new sign or a replacement sign designating an accessible parking
location is posted on or after October 14, 1999, there also shall be affixed
upon the surface of that sign or affixed next to the designating sign a notice
that states the fine applicable for the offense of parking a motor vehicle in
the designated accessible parking location if the motor vehicle is not legally
entitled to be parked in that location.
   (f)   (1)   A.   No person shall stop, stand or park any motor vehicle at
accessible parking locations provided under division (e) of this section, or at
accessible clearly marked parking locations provided in or on privately owned
parking lots, parking garages or other parking areas and designated in
accordance with that division, unless one of the following applies:
            1.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of
a person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is
displaying a valid removable windshield placard or accessible license plates;
or
            2.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of
a person with a disability and is displaying a parking card or accessible
license plates.
         B.   Any motor vehicle that is parked in an accessible marked parking
location in violation of division (f)(1)A.1. or (f)(1)A.2. of this section may
be towed or otherwise removed from the parking location by the law enforcement
agency of the municipality. A motor vehicle that is so towed or removed shall
not be released to its owner until the owner presents proof of ownership of the
motor vehicle and pays all towing and storage fees normally imposed by the
municipality for towing and storing motor vehicles. If the motor vehicle is a
leased vehicle, it shall not be released to the lessee until the lessee
presents proof that that person is the lessee of the motor vehicle and pays all
towing and storage fees normally imposed by the municipality for towing and
storing motor vehicles.
         C.   If a person is charged with a violation of division (f)(1)A.1. or
(f)(1)A.2. of this section, it is an affirmative defense to the charge that the
person suffered an injury not more than 72 hours prior to the time the person
was issued the ticket or citation and that, because of the injury, the person
meets at least one of the criteria contained in R.C. § 4503.44(A)(1).
      (2)   No person shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle in an area
that is commonly known as an access aisle, which area is marked by diagonal
stripes and is located immediately adjacent to an accessible parking location
provided under division (e) of this section or at an accessible clearly marked
parking location provided in or on a privately owned parking lot, parking
garage, or other parking area and designated in accordance with that division.
   (g)   When a motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a
person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is
displaying a removable windshield placard or accessible license plates, or when
a motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a person with a
disability and is displaying a parking card or accessible license plates, the
motor vehicle is permitted to park for a period of two hours in excess of the
legal parking period permitted by local authorities, except where local
ordinances or police rules provide otherwise or where the vehicle is parked in
such a manner as to be clearly a traffic hazard.
   (h)   No owner of an office, facility or parking garage where accessible
parking locations are required to be designated in accordance with division (e)
of this section shall fail to properly mark the accessible parking locations in
accordance with that division or fail to maintain the markings of the
accessible locations, including the erection and maintenance of the fixed or
movable signs.
   (i)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a person or
organization to apply for a removable windshield placard or accessible license
plates if the parking card or accessible license plates issued to the person or
organization under prior law have not expired or been surrendered or revoked.
   (j)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   ACCESSIBLE LICENSE PLATES and REMOVABLE WINDSHIELD PLACARD. Any
license plates, standard removable windshield placard, permanent removable
windshield placard, or temporary removable windshield placard issued under R.C.
§ 4503.41 or 4503.44, and also mean any substantially similar license plates or
removable windshield placard issued by a state, district, country, or
sovereignty.
      (2)   PERSON WITH A DISABILITY. Any person who has lost the use of one or
both legs or one or both arms, who is blind, deaf or unable to move without the
aid of crutches or a wheelchair, or whose mobility is restricted by a permanent
cardiovascular, pulmonary or other disabling condition.
      (3)   PERSON WITH A DISABILITY THAT LIMITS OR IMPAIRS THE ABILITY TO
WALK. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4503.44.
   (k)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (a) or (c) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (f)(1)A.1. or (f)(1)A.2. of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in
division (k)(2)A. and (k)(2)B. of this section. Except as otherwise provided in
division (k)(2)A. of this section, an offender who violates division (f)(1)A.1.
or (f)(1)A.2. of this section shall be fined not less than $250 nor more than
$500. An offender who violates division (f)(1)A.1. or (f)(1)A.2. of this
section shall be fined not more than $100 if the offender, prior to sentencing,
proves either of the following to the satisfaction of the court:
            1.   At the time of the violation of division (f)(1)A.1. of this
section, the offender or the person for whose transport the motor vehicle was
being operated had been issued a removable windshield placard that then was
valid or special license plates that then were valid but the offender or the
person neglected to display the placard or license plates as described in
division (f)(1)A.1. of this section.
            2.   At the time of the violation of division (f)(1)A.2. of this
section, the offender or the person for whose transport the motor vehicle was
being operated had been issued a parking card that then was valid or special
handicapped license plates that then were valid but the offender or the person
neglected to display the card or license plates as described in division (f)
(1)A.2. of this section.
         B.   In no case shall an offender who violates division (f)(1)A.1. or
(f)(1)A.2. be sentenced to any term of imprisonment.
         C.   An arrest or conviction for a violation of division (f)(1)A.1. or
(f)(1)A.2. of this section does not constitute a criminal record and need not
be reported by the person so arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries
contained in any application for employment, license or other right or
privilege, or made in connection with the person’s appearance as a witness.
         D.   The Clerk of the Court shall pay every fine collected under
divisions (k)(2) and (k)(3) of this section to the municipality. Except as
provided in division (k)(2) of this section, the municipality shall use the
fine monies it receives under divisions (k)(2) and (k)(3) of this section to
pay the expenses it incurs in complying with the signage and notice
requirements contained in division (e) of this section. The municipality may
use up to 50% of each fine it receives under divisions (k)(2) and (k)(3) of
this section to pay the costs of educational, advocacy, support and assistive
technology programs for persons with disabilities, and for public improvements
within the municipality that benefit or assist persons with disabilities, if
governmental agencies or nonprofit organizations offer the programs.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (f)(2) of this section shall be fined not
less than $250 nor more than $500. In no case shall an offender who violates
division (f)(2) of this section be sentenced to any term of imprisonment. An
arrest or conviction for a violation of division (f)(2) of this section does
not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries contained in any application
for employment, license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection
with the person’s appearance as a witness.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (h) of this section shall be punished as
follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (k)(4) of this section,
the offender shall be issued a warning.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (h) of this section or of a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that division, the offender shall
not be issued a warning but shall be fined not more than $25 for each parking
location that is not properly marked or whose markings are not properly
maintained.
(R.C. § 4511.69)
§ 452.05 WILLFULLY LEAVING VEHICLES ON PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (a)   The Police Chief, upon notification to the Police Chief of such action
and of the location of the place of storage, may order into storage any motor
vehicle, including an abandoned junk motor vehicle as defined in R.C. §
4513.63, that:
      (1)   Has come into the possession of the Police chief as a result of the
performance of the Police Chief's duties; or
      (2)   Has been left on a public street or other property open to the
public for purposes of vehicular travel, or upon or within the right-of-way of
any road or highway, for 48 hours or longer without notification to the Police
Chief of the reasons for leaving the motor vehicle in such place. However, when
such a motor vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic it may be ordered
into storage immediately unless either of the following applies:
         A.   The vehicle was involved in an accident and is subject to R.C. §
4513.66, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
         B.   The vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle. If the vehicle is a
commercial motor vehicle, the Police Chief shall allow the owner or operator of
the vehicle the opportunity to arrange for the removal of the motor vehicle
within a period of time specified by the Police Chief. If the Police Chief
determines that the vehicle cannot be removed within the specified period of
time, the Police Chief shall order the removal of the vehicle.
      (3)   Subject to division (c) of this section, the Police Chief shall
designate the place of storage of any motor vehicle so ordered removed.
   (b)   If the Police Chief issues an order under division (a) of this section
and arranges for the removal of a motor vehicle by a towing service, the towing
service shall deliver the motor vehicle to the location designated by the
Police Chief not more than two hours after the time it is removed.
   (c)   (1)   The Police Chief shall cause a search to be made of the records
of an applicable entity listed in R.C. § 4513.601(F)(1) to ascertain the
identity of the owner and any lienholder of a motor vehicle ordered into
storage by the Police Chief within five business days of the removal of the
vehicle. Upon obtaining such identity, the Police Chief shall send or cause to
be sent to the owner and any lienholder at the owner's and any lienholder's
last known address by certified or express mail with return receipt requested,
by certified mail with electronic tracking, or by a commercial carrier service
utilizing any form of delivery requiring a signed receipt. The notice shall
inform the owner and any lienholder that the motor vehicle will be declared a
nuisance and disposed of if not claimed within ten days of the date of the
sending of the notice.
      (2)   A.   The owner or lienholder of the motor vehicle is responsible
for payment of any expenses or charges incurred in its removal and storage and
may reclaim the motor vehicle upon payment of those expenses or charges, and
presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a certificate of
title or memorandum certificate of title to the motor vehicle, a certificate of
registration for the motor vehicle, or a lease agreement. Upon presentation of
proof of ownership evidenced as provided above, the owner of the motor vehicle
also may retrieve any personal items from the vehicle without retrieving the
vehicle and without paying any fee. However, a towing service or storage
facility may charge an after-hours retrieval fee established by the Public
Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25 if the owner
retrieves the personal items after hours, unless the towing service or storage
facility fails to provide the notice required under R.C. § 4513.69(B)(3), if
applicable. However, the owner shall not do either of the following:
            1.   Retrieve any personal item that has been determined by the
Police Chief to be necessary to a criminal investigation;
            2.   Retrieve any personal item from a vehicle if it would endanger
the safety of the owner, unless the owner agrees to sign a waiver of liability.
         B.   For purposes of division (c)(2) of this section, "personal items"
do not include any items that are attached to the vehicle.
      (3)   If the owner or lienholder of the motor vehicle reclaims it after a
search of the applicable records has been conducted and after notice has been
sent to the owner and any lienholder as described in this section, and the
search was conducted by the place of storage, and the notice was sent to the
motor vehicle owner by the place of storage, the owner or lienholder shall pay
to the place of storage a processing fee of $25, in addition to any expenses or
charges incurred in the removal and storage of the vehicle.
   (d)   If the owner or lienholder makes no claim to the motor vehicle within
ten days of the date of sending the notice, and if the vehicle is to be
disposed of at public auction as provided in R.C. § 4513.62 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the Police Chief, without charge
to any party, shall file with the clerk of courts of the county in which the
place of storage is located an affidavit showing compliance with the
requirements of this section. Upon presentation of the affidavit, the clerk,
without charge, shall issue a salvage certificate of title, free and clear of
all liens and encumbrances, to the Police Chief. If the vehicle is to be
disposed of to a motor vehicle salvage dealer or other facility as provided in
R.C. § 4513.62 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the Police
Chief shall execute in triplicate an affidavit, as prescribed by the Registrar
of Motor Vehicles, describing the motor vehicle and the manner in which it was
disposed of, and that all requirements of this section have been complied with.
The Police Chief shall retain the original of the affidavit for the Police
Chief's records, and shall furnish two copies to the motor vehicle salvage
dealer or other facility. Upon presentation of a copy of the affidavit by the
motor vehicle salvage dealer, the clerk of courts, within 30 days of the
presentation, shall issue a salvage certificate of title, free and clear of all
liens and encumbrances.
   (e)   Whenever a motor vehicle salvage dealer or other facility receives an
affidavit for the disposal of a motor vehicle as provided in this section, the
dealer or facility shall not be required to obtain an Ohio certificate of title
to the motor vehicle in the dealer’s or facility’s own name if the vehicle is
dismantled or destroyed and both copies of the affidavit are delivered to the
clerk of courts.
   (f)   No towing service or storage facility shall fail to comply with this
section.
(R.C. § 4513.61)
   (g)   Abandonment of Junk Motor Vehicle Prohibited.
      (1)   A.   No person shall willfully leave an abandoned junk motor
vehicle, as defined in R.C. § 4513.63, on private property for more than 72
hours without the permission of the person having the right to the possession
of the property, or on a public street or other property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking, or upon or within the right-of-way of
any road or highway for 48 hours or longer without notification to the Police
Chief of the reason for leaving the motor vehicle in that place.
         B.   For purposes of this division (g)(1), the fact that a motor
vehicle has been so left without permission or notification is prima facie
evidence of abandonment.
         C.   Nothing contained in this section and R.C. §§ 4513.60, 4513.61
and 4513.63 shall invalidate or prevent the enactment of further provisions of
municipal ordinances regulating or prohibiting the abandonment of motor
vehicles on streets, highways, public property or private property within the
municipality.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (g) is guilty of a minor misdemeanor
and shall also be assessed any costs incurred by the municipality in disposing
of the abandoned junk motor vehicle, less any money accruing to the
municipality from the disposal.
(R.C. § 4513.64)
§ 452.055 PARKING PROHIBITIONS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; PRIVATE TOW-AWAY ZONES.
   (a)   (1)   The chief of a law enforcement agency of the municipal
corporation, upon complaint of any person adversely affected, may order into
storage any motor vehicle, other than an abandoned junk motor vehicle as
defined in R.C. § 4513.63, that has been left on private residential or private
agricultural property for at least four hours without the permission of the
person having the right to the possession of the property. The chief, upon
complaint of a repair garage or place of storage, may order into storage any
motor vehicle, other than an abandoned junk motor vehicle, that has been left
at the garage or place of storage for a longer period than that agreed upon.
When ordering a motor vehicle into storage pursuant to this division, the chief
may arrange for the removal of the motor vehicle by a towing service and shall
designate a storage facility.
      (2)   A towing service towing a motor vehicle under division (a)(1) of
this section shall remove the motor vehicle in accordance with that division.
The towing service shall deliver the motor vehicle to the location designated
by the chief not more than two hours after the time it is removed from the
private property, unless the towing service is unable to deliver the motor
vehicle within two hours due to an uncontrollable force, natural disaster, or
other event that is not within the power of the towing service.
      (3)   Subject to division (b) of this section, the owner of a motor
vehicle that has been removed pursuant to this division may recover the vehicle
only in accordance with division (d) of this section.
      (4)   As used in this section, PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY means private
property on which is located one or more structures that are used as a home,
residence, or sleeping place by one or more persons, if no more than three
separate households are maintained in the structure or structures. The phrase
does not include any private property on which is located one or more
structures that are used as a home, residence, or sleeping place by two or more
persons, if more than three separate households are maintained in the structure
or structures.
   (b)   (1)   If the owner or operator of a motor vehicle that has been
ordered into storage pursuant to division (a)(1) of this section arrives after
the motor vehicle has been prepared for removal, but prior to its actual
removal from the property, the towing service shall give the owner or operator
oral or written notification at the time of such arrival that the vehicle owner
or operator may pay a fee of not more than one-half of the fee for the removal
of the motor vehicle established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules
adopted under R.C. § 4921.25, in order to obtain release of the motor vehicle.
However, if the vehicle is within a municipal corporation and the municipal
corporation has established a vehicle removal fee, the towing service shall
give the owner or operator oral or written notification that the owner or
operator may pay not more than one-half of that fee to obtain release of the
motor vehicle. That fee may be paid by use of a major credit card unless the
towing service uses a mobile credit card processor and mobile service is not
available at the time of the transaction.
      (2)   Upon payment of the applicable fee, the towing service shall give
the vehicle owner or operator a receipt showing both the full amount normally
assessed and the actual amount received and shall release the motor vehicle to
the owner or operator. Upon its release, the owner or operator immediately
shall move it so that it is not on the private residential or private
agricultural property without the permission of the person having the right to
possession of the property, or is not at the garage or place of storage without
the permission of the owner, whichever is applicable.
   (c)   (1)   The chief of a law enforcement agency in the municipal
corporation shall maintain a record of motor vehicles that the chief orders
into storage pursuant to division (a)(1) of this section. The record shall
include an entry for each such motor vehicle that identifies the motor
vehicle's license number, make, model, and color, the location from which it
was removed, the date and time of its removal, the telephone number of the
person from whom it may be recovered, and the address of the place to which it
has been taken and from which it may be recovered. The chief shall provide any
information in the record that pertains to a particular motor vehicle to any
person who, either in person or pursuant to a telephone call, identifies self
as the owner or operator of the motor vehicle and requests information
pertaining to its location.
      (2)   Any person who registers a complaint that is the basis of the
chief's order for the removal and storage of a motor vehicle under division (a)
(1) of this section shall provide the identity of the law enforcement agency
with which the complaint was registered to any person who identifies self as
the owner or operator of the motor vehicle and requests information pertaining
to its location.
   (d)   (1)   The owner or lienholder of a motor vehicle that is ordered into
storage pursuant to division (a)(1) of this section may reclaim it upon both of
the following:
         A.   Payment of all applicable fees established by the Public
Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25 or, if the vehicle
was towed within a municipal corporation that has established fees for vehicle
removal and storage, payment of all applicable fees established by the
municipal corporation.
         B.   Presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a
certificate of title to the motor vehicle, a certificate of registration for
the motor vehicle, or a lease agreement.
      (2)   When the owner of a vehicle towed under this section retrieves the
vehicle, the towing service or storage facility in possession of the vehicle
shall give the owner written notice that if the owner disputes that the motor
vehicle was lawfully towed, the owner may be able to file a civil action under
R.C. § 4513.611.
      (3)   Upon presentation of proof of ownership as required under division
(d)(1)B. of this section, the owner of a motor vehicle that is ordered into
storage under division (a)(1) of this section may retrieve any personal items
from the motor vehicle without retrieving the vehicle and without paying any
fee. However, a towing service or storage facility may charge an after-hours
retrieval fee established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted
under R.C. § 4921.25 if the owner retrieves the personal items after hours,
unless the towing service or storage facility fails to provide the notice
required under R.C. § 4513.69(B)(3), if applicable. The owner of a motor
vehicle shall not do either of the following:
         A.   Retrieve any personal item that has been determined by the chief
to be necessary to a criminal investigation;
         B.   Retrieve any personal item from a vehicle if it would endanger
the safety of the owner, unless the owner agrees to sign a waiver of liability.
      (4)   For purposes of division (d)(3) of this section, “personal items”
do not include any items that are attached to the motor vehicle.
      (5)   If a motor vehicle that is ordered into storage pursuant to
division (a)(1) of this section remains unclaimed by the owner for 30 days, the
procedures established by R.C. §§ 4513.61 and 4513.62 apply.
   (e)   (1)   No person shall remove, or cause the removal of, any motor
vehicle from any private residential or private agricultural property other
than in accordance with division (a)(1) of this section or R.C. §§ 4513.61 to
4513.65.
      (2)   No towing service or storage facility shall fail to comply with the
requirements of this section.
   (f)   This section does not apply to any private residential or private
agricultural property that is established as a private tow-away zone in
accordance with division (h) of this section or R.C. § 4513.601.
   (g)   Whoever violates division (e) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.60)
   (h)   Private Tow-away Zones.
      (1)   The owner of a private property may establish a private tow-away
zone, but may do so only if all of the following conditions are satisfied:
         A.   The owner of the private property posts on the property a sign,
that is at least 18 inches by 24 inches in size, that is visible from all
entrances to the property, and that includes all of the following information:
            1.   A statement that the property is a tow-away zone;
            2.   A description of persons authorized to park on the property.
If the property is a residential property, the owner of the private property
may include on the sign a statement that only tenants and guests may park in
the private tow-away zone, subject to the terms of the property owner. If the
property is a commercial property, the owner of the private property may
include on the sign a statement that only customers may park in the private
tow-away zone. In all cases, if it is not apparent which persons may park in
the private tow-away zone, the owner of the private property shall include on
the sign the address of the property on which the private tow-away zone is
located or the name of the business that is located on the property designated
as a private tow-away zone.
            3.   If the private tow-away zone is not enforceable at all times,
the times during which the parking restrictions are enforced;
            4.   The telephone number and the address of the place from which a
towed vehicle may be recovered at any time during the day or night;
            5.   A statement that the failure to recover a towed vehicle may
result in the loss of title to the vehicle as provided in R.C. § 4505.101(B).
            6.   In order to comply with the requirements of division (h)(1)A.
of this section, the owner of a private property may modify an existing sign by
affixing to the existing sign stickers or an addendum in lieu of replacing the
sign.
         B.   A towing service ensures that a vehicle towed under this division
(h) is taken to a location from which it may be recovered that complies with
all of the following:
            1.   It is located within 25 linear miles of the location of the
private tow- away zone, unless it is not practicable to take the vehicle to a
place of storage within 25 linear miles.
            2.   It is well-lighted.
            3.   It is on or within a reasonable distance of a regularly
scheduled route of one or more modes of public transportation, if any public
transportation is available in the municipal corporation or township in which
the private tow-away zone is located.
      (2)   A.   If a vehicle is parked on private property that is established
as a private tow-away zone in accordance with division (h)(1) of this section,
without the consent of the owner of the private property or in violation of any
posted parking condition or regulation, the owner of the private property may
cause the removal of the vehicle by a towing service. The towing service shall
remove the vehicle in accordance with this division (h). The vehicle owner and
the operator of the vehicle are considered to have consented to the removal and
storage of the vehicle, to the payment of the applicable fees established by
the Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25, and to
the right of a towing service to obtain title to the vehicle if it remains
unclaimed as provided in R.C. § 4505.101. The owner or lienholder of a vehicle
that has been removed under this division (h), subject to division (h)(3) of
this section, may recover the vehicle in accordance with division (h)(7) of
this section.
         B.   If a municipal corporation requires tow trucks and tow truck
operators to be licensed, no owner of a private property located within the
municipal corporation shall cause the removal and storage of any vehicle
pursuant to division (h)(2) of this section by an unlicensed tow truck or
unlicensed tow truck operator.
         C.   No towing service shall remove a vehicle from a private tow-away
zone except pursuant to a written contract for the removal of vehicles entered
into with the owner of the private property on which the private tow-away zone
is located.
      (3)   If the owner or operator of a vehicle that is being removed under
authority of division (h)(2) of this section arrives after the vehicle has been
prepared for removal, but prior to its actual removal from the property, the
towing service shall give the vehicle owner or operator oral or written
notification at the time of such arrival that the vehicle owner or operator may
pay a fee of not more than one-half of the fee for the removal of the vehicle
established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. §
4921.25 in order to obtain release of the vehicle. That fee may be paid by use
of a major credit card unless the towing service uses a mobile credit card
processor and mobile service is not available at the time of the transaction.
Upon payment of that fee, the towing service shall give the vehicle owner or
operator a receipt showing both the full amount normally assessed and the
actual amount received and shall release the vehicle to the owner or operator.
Upon its release, the owner or operator immediately shall move the vehicle so
that the vehicle is not parked on the private property established as a private
tow-away zone without the consent of the owner of the private property or in
violation of any posted parking condition or regulation.
      (4)   A.   Prior to towing a vehicle under division (h)(2) of this
section, a towing service shall make all reasonable efforts to take as many
photographs as necessary to evidence that the vehicle is clearly parked on
private property in violation of a private tow-away zone established under
division (h)(1) of this section. The towing service shall record the time and
date of the photographs taken under this division (h). The towing service shall
retain the photographs and the record of the time and date, in electronic or
printed form, for at least 30 days after the date on which the vehicle is
recovered by the owner or lienholder or at least two years after the date on
which the vehicle was towed, whichever is earlier.
         B.   A towing service shall deliver a vehicle towed under division (h)
(2) of this section to the location from which it may be recovered not more
than two hours after the time it was removed from the private tow-away zone,
unless the towing service is unable to deliver the motor vehicle within two
hours due to an uncontrollable force, natural disaster, or other event that is
not within the power of the towing service.
      (5)   A.   If an owner of a private property that is established as a
private tow-away zone in accordance with division (H)(1) of this section causes
the removal of a vehicle from that property by a towing service under division
(H)(2) of this section, the towing service, within two hours of removing the
vehicle, shall provide notice to the law enforcement agency of the municipal
corporation concerning all of the following:
            1.   The vehicle’s license number, make, model, and color;
            2.   The location from which the vehicle was removed;
            3.   The date and time the vehicle was removed;
            4.   The telephone number of the person from whom the vehicle may
be recovered;
            5.   The address of the place from which the vehicle may be
recovered.
         B.   The chief of a law enforcement agency of the municipal
corporation shall maintain a record of any vehicle removed from private
property in the chief's jurisdiction that is established as a private tow-away
zone of which the chief has received notice under this division (h). The record
shall include all information submitted by the towing service. The chief shall
provide any information in the record that pertains to a particular vehicle to
a person who, either in person or pursuant to a telephone call, identifies self
as the owner, operator, or lienholder of the vehicle and requests information
pertaining to the vehicle.
      (6)   A.   When a vehicle is removed from private property in accordance
with this section, within three business days of the removal, the towing
service or storage facility from which the vehicle may be recovered shall cause
a search to be made of either of the following to ascertain the identity of the
owner and any lienholder of the vehicle:
            1.   The records of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles;
            2.   The records of any vendor or vendors, approved by the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles, that are capable of providing real-time access to
owner and lienholder information.
         B.   The towing service or storage facility may search the National
Motor Vehicle Title Information System in order to determine the state in which
the vehicle is titled. The entity that provides the record of the owner and any
lienholder under this division shall ensure that such information is provided
in a timely manner.
         C.   Subject to division (h)(6)F. of this section, the towing service
or storage facility shall send notice to the vehicle owner and any known
lienholder as follows:
            1.   Within five business days after the applicable entity provides
the identity of the owner and any lienholder of the motor vehicle, if the
vehicle remains unclaimed, to the owner’s and lienholder’s last known address
by certified or express mail with return receipt requested, by certified mail
with electronic tracking, or by a commercial carrier service utilizing any form
of delivery requiring a signed receipt;
            2.   If the vehicle remains unclaimed 30 days after the first
notice is sent, in the manner required under division (h)(6)C.1. of this
section.
         D.   Sixty days after any notice sent pursuant to division (h)(6)C. of
this section is received, as evidenced by a receipt signed by any person, or
the towing service or storage facility has been notified that delivery was not
possible, the towing service or storage facility, if authorized under R.C. §
4505.101(B), may initiate the process for obtaining a certificate of title to
the motor vehicle as provided in that section.
         E.   A towing service or storage facility that does not receive a
signed receipt of notice, or a notification that delivery was not possible,
shall not obtain, and shall not attempt to obtain, a certificate of title to
the motor vehicle under R.C. § 4505.101(B).
         F.   With respect to a vehicle concerning which a towing service or
storage facility is not eligible to obtain title under R.C. § 4505.101, the
towing service or storage facility need only comply with the initial notice
required under division (h)(6)C.1. of this section.
      (7)   A.   The owner or lienholder of a vehicle that is removed under
division (h)(2) of this section may reclaim it upon both of the following:
            1.   Presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by
a certificate of title to the vehicle, a certificate of registration for the
motor vehicle, or a lease agreement;
            2.   Payment of the following fees:
               a.   All applicable fees established by the Public Utilities
Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25, except that the lienholder of
a vehicle may retrieve the vehicle without paying any storage fee for the
period of time that the vehicle was in the possession of the towing service or
storage facility prior to the date the lienholder received the notice sent
under division (h)(6)A.1. of this section;
               b.   If notice has been sent to the owner and lienholder as
described in division (h)(6) of this section, a processing fee of $25.
         B.   A towing service or storage facility in possession of a vehicle
that is removed under authority of division (h)(2) of this section shall show
the vehicle owner, operator, or lienholder who contests the removal of the
vehicle all photographs taken under division (h)(4) of this section. Upon
request, the towing service or storage facility shall provide a copy of all
photographs in the medium in which the photographs are stored, whether paper,
electronic, or otherwise.
         C.   When the owner of a vehicle towed under this section retrieves
the vehicle, the towing service or storage facility in possession of the
vehicle shall give the owner written notice that if the owner disputes that the
motor vehicle was lawfully towed, the owner may be able to file a civil action
under R.C. § 4513.611.
         D.   Upon presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced
by a certificate of title to the vehicle, a certificate of registration for the
motor vehicle, or a lease agreement, the owner of a vehicle that is removed
under authority of division (h)(2) of this section may retrieve any personal
items from the vehicle without retrieving the vehicle and without paying any
fee. The owner of the vehicle shall not retrieve any personal items from a
vehicle if it would endanger the safety of the owner, unless the owner agrees
to sign a waiver of liability. For purposes of division (h)(7)D. of this
section, “personal items” do not include any items that are attached to the
vehicle.
      (8)   No person shall remove, or cause the removal of, any vehicle from
private property that is established as a private tow-away zone under this
division (h) or store such a vehicle other than in accordance with this
division (h), or otherwise fail to comply with any applicable requirement of
this division (h).
      (9)   This section does not affect or limit the operation of divisions
(a) through (g) of this section, R.C. § 4513.60 or R.C. §§ 4513.61 to 4613.65
as they relate to property other than private property that is established as a
private tow-away zone under division (h)(1) of this section.
      (10)   Whoever violates division (h)(8) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
      (11)   As used in this section, “owner of a private property” or “owner
of the private property” includes, with respect to a private property, any of
the following:
         A.   Any person who holds title to the property;
         B.   Any person who is a lessee or sublessee with respect to a lease
or sublease agreement for the property;
         C.   A person who is authorized to manage the property;
         D.   A duly authorized agent of any person listed in divisions (h)
(11)A. to (h)(11)C. of this section.
(R.C. § 4513.601)
   (i)   If an owner of private property posts on the property in a conspicuous
manner a prohibition against parking on the property or conditions and
regulations under which parking is permitted, no person shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   Park a vehicle on the property without the owner’s consent;
      (2)   Park a vehicle on the property in violation of any condition or
regulation posted by the owner.
   (j)   Whoever violates division (i) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.681)
§ 452.06 UNATTENDED VEHICLES; DUTY TO LOCK IGNITION, REMOVE KEY, SET BRAKE AND
THE LIKE.
   (a)   (1)   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit
it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition,
removing the key from the ignition, effectively setting the parking brake, and,
when the motor vehicle is standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to
the curb or side of the highway.
      (2)   The requirements of this section relating to the stopping of the
engine, locking of the ignition, and removing the key from the ignition of a
motor vehicle do not apply to any of the following:
         A.   A motor vehicle that is parked on residential property;
         B.   A motor vehicle that is locked, regardless of where it is parked;
         C.   An emergency vehicle ;
         D.   A public safety vehicle.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.661)
§ 452.07 OPENING DOORS ON SIDE AVAILABLE TO TRAFFIC.
   (a)   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.70)
§ 452.08 SELLING, WASHING OR REPAIRING VEHICLE UPON ROADWAY.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the
principal purpose of:
   (a)   Displaying the vehicle for sale; or
   (b)   Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle except repairs necessitated
by an emergency.
§ 452.09 LOADING ZONES; NOISE CONTROL.
   (a)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or
length of time, other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup
and loading of materials, in any place marked as a commercial curb loading zone
during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no
case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
   (b)   No person shall couple or uncouple a trailer, or load or unload
materials from trucks or trailers, between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
of the following day, or on Sundays and legal holidays at any time. However,
these requirements shall not apply where each of the following criteria are
met:
      (1)   The area where the loading/unloading activity occurs is located a
minimum of 400 feet from the closest lot line of any residentially zoned
property and at least 600 feet from any residence located on residentially
zoned property;
      (2)   The loading/unloading activity is not visible from any residence
that is located on residentially zoned property and that is adjacent to the
property in question;
      (3)   The noise level that is generated by the loading/unloading activity
does not exceed 50 dBA, as measured from the property line of any residentially
zoned lot.
(Ord. 1989-134, passed 8-9-1989; Ord. 2015-164, passed 7-20-2015)
§ 452.10 BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS.
   (a)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a
bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or
stand has been officially designated and appropriately posted, except that the
driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of,
and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers when the
stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about
to enter the zone, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes, if
the stopping is not prohibited therein by posted signs.
   (b)   No operator of a bus shall stop, stand or park the vehicle upon any
street or other public way at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading
passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop so designated and posted
as such, except in case of an emergency.
   (c)   No operator of a bus shall fail to enter a bus stop on a street or
other public way in such a manner that the bus when stopped to load or unload
passengers or baggage is in a position with the right front wheel of the
vehicle not further than 18 inches from the curb and the bus approximately
parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular
traffic.
   (d)   No operator of a taxicab shall stand or park the vehicle upon any
street or other public way at any place other than in a taxicab stand so
designated and posted as such. This provision shall not prevent the operator of
a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or
parking provisions at any place for the purpose of, and while actually engaged
in, the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.
§ 452.11 PARKING IN ALLEYS AND NARROW STREETS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street, other
than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available
less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular
traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or
unloading of passengers or when directed to by a police officer or traffic-
control signal.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided by law, no person shall stop, stand or
park a vehicle within an alley except while actually loading and unloading, and
then only for a period not to exceed 30 minutes.
§ 452.12 SNOW EMERGENCIES.
   (a)   Whenever, during any period of 24 hours or less, snow falls in the
city or in any section thereof to a depth of two inches or more, an emergency
is declared to exist in that such a depth of snow constitutes a serious public
hazard, impairing transportation, the movement of food, fuel and other
supplies, medical care, fire, health and police protection, and other vital
facilities of the city.
   (b)   The Director of Public Safety, the Service Director or the Police
Chief shall make a reasonable effort to announce the existence of the emergency
by the use of the local press and radio and television stations. Such emergency
shall continue until such time as the snow accumulation is reduced to less than
two inches or until the Director of Public Safety, the Service Director or the
Police Chief announces that the emergency is terminated. However, owners and
operators of motor vehicles shall have the responsibility of determining
existing weather conditions and depth or extent of snowfall and to comply with
emergency parking regulations when such emergency is in effect.
   (c)   During the period of the emergency, the Director of Public Safety, the
Service Director or the Police Chief may prohibit the parking of vehicles upon
any or all of the city streets. During such emergency no person shall park or
cause to be parked, or permit to be parked, or abandon or leave unattended, any
motor vehicle of any kind or description on any of the city’s streets or roads.
However, vehicles may be parked for a period of not longer than three minutes
for the actual loading or unloading of passengers, or 30 minutes for the actual
loading or unloading of property or goods, provided that the operator of such
vehicle is immediately available, and provided, further, that no other
ordinance restricting parking as to time and place is violated.
   (d)   Snow emergency streets shall be designated by the Director of Public
Safety and posted with appropriate signs. Any motor vehicle parked in violation
of this section shall be towed to a place designated by the Director or the
Police Chief, at the owner’s expense, pursuant to §
404.05.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
§ 452.13 MOVING VEHICLES INTERFERING WITH SNOW REMOVAL; CHARGES.
   (a)   For the purpose of plowing or removing snow from any public street or
highway, the Service Director, or such subordinate as he or she may from time
to time designate, may request the Police Department to remove or cause to be
removed to some convenient place any vehicle parked on such street or highway
which interferes with the plowing or removal of snow therein.
   (b)   At the time of such removal, the Service Director shall make or cause
to be made a record in duplicate of the license number of the vehicle so
removed, the date and time of removal and the place to which the vehicle is
removed. A copy of such record shall be filed with the Police Chief.
   (c)   The Police Department shall forthwith notify the registered vehicle
owner of the fact of such removal and impounding, reasons therefor and the
place of storage. Any person desiring to redeem an impounded vehicle shall
appear at the Police Department to furnish satisfactory evidence of identity
and ownership or right to possession. Prior to issuance of a release form, the
claimant, owner or operator shall either pay the amount due for any fines for
violations on account of which such vehicle was impounded or, as the court may
require, post a bond, in an amount set by the court, to appear to answer to
such violations. The pound operator shall release such vehicle upon the receipt
of the release form and payment of all towing and storage charges.
   (d)   Unclaimed motor vehicles ordered into storage pursuant to R.C. §
4513.60(A)(1) or 4513.61 shall be disposed of at the order of the Police Chief
to a motor vehicle salvage dealer or scrap metal processing facility as defined
in R.C. § 4737.05, or to any other facility owned by or under contract with the
city for the disposal of such motor vehicles, or shall be sold by the Police
Chief or a licensed auctioneer at public auction, after giving notice thereof
by advertisement, published once a week for two successive weeks in a newspaper
of general circulation in the county. Any monies accruing from the disposition
of an unclaimed motor vehicle that are in excess of the expenses resulting from
the removal and storage of the vehicle shall be credited to the General Fund.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
§ 452.14 OVERNIGHT PARKING.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle on any highway, roadway or city
street during the period after 2:00 a.m. and before 6:00 a.m.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
§ 452.15 PARKING IN DRIVEWAYS OF CITY-OWNED PROPERTY, MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS
AND IN SHOPPING CENTER, STORE AND SCHOOL AREAS.
   (a)   No person shall stand or park a motor vehicle, truck or tractor-
trailer at any time, unless in compliance with the directions of a police
officer, or unless then engaged in business on the premises or loading or
unloading merchandise, in any of the following areas:
      (1)   In any driveway of premises on which a building housing more than
two families is located;
      (2)   In the areas reserved for public parking in any shopping center or
store area, or on the premises of any gasoline service station or service
garage; or
      (3)   In driveways, parking areas and other public grounds under the
jurisdiction of the Solon Board of Education during hours prohibited by such
Board as disclosed by signs posted thereon.
   (b)   No person shall stand or park a motor vehicle, truck or tractor-
trailer, unless in compliance with the directions of a police officer, during
the period after 2:00 a.m. and before 6:00 a.m. in any of the following areas:
      (1)   In areas reserved for public parking in any shopping center or
store area;
      (2)   In driveways, parking areas or other public grounds of the city; or
      (3)   In driveways, parking areas and other public grounds under the
jurisdiction of the Solon Board of Education, except with the specific prior
approval of the Solon Board of Education.
(Ord. 1994-171, passed 12-5-1994)
§ 452.16 REGISTERED OWNER PRIMA FACIE LIABLE FOR UNLAWFUL PARKING.
   In any hearing on a charge of illegally parking a motor vehicle, testimony
that a vehicle bearing a certain license plate was found unlawfully parked as
prohibited by the provisions of this Traffic Code, and further testimony that
the record of the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles shows that the license plate
was issued to the defendant, shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle
which was unlawfully parked, was so parked by the defendant. A certified
registration copy, showing that fact, from the Registrar shall be proof of
ownership.
§ 452.17 WAIVER.
   Any person charged with a violation of any provision of this chapter for
which payment of a prescribed fine may be made, may pay the sum in the manner
prescribed on the issued traffic ticket. This payment shall be deemed a plea of
guilty, waiver of court appearance and acknowledgment of conviction of the
alleged offense and may be accepted in full satisfaction of the prescribed
penalty for the alleged violation. Payment of the prescribed fine need not be
accepted when laws prescribe that a certain number of such offenses shall
require a court appearance.
§ 452.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
TITLE TEN - BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES AND SNOWMOBILES
            Chap.
474.   Bicycles and Motorcycles Generally.
            Chap.
476.   Snowmobiles, Off-Highway Motorcycles and All-Purpose Vehicles
CHAPTER 474: BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES GENERALLY
Section
   
474.01   Code application to bicycles
   
474.02   Riding upon seats; carrying packages; motorcycle handle bars; helmets
and glasses
   
474.03   Attaching bicycles, motorcycles to other vehicles
   
474.04   Riding on right side of roadway; riding abreast
   
474.05   Lights, signal devices, brakes on bicycles
   
474.06   Safe riding regulations for bicycles
   
474.07   Reckless operation; control, course and speed
   
474.08   Parking; locks
   
474.09   Parent’s responsibility
   
474.10   Operation of motorized bicycles
   
474.11   Suspension of riding privileges; impounding of bicycles
   
474.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Bicycle defined, see §
402.05
   Bicycle regulations to be consistent with state law, see R.C. § 4511.07(A)
(8)
   Bicycles prohibited on freeways, see §
412.05
   Motorcycle brakes, see §
438.19
   Motorcycle defined, see §
402.21
   Motorcycle headlight, see §
438.03
   Motorcycle operator’s license required, see §
436.01
   Off-highway motorcycles, see
Ch. 476
   Operation of vehicles on bicycle paths, see §
432.39
§ 474.01 CODE APPLICATION TO BICYCLES.
   (a)   The provisions of this Traffic Code which are applicable to bicycles
apply whenever a bicycle is operated as a vehicle.
(Ord. 2002-63, passed 4-1-2002)
   (b)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall be subject to
the provisions of this Traffic Code applicable to the driver of a vehicle,
except provisions which by their nature can have no application and except
where bicycles are subjected to special regulations.
   (c)   Wherever the word BICYCLE appears in this chapter, it includes
MOTORIZED BICYCLES as defined in §
402.22.
Statutory reference:
   Bicycles - issuance of ticket - points not assessed, see R.C. § 4511.52
§ 474.02 RIDING UPON SEATS; CARRYING PACKAGES; MOTORCYCLE HANDLE BARS; HELMETS
AND GLASSES.
   (a)   For purposes of this section, SNOWMOBILE has the same meaning as given
that term in R.C. § 4519.01.
   (b)   A person operating a bicycle or motorcycle shall not ride other than
upon the affixed seat thereto, nor carry any other person upon such bicycle or
motorcycle nor shall any additional person be permitted to ride upon a bicycle
or motorcycle, unless such bicycle or motorcycle is designed or equipped to
carry more than one person at a time.
   (c)   A person shall ride upon a bicycle or motorcycle only while sitting
astride the seat, facing forward, with one leg on each side of the bicycle or
motorcycle.
   (d)   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or
article that prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand upon the
handlebars.
   (e)   No person shall operate a motorcycle on a public roadway when the
handlebars or grips are more than 15 inches higher than the seat or saddle for
the operator.
   (f)   No person shall operate or be a passenger on a snowmobile or
motorcycle without using safety glasses or other protective eye device. No
person who is under the age of 18 years, or who holds a motorcycle operator’s
endorsement or license bearing a “NOVICE” designation that is currently in
effect as provided in R.C. § 4507.13, shall operate a motorcycle on a highway,
or be a passenger on a motorcycle, unless wearing a protective helmet on the
person’s head, and no other person shall be a passenger on a motorcycle
operated by such a person unless similarly wearing a protective helmet. The
helmet, safety glasses, or other protective eye device shall conform with
regulations prescribed and promulgated by the Director of Public Safety. The
provisions of this division (f) or a violation thereof shall not be used in the
trial of any civil action.
(Ord. 2002-63, passed 4-1-2002)
§ 474.03 ATTACHING BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES TO OTHER VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   No person riding upon any bicycle, electric bicycle, coaster,
roller skates, sled, skateboard, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or self
to any vehicle upon a roadway.
      (2)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person riding upon any
bicycle, electric bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, skateboard, or toy
vehicle to attach the same or self to any vehicle while it is moving upon a
roadway.
      (3)   This section does not apply to towing a disabled vehicle.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991(B).
(R.C. § 4511.54)
§ 474.04 RIDING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; RIDING ABREAST.
   (a)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right side of the roadway, with the flow of traffic, as practicable obeying
all traffic rules applicable to vehicles and exercising due care when passing a
standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. Exceptions to riding
as near to the right side are during the following situations: overtaking in
the same direction; preparing for a left turn; when necessary to avoid
conditions; substantial width lanes; and when riding in the right turn only
lane.
   (b)   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall ride in single file in
the following places:
      (1)   In business districts of the city;
      (2)   On through streets; and
      (3)   At other places where properly signed, or upon the order of a
police officer.
   (c)   Persons riding motorcycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two
abreast in a single lane.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989; Ord. 2002-63, passed 4-1-2002)
§ 474.05 LIGHTS, SIGNAL DEVICES, BRAKES ON BICYCLES.
   (a)   Every bicycle when in use at the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall be equipped with the
following:
      (1)   A lamp on the front that shall emit a white light visible from a
distance of at least 500 feet to the front, and a strobe light visible to
oncoming traffic;
      (2)   A red reflector on the rear of a type approved by the Director of
Public Safety that shall be visible from all distances from zero feet to 600
feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of head lamps on
a motor vehicle;
      (3)   A lamp emitting a red blinking or strobe light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear shall be used in addition to the red
reflector;
      (4)   An essentially colorless reflector on the front of a type approved
by the Director; and
      (5)   Either with tires with retroreflective sidewalls or with an
essentially colorless or amber reflector mounted on the spokes of the front
wheel and an essentially colorless or red reflector mounted on the spokes of
the rear wheel. Each reflector shall be visible on each side of the wheel from
a distance of 600 feet when directly in front of lawful lower beams of head
lamps on a motor vehicle. Retroreflective tires or reflectors shall be of a
type approved by the Director.
   (b)   No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with an
audible device that sounds for a distance of at least 100 feet to provide
notice to pedestrians, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor
shall any person use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.
   (c)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with an adequate brake when used on a
street or highway.
(Ord. 2002-63, passed 4-1-2002)
Statutory reference:
   Bicycle signal devices, see R.C. § 4511.56
§ 474.06 SAFE RIDING REGULATIONS FOR BICYCLES.
   (a)   A person propelling a bicycle upon and along a sidewalk, or across a
roadway upon and along a crosswalk shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing any
pedestrian. This audible signal must be given in such a manner as not to
startle the person being overtaken and passed.
   (b)   No person when riding a bicycle off of the public roadway shall ride
across or through any intersection involving a through street without first
stopping and yielding to any oncoming traffic and/or having a walk signal from
a traffic-control device.
   (c)   Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, the person,
before overtaking and passing a blind person carrying a white or metallic cane,
shall give an audible signal and the right-of-way to the blind person.
   (d)   Every rider of a bicycle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding
with any pedestrian or any vehicle upon any roadway, sidewalk or bicycle path,
or endangering the life, limb or property of any person while in the lawful use
of the streets, sidewalks or any other private or public property.
   (e)   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is
reasonable and proper under the conditions then existing.
   (f)   The operator of a bicycle emerging from or turning into an alley,
driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area
extending across any alley, driveway or building, yield the right-of-way to all
pedestrians approaching on such sidewalk area. Upon entering the street, such
operator shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such
street.
   (g)   No person shall engage in trick riding or operate a bicycle without
both hands upon the handle grips except when necessary to give the hand signals
required herein, upon a public roadway or areas used by the public for the
purpose of vehicular travel or parking in the city.
   (h)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left
or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the
direction of any such sign, unless such person dismounts from the bicycle to
make any such turn, in which event such person shall then obey the regulations
applicable to pedestrians.
(Ord. 2002-63, passed 4-1-2002)
§ 474.07 RECKLESS OPERATION; CONTROL, COURSE AND SPEED.
   No person shall operate a bicycle:
   (a)   Without due regard for the safety and rights of pedestrians and of
drivers and occupants of all other vehicles, and so as to endanger the life,
limb or property of any person while in the lawful use of the streets or
sidewalks or any other public or private property;
   (b)   Without exercising reasonable and ordinary control over such bicycle;
or
   (c)   In a weaving or zigzag course unless such irregular course is
necessary for safe operation in compliance with law.
§ 474.08 PARKING; LOCKS.
   (a)   No person shall park a bicycle upon a sidewalk in such a manner as to
interfere with pedestrian traffic or damage the property of another.
   (b)   No person shall park a bicycle upon a roadway.
   (c)   No bicycle shall remain unlocked when parked upon any public way or
place.
(Ord. 2002-63, passed 4-1-2002)
§ 474.09 PARENT’S RESPONSIBILITY.
   No parent of any child or guardian of any ward shall authorize or knowingly
permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 474.10 OPERATION OF MOTORIZED BICYCLES.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motorized bicycle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking, unless all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The person is 14 or 15 years of age and holds a valid probationary
motorized bicycle license issued after the person has passed the test provided
for in this section, or the person is 16 years of age or older and holds either
a valid commercial driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4506 or a
driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid motorized bicycle
license issued after the person has passed the test provided for in this
section, except that if a person is 16 years of age, has a valid probationary
motorized bicycle license and desires a motorized bicycle license, the person
is not required to comply with the testing requirements provided for in this
section;
      (2)   The motorized bicycle is equipped in accordance with the rules
adopted under division (b) of this section and is in proper working order;
      (3)   The person, if under 18 years of age, is wearing a protective
helmet on the person’s head with the chin strap properly fastened and the
motorized bicycle is equipped with a rearview mirror; and
      (4)   The person operates the motorized bicycle when practicable within
three feet of the right edge of the roadway obeying all traffic rules
applicable to vehicles.
   (b)   The Director of Public Safety, subject to R.C. Chapter 119, shall
adopt and promulgate rules concerning protective helmets, the equipment of
motorized bicycles, and the testing and qualifications of persons who do not
hold a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license. The test shall be as near
as practicable to the examination required for a motorcycle operator’s
endorsement under R.C. § 4507.11. The test shall also require the operator to
give an actual demonstration of the operator’s ability to operate and control a
motorized bicycle by driving one under the supervision of an examining officer.
   (c)   Every motorized bicycle license expires on the birthday of the
applicant in the fourth or eighth year after the date it is issued, based on
the period of renewal requested by the applicant. No motorized bicycle license
shall be issued for a period longer than eight years. A person who is 65 years
of age or older may only apply for a motorized bicycle license that expires on
the birthday of the applicant in the fourth year after the date it is issued.
   (d)   No person operating a motorized bicycle shall carry another person
upon the motorized bicycle.
   (e)   The protective helmet and rearview mirror required by division (a)(3)
of this section shall, on and after January 1, 1985, conform with rules adopted
by the Director under division (b) of this section.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (a), (d) or (e) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.521)
Statutory reference:
   Suspension of probationary motorized bicycle license by the state, see R.C.
§ 4510.34
§ 474.11 SUSPENSION OF RIDING PRIVILEGES; IMPOUNDING OF BICYCLES.
   (a)   In addition to the penalties provided in §§
408.01 and
408.02, a court may prohibit any person who violates or fails to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter relating to bicycles from riding a
bicycle for a period not to exceed three months.
   (b)   Whenever any bicycle is operated by any minor under the age of 18
years in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, such bicycle may
be seized by any police officer and impounded by the Police Department. Such
bicycle so impounded shall be surrendered to the parent or guardian of such
minor, without charge, after a full explanation to such parent or guardian of
the reason for the impounding of such bicycle. A complete record of each such
impounding shall be kept in the office of the Police Chief.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989)
§ 474.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 476: SNOWMOBILES, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLES AND ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLES
Section
   
476.01   Definitions
   
476.02   Equipment
   
476.03   Code application; prohibited operation
   
476.04   Permitted operation
   
476.05   Licensing requirements of operator
   
476.06   Accident reports
   
476.07   Local control within police power
   
476.08   Registration of vehicles
   
476.09   Operation of off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle without
certificate of title; failure to surrender
   
476.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Bicycles and motorcycles generally, see
Ch. 474
   Operation on bicycle paths, see §
432.39
   Power of court to impound registration certificates for certain violations,
see R.C. § 4519.47
   Required usage of helmets and safety glasses, see §
474.02
   Street or highway defined, see §
402.44
§ 476.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for
cross-country travel on land and water, or on more than one type of terrain,
and steered by wheels or caterpillar treads, or any combination thereof,
including vehicles that operate on a cushion of air, vehicles commonly known as
all-terrain vehicles, all season vehicles, mini-bikes and trail bikes. The term
does not include a utility vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4501.01 or any vehicle
principally used in playing golf, any motor vehicle or aircraft required to be
registered under R.C. Chapter 4503 or R.C. Chapter 4561, and any vehicle
excepted from definition as a motor vehicle by R.C. § 4501.01(B).
   (b)   DEALER. Any person or firm engaged in the business of manufacturing or
selling snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles or all-purpose vehicles at
wholesale or retail, or who rents, leases or otherwise furnishes snowmobiles,
off-highway motorcycles or all-purpose vehicles for hire.
   (c)   ELECTRONIC and ELECTRONIC RECORD. Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
4501.01.
   (d)   ELECTRONIC DEALER. A dealer whom the Registrar of Motor Vehicles
designates under R.C. § 4519.511.
   (e)   INTERSTATE HIGHWAY. Any part of the interstate system of highways as
defined in division (e), 90 Stat. 431 (1976), 23 U.S.C. § 103, as amended.
   (f)   LIMITED-ACCESS HIGHWAY or FREEWAY. Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
5511.02.
   (g)   MINI-TRUCK. A vehicle that has four wheels, is propelled by an
electric motor with a rated power of 7,500 watts or less or an internal
combustion engine with a piston displacement capacity of 660 cubic centimeters
or less, has a total dry weight of 900 to 2,200 pounds, contains an enclosed
cabin and a seat for the vehicle operator, resembles a pickup truck or van with
a cargo area or bed located at the rear of the vehicle, and was not originally
manufactured to meet federal motor vehicle safety standards.
   (h)   OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE. Every motorcycle, as defined in R.C. §
4511.01, that is designed to be operated primarily on lands other than a street
or highway.
   (i)   OPERATOR. Any person who operates or is in actual physical control of
a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle.
   (j)   OWNER. Any person or firm, other than a lienholder or dealer, having
title to a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, or other
right to the possession thereof.
   (k)   PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4509.01.
   (l)   SNOWMOBILE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for use on
snow or ice, and steered by skis, runners or caterpillar treads.
   (m)   STATE HIGHWAY and STATE ROUTE. Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
4511.01.
   (n)   STREET or HIGHWAY. Have the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(R.C. § 4519.01)
§ 476.02 EQUIPMENT.
   (a)   In addition to any rules or regulations promulgated by the Ohio
Director of Public Safety pursuant to R.C. § 4519.20 and R.C. Chapter 119,
equipment of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles and all-purpose vehicles
shall include but not necessarily be limited to requirements for the following
items of equipment:
      (1)   At least one headlight having a minimum candlepower of sufficient
intensity to reveal persons and objects at a distance of at least 100 feet
ahead under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;
      (2)   At least one red tail light having a minimum candlepower of
sufficient intensity to be plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the
rear under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;
      (3)   Every snowmobile, while traveling on packed snow, shall be capable
of carrying a driver who weighs 175 pounds or more, and, while carrying the
driver, be capable of stopping in no more than 40 feet from an initial steady
speed of 20 mph, or locking its traction belt; and
      (4)   A muffler system capable of precluding the emission of excessive
smoke or exhaust fumes, and of limiting the engine noise of vehicles. On
snowmobiles manufactured after January 1, 1973, the requirement shall include
sound dampening equipment such that noise does not exceed 82 decibels on the
“A” scale at 50 feet as measured according to SAE J192 (September 1970).
   (b)   No person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle in violation of this section, except that equipment specified
in division (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section shall not be required on
snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles or all-purpose vehicles operated during
the daylight hours.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c), whoever violates
division (b) of this section shall be fined not more than $50. If the offender
within the preceding year previously has committed a violation of division (b)
of this section or of R.C. § 4519.20(B), whoever violates division (b) of this
section shall be fined not less than $15 nor more than $100, imprisoned not
more than three days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.20)
§ 476.03 CODE APPLICATION; PROHIBITED OPERATION.
   (a)   The applicable provisions of this traffic code apply to the operation
of snowmobiles, off- highway motorcycles, and all-purpose vehicles, except that
no person shall operate a snowmobile, off- highway motorcycle, or all-purpose
vehicle as follows:
      (1)   On any state highway, including a limited access highway or freeway
or the right- of-way thereof, except for emergency travel during such time and
in such manner as the Ohio Director of Public Safety designates or except as
authorized by R.C. § 4519.41(F);
      (2)   On any private property, or in any nursery or planting area,
without the permission of the owner or other person having the right to
possession of the property;
      (3)   On any land or waters controlled by the state, except at those
locations where a sign has been posted permitting the operation;
      (4)   On the tracks or right-of-way of any operating railroad;
      (5)   While transporting any firearm, bow or other implement for hunting
that is not unloaded and securely encased;
      (6)   For the purpose of chasing, pursuing, capturing or killing any
animal or wild fowl; or
      (7)   During the time from sunset to sunrise, unless displaying lighted
lights as required by R.C. § 4519.20 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $50 nor
more than $500, or imprisoned not less than three nor more than 30 days, or
both.
(R.C. § 4519.40)
§ 476.04 PERMITTED OPERATION.
   Snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles and all-purpose vehicles may be
operated as follows:
   (a)   To make a crossing of a highway, other than a highway as designated in
R.C. § 4519.40(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
whenever the crossing can be made in safety and will not interfere with the
movement of vehicular traffic approaching from any direction on the highway,
and provided that the operator yields the right-of-way to any approaching
traffic that presents an immediate hazard;
   (b)   On highways in the county or township road systems whenever the local
authority having jurisdiction over the highways so permits;
   (c)   Off and alongside street or highway for limited distances from the
point of unloading from a conveyance to the point at which the snowmobile, off-
highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle is intended and authorized to be
operated;
   (d)   On the berm or shoulder of a highway, other than a highway as
designated in R.C. § 4519.40(A)(1), or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, when the terrain permits the operation to be undertaken safely and
without the necessity of entering any traffic lane; and
   (e)   On the berm or shoulder or a county or township road, while traveling
from one area of operation of the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle to another such area.
   (f)   For snowmobiles without metal studded tracks and all-purpose vehicles,
on state highways located on an island in Lake Erie, including limited access
highways and freeways, between the first day of November and the thirtieth day
of April, provided that all of the following conditions apply:
      (1)   The operator has a valid driver’s license as required under R.C. §
4519.44.
      (2)   The snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle is in compliance with rules
governing safety equipment adopted under R.C. § 4519.20.
      (3)   The owner of the snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle maintains proof
of financial responsibility for both on-road and off-road use of the snowmobile
or all-purpose vehicle.
      (4)   The operator obeys all traffic rules and regulations.
(R.C. § 4519.41)
§ 476.05 LICENSING REQUIREMENTS OF OPERATOR.
   (a)   No person who does not hold a valid, current motor vehicle driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, motorcycle operator’s endorsement or probationary
license, issued under R.C. Chapter 4506 or R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid,
current driver’s license issued by another jurisdiction, shall operate a
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle on any street or
highway in this municipality, on any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or on
any public land or waters.
   (b)   No person who is less than 16 years of age shall operate a snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle on any land or waters other than
private property or waters owned by or leased to the person’s parent or
guardian, unless accompanied by another person who is 18 years of age or older,
and who holds a license as provided in division (a) of this section, except
that the Ohio Department of Natural Resources may permit the operation on
state-controlled land under its jurisdiction when the person is less than 16
years of age and is accompanied by a parent or guardian who is a licensed
driver 18 years of age or older.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $50 nor
more than $500, or imprisoned not less than three nor more than 30 days, or
both.
(R.C. § 4519.44)
§ 476.06 ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   (a)   The operator of a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle involved in any accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of any
person or damage to the property of any person in excess of $100 shall report
the accident within 48 hours to the Police Chief, and within 30 days shall
forward a written report of the accident to the Ohio Registrar of Motor
Vehicles on a form prescribed by the Registrar. If the operator is physically
incapable of making the reports and there is another participant in the
accident not so incapacitated, the participant shall make the reports. In the
event there is no other participant, and the operator is other than the owner,
the owner, within the prescribed periods of time, shall make the reports.
   (b)   Any law enforcement officer or other person authorized by R.C. §§
4519.42 and 4519.43 who investigates or receives information of an accident
involving a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle shall
forward to the Registrar a written report of the accident within 48 hours.
(R.C. § 4519.46)
§ 476.07 LOCAL CONTROL WITHIN POLICE POWER.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the municipality from
regulating the operation of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycle and all-purpose
vehicles on streets and highways and other public property under municipal
jurisdiction, and within the reasonable exercise of the police power, except
that no registration or licensing of any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or
all-purpose vehicle required to be registered or titled under R.C. Chapter 4519
shall be required.
(R.C. § 4519.48)
§ 476.08 REGISTRATION OF VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b), (c) and (d) of this section,
no person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle within this municipality unless the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle
or all-purpose vehicle is registered and numbered in accordance with R.C. §§
4519.03 and 4519.04.
      (2)   Except as provided in R.C. § 4511.215 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, no registration is required for a mini-truck that is
operated within this state. A mini-truck may be operated only in accordance
with R.C. § 4511.215 and R.C. § 4519.401, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (b)   (1)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or off-highway
motorcycle that is operated exclusively upon lands owned by the owner of the
snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle, or on lands to which the owner of the
snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle has a contractual right.
      (2)   No registration is required for an all-purpose vehicle that is used
primarily for agricultural purposes when the owner qualifies for the current
agricultural use valuation tax credit, unless it is to be used on any public
land, trail or right-of-way.
      (3)   Any all-purpose vehicle exempted from registration under division
(b)(2) of this section and operated for agricultural purposes may use public
roads and rights-of-way when traveling from one farm field to another, when
such use does not violate R.C. § 4519.41.
      (4)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle
that is operated on a state highway as authorized by R.C. § 4519.41(F).
   (c)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle
or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this state by a resident of another
state whenever that state has in effect a registration law similar to R.C.
Chapter 4519 and the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle
is properly registered under that state’s law. Any snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this state by a resident of
a state not having a registration law similar to R.C. Chapter 4519 shall comply
with R.C. § 4519.09.
   (d)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle
or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this municipality by the United
States, another state or a political subdivision thereof, but the snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle shall display the name of the
owner thereon.
   (e)   The owner or operator of any all-purpose vehicle operated or used upon
the waters in this municipality shall comply with R.C. Chapters 1547 and 1548
relative to the operation of watercraft.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section shall be fined not less
than $50 nor more than $100.
(R.C. § 4519.02)
Statutory reference:
   Destruction or disposal of vehicle; transfer of ownership; change of
address; loss of certificate, see R.C. § 4519.05
   Registration of emergency vehicles, see R.C. § 4519.08
   Registration procedure, see R.C. § 4519.03
   Temporary license placards and fees, see R.C. § 4519.10
   Temporary operating permit for certain nonresidents, see R.C. § 4519.09
§ 476.09 OPERATION OF OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE OR ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE WITHOUT
CERTIFICATE OF TITLE; FAILURE TO SURRENDER.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in this state an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle without having a certificate of title for the off-highway motorcycle or
all-purpose vehicle if such a certificate is required by R.C. Chapter 4519 to
be issued for the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, or, if a
physical certificate of title has not been issued for it, operate an off-
highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle knowing that the ownership
information related to the motorcycle or vehicle has not been entered into the
automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of Common Pleas.
      (2)   Operate in this municipality an off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle if a certificate of title to the off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle has been issued and then has been canceled.
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title upon cancellation of it
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed
in R.C. Chapter 4519.
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas as provided in R.C. Chapter 4519, in case of the destruction or
dismantling of, or change in, the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle
described in the certificate of title.
      (5)   Violate any provision of R.C. §§ 4519.51 to 4519.70 for which no
penalty is otherwise provided or any lawful rules adopted pursuant to those
sections.
      (6)   Operate in this state an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle knowing that the certificate of title to or ownership of the motorcycle
or vehicle as otherwise reflected in the automated title processing system has
been canceled.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $200, or
imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.66)
§ 476.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
PART SIX - GENERAL OFFENSES CODE
            Chap.
606.   General Provisions; Administration and Enforcement
            Chap.
612.   Alcoholic Beverages
            Chap.
618.   Animals
            Chap.
624.   Drugs
            Chap.
630.   Gambling
            Chap.
634.   Noise Control
            Chap.
636.   Offenses Relating to Persons
            Chap.
642.   Offenses Relating to Property
            Chap.
648.   Peace Disturbances
            Chap.
660.   Safety, Sanitation and Health
            Chap.
666.   Sex Related Offenses
            Chap.
672.   Weapons and Explosives
            Chap.
698.   Penalties and Sentencing
CHAPTER 606: GENERAL PROVISIONS; ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section
   
606.01   Definitions
   
606.02   Culpable mental states
   
606.03   Classification of offenses
   
606.04   Offenses defined
   
606.05   Rules of construction
   
606.055   Criminal law jurisdiction
   
606.06   Limitation on criminal prosecutions
   
606.07   Requirements for criminal liability; voluntary intoxication
   
606.08   Organizational criminal liability
   
606.09   Personal accountability for organizational conduct
   
606.10   Falsification
   
606.105   False report of child abuse or neglect
   
606.11   Compounding a crime
   
606.12   Failure to report a crime or death
   
606.13   Failure to aid a law enforcement officer
   
606.14   Obstructing official business
   
606.15   Obstructing justice
   
606.16   Resisting arrest
   
606.165   Compliance with lawful order of police officer; fleeing
   
606.17   Having an unlawful interest in a public contract
   
606.18   Soliciting or receiving improper compensation
   
606.19   Dereliction of duty
   
606.20   Interfering with civil rights
   
606.21   Attempts
   
606.22   Complicity
   
606.23   Detention of shoplifters and those committing motion picture piracy;
protection of institutional property
   
606.24   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police
Department
   
606.25   Impersonating an officer
   
606.26   Display of law enforcement agency emblem
   
606.27   Using sham legal process
   
606.28   Failure to disclose personal information
   
606.29   Misuse of 9-1-1 system
   
606.30   Self defense: limitations on duty to retreat prior to using force
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Arrest without warrant for misdemeanor, see R.C. § 2935.03
   Burden and degree of proof, see R.C. § 2901.05
   Cordoning off riot areas; prohibiting sales of firearms and explosives, see
R.C. § 3761.16
   Criteria for probation; conditions of probation, see R.C. § 2951.02
   Declaratory judgment in sex related offenses, see §
666.16
   Definition of “imprisoned,” see R.C. § 1.05
   Degree of offense; charge and verdict; prior conviction, see R.C. § 2945.75
   Discharge for delay in trial, see R.C. § 2945.73
   Disposition of unclaimed, abandoned and junk motor vehicles, see R.C. §§
737.32, 4513.61 et seq.
   Extension of time for hearing or trial, see R.C. § 2945.72
   Injunction and abatement of nuisance in sex related offenses, see §
666.17
   Justifiable use of force to suppress riot, see §
648.03
   License or permit to possess dangerous ordnance, see §
672.05
   Making false alarms, see §
648.08
   Misconduct at an emergency, see §
648.06
   Payment of costs and expenses on change of venue, see R.C. § 2931.31
   Penalties and sentencing, see
Ch. 698
   Procedure on affidavit or complaint; withdrawal of unexecuted warrants, see
R.C. § 2935.10
   Procedure on change of venue, see R.C. § 2931.29
   Rabies quarantine, see §
618.11
   Registration of dogs, see §
618.08
   Registration of sex offenders in cities and counties, see R.C. §§ 2950.01 et
seq.
   Reports of vehicle accidents, see §§
436.11,
436.12,
476.06
   Right of trial by jury, see R.C. § 2945.17
   Rules of evidence in sex related offenses, see §
666.10
   Satisfaction of fine; credit for time served, see R.C. § 2947.14
   Time within which hearing or trial must be held, see R.C. § 2945.71
   Transfer of prisoner on change of venue, see R.C. § 2931.30
   Treatment of drug dependent persons in lieu of conviction, see R.C. §
2951.041
   Venue, see R.C. §§ 2901.12, 2931.29 et seq.
§ 606.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE, CONTRIBUTION, LEGISLATIVE CAMPAIGN FUND, POLITICAL
ACTION COMMITTEE, POLITICAL CONTRIBUTING ENTITY and POLITICAL PARTY. Have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 3517.01.
   (b)   CONTRABAND. Any property that is illegal for a person to acquire or
possess under a statute, ordinance or rule, or that a trier of fact lawfully
determines to be illegal to possess by reason of the property’s involvement in
an offense. CONTRABAND includes, but is not limited to, all of the following:
      (1)   Any controlled substance, as defined in R.C. § 3719.01, or any
device or paraphernalia related thereto;
      (2)   Any unlawful gambling device or paraphernalia; and
      (3)   Any dangerous ordnance or obscene material.
   (c)   DEADLY FORCE. Any force that carries a substantial risk that it will
proximately result in the death of any person.
   (d)   DETENTION. Arrest; confinement in any vehicle subsequent to an arrest;
confinement in any public or private facility for custody of persons charged
with or convicted of crime in this state or another state or under the laws of
the United States or alleged or found to be a delinquent child or unruly child
in this state or another state or under the laws of the United States;
hospitalization, institutionalization or confinement in any public or private
facility that is ordered pursuant to or under the authority of R.C. § 2945.37,
2945.371, 2945.38, 2945.39, 2945.40, 2945.401 or 2945.402; confinement in any
vehicle for transportation to or from any facility of any of those natures;
DETENTION for extradition or deportation; except as provided in this division
(d), supervision by any employee of any facility of any of those natures that
is incidental to hospitalization, institutionalization or confinement in the
facility but that occurs outside the facility; supervision by an employee of
the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction of a person on any type of
release from a state correctional institution; or confinement in any vehicle,
airplane or place while being returned from outside of this state into this
state by a private person or entity pursuant to a contract entered into under
R.C. § 311.29(E) or 5149.03(B). For a person confined in a county jail who
participates in a county jail industry program pursuant to R.C. § 5147.30,
DETENTION includes time spent at an assigned work site and going to and from
the work site.
   (e)   DETENTION FACILITY. Any public or private place used for the
confinement of a person charged with or convicted of any crime in this state or
another state or under the laws of the United States or alleged or found to be
a delinquent child or an unruly child in this state or another state or under
the laws of the United States.
   (f)   FORCE. Any violence, compulsion or constraint physically exerted by
any means upon or against a person or thing.
   (g)   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any of the following:
      (1)   A Sheriff, Deputy Sheriff, constable, police officer of a township
or joint police district, Marshal, Deputy Marshal, municipal police officer,
member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under
R.C. § 3735.31(D) or State Highway Patrol trooper;
      (2)   An officer, agent or employee of the state or any of its agencies,
instrumentalities or political subdivisions, upon whom, by statute, a duty to
conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is imposed and the
authority to arrest violators is conferred, within the limits of such statutory
duty and authority;
      (3)   The Mayor, in a capacity as chief conservator of the peace within
the municipality;
      (4)   A member of an auxiliary police force organized by the county,
township or municipal law enforcement authorities, within the scope of the
member’s appointment or commission;
      (5)   A person lawfully called pursuant to R.C. § 311.07 to aid a sheriff
in keeping the peace, for the purposes and during the time when the person is
called;
      (6)   A person appointed by a Mayor pursuant to R.C. § 737.10 as a
special patrolling officer during a riot or emergency, for the purposes and
during the time when the person is appointed;
      (7)   A member of the organized militia of this state or the Armed Forces
of the United States, lawfully called to duty to aid civil authorities in
keeping the peace or protect against domestic violence;
      (8)   A prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, secret
service officer or municipal prosecutor;
      (9)   A veterans’ home police officer appointed under R.C. § 5907.02;
      (10)   A member of a police force employed by a regional transit
authority under R.C. § 306.35(Y);
      (11)   A special police officer employed by a port authority under R.C. §
4582.04 or 4582.28;
      (12)   The House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms if the House of
Representatives Sergeant at Arms has arrest authority pursuant to R.C. §
101.311(E)(1) and an Assistant House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms;
      (13)   The Senate Sergeant at Arms and an Assistant Senate Sergeant at
Arms; and
      (14)   A special police officer employed by a municipal corporation at a
municipal airport, or other municipal air navigation facility, that has
scheduled operations, as defined in 14 C.F.R. Part 119.3, as amended, and that
is required to be under a security program and is governed by aviation security
rules of the Transportation Security Administration of the United States
Department of Transportation as provided in 49 C.F.R. Parts 1542 and 1544, as
amended.
   (h)   NOT GUILTY BY REASON OF INSANITY. A person is NOT GUILTY BY REASON OF
INSANITY relative to a charge of an offense only if the person proves, in the
manner specified in R.C. § 2901.05, that at the time of the commission of the
offense, he or she did not know, as a result of a severe mental disease or
defect, the wrongfulness of his or her acts.
   (i)   OFFENSE OF VIOLENCE.
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.11,
2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.15, 2903.18, 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22, 2905.01,
2905.02, 2905.11, 2905.32, 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.05, 2909.02, 2909.03,
2909.24, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2917.01, 2917.02, 2917.03, 2917.31,
2917.321, 2919.25, 2921.03, 2921.04, 2921.34 or 2923.161, or division (A)(1) of
R.C. § 2903.34, of division (A)(1), (A)(2) or (A)(3) of R.C. § 2911.12, or of
division (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3) or (B)(4) of R.C. § 2919.22, or felonious
sexual penetration in violation of former R.C. § 2907.12;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States, substantially equivalent to
any section, division or offense listed in division (1) of this definition;
      (3)   An offense, other than a traffic offense, under an existing or
former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or of the United
States, committed purposely or knowingly, and involving physical harm to
persons or a risk of serious physical harm to persons;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing, any
offense under division (1), (2) or (3) of this definition;
      (5)   A violation of division (C) of R.C. § 959.131.
   (j)   OFFICIAL PROCEEDING. Any proceeding before a legislative, judicial,
administrative or other governmental agency or official authorized to take
evidence under oath, and includes any proceeding before a referee, hearing
examiner, commissioner, notary or other person taking testimony or a deposition
in connection with an official proceeding.
   (k)   PARTY OFFICIAL. Any person who holds an elective or appointive post in
a political party in the United States or this state, by virtue of which he or
she directs, conducts or participates in directing or conducting party affairs
at any level of responsibility.
   (l)   PERSON.
      (1)   A.   Subject to division (2) of this definition, as used in any
section contained in this General Offenses Code that sets forth a criminal
offense, PERSON includes all of the following:
            1.   An individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership and association; and
            2.   An unborn human who is viable.
         B.   As used in any section contained in this General Offenses Code
that does not set forth a criminal offense, PERSON includes an individual,
corporation, business trust, estate, partnership and association.
         C.   As used in division (1)A.2. of this definition, UNBORN HUMAN
means an individual organism of the species homo sapiens from fertilization
until live birth. VIABLE means the stage of development of a human fetus at
which there is a realistic probability of maintaining and nourishing of a life
outside the womb with or without temporary artificial life-sustaining support.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (1)A. of this definition, in no case shall
the portion of the definition of the term person that is set forth in division
(1)A.2. of this definition be applied or construed in any section contained in
this General Offenses Code that sets forth a criminal offense in any of the
following manners:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (2)A. of this
definition, in a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as
prohibiting any pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion
with the consent of the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant woman
implied by law in a medical emergency, or with the approval of one otherwise
authorized by law to consent to medical treatment on behalf of the pregnant
woman. An abortion that violates the conditions described in the immediately
preceding sentence may be punished as a violation of R.C. § 2903.01, 2903.02,
2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13,
2903.14, 2903.21 or 2903.22, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, as applicable. An abortion that does not violate the conditions
described in the second immediately preceding sentence but that does violate
R.C. § 2919.12, 2919.13(B), 2919.15, 2919.151, 2919.17 or 2919.18, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, may be punished as a violation of
that section, as applicable. Consent is sufficient under this division (l)(2)A.
if it is of the type otherwise adequate to permit medical treatment to the
pregnant woman, even if it does not comply with R.C. § 2919.12; and
         B.   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as
applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman that occurs while
she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the following:
            1.   Her delivery of a stillborn baby;
            2.   Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a
viable, unborn human that she is carrying;
            3.   Her causing the death of her child who is born alive but who
dies from one or more injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable,
unborn human;
            4.   Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more
injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human; or
            5.   Her causing, threatening to cause or attempting to cause, in
any other manner, an injury, illness or other psychological illness or
condition, regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable, unborn human
that she is carrying.
   (m)   PHYSICAL HARM TO PERSONS. Any injury, illness or other physiological
impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.
   (n)   PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY. Any tangible or intangible damage to
property that, in any degree, results in loss to its value or interferes with
its use or enjoyment. PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY does not include wear and tear
occasioned by normal use.
   (o)   PRIVILEGE. An immunity, license or right conferred by law, or bestowed
by express or implied grant, or arising out of status, position, office or
relationship, or growing out of necessity.
   (p)   PROPERTY.
      (1)   Any property, real or personal, tangible or intangible, and any
interest or license in that property. PROPERTY includes, but is not limited to,
cable television service, other telecommunications service, telecommunications
devices, information service, computers, data, computer software, financial
instruments associated with computers, other documents associated with
computers, or copies of the documents, whether in machine or human-readable
form, trade secrets, trademarks, copyrights, patents and property protected by
a trademark, copyright or patent. Financial instruments associated with
computers include, but are not limited to, checks, drafts, warrants, money
orders, notes of indebtedness, certificates of deposit, letters of credit,
bills of credit or debit cards, financial transaction authorization mechanisms,
marketable securities or any computer system representations of any of them.
      (2)   As used in this definition, TRADE SECRET has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 1333.61, and telecommunications service and information service have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (3)   As used in this definition and in the definition of contraband in
this section,  CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE, COMPUTER, COMPUTER NETWORK, COMPUTER
SOFTWARE, COMPUTER SYSTEM, DATA and TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   (q)   PROVIDER AGREEMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01..
   (r)   PUBLIC OFFICIAL. Any elected or appointed officer, employee or agent
of the state or any political subdivision thereof, whether in a temporary or
permanent capacity, and includes, but is not limited to, legislators, judges
and law enforcement officers. The term does not include an employee, officer or
governor-appointed member of the board of directors of the nonprofit
corporation formed under R.C. § 187.01.
   (s)   PUBLIC SERVANT.
      (1)   Any of the following:
         A.   Any public official;
         B.   Any person performing ad hoc a governmental function, including,
but not limited to, a juror, member of a temporary commission, master,
arbitrator, advisor or consultant; or
         C.   A person who is a candidate for public office, whether or not he
or she is elected or appointed to the office for which he or she is a
candidate. A person is a candidate for purposes of this division (s)(1)C. if he
or she has been nominated according to law for election or appointment to
public office, or if he or she has filed a petition or petitions as required by
law to have his or her name placed on the ballot in a primary, general or
special election, or if he or she campaigns as a write-in candidate in any
primary, general or special election.
      (2)   The term does not include an employee, officer or governor-
appointed member of the board of directors of the nonprofit corporation formed
under R.C. § 187.01.
   (t)   RISK. A significant possibility, as contrasted with a remote
possibility, that a certain result may occur or that certain circumstances may
exist.
   (u)   SCHOOL, SCHOOL BUILDING and SCHOOL PREMISES. Have the same meanings as
in R.C. § 2925.01.
   (v)   SCHOOL ACTIVITY. Any activity held under the auspices of a board of
education of a city, local, exempted village, joint vocational or cooperative
education school district; a governing authority of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314; a governing board of an educational
service center; or the governing body of a nonpublic school for which the
Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum standards under R.C. §
3301.07.
   (w)   SCHOOL BUS. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   (x)   SCHOOL SAFETY ZONE. Consists of a school, school building, school
premises, school activity and school bus.
   (y)   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO PERSONS. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any mental illness or condition of such gravity as would normally
require hospitalization or prolonged psychiatric treatment;
      (2)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death;
      (3)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent incapacity, whether
partial or total, or that involves some temporary, substantial incapacity;
      (4)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent disfigurement, or
that involves some temporary, serious disfigurement; or
      (5)   Any physical harm that involves acute pain of such duration as to
result in substantial suffering, or that involves any degree of prolonged or
intractable pain.
   (z)   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY. Any physical harm to property that
does either of the following:
      (1)   Results in substantial loss to the value of the property, or
requires a substantial amount of time, effort or money to repair or replace; or
      (2)   Temporarily prevents the use or enjoyment of the property, or
substantially interferes with its use or enjoyment for an extended period of
time.
   (aa)   SUBSTANTIAL RISK. A strong possibility, as contrasted with a remote
or significant possibility, that a certain result may occur or that certain
circumstances may exist.
   (bb)   VALUABLE THING or VALUABLE BENEFIT. Includes, but is not limited to,
a contribution. This inclusion does not indicate or imply that a contribution
was not included in those terms before September 17, 1986.
(R.C. §§ 2901.01, 2921.01)
§ 606.02 CULPABLE MENTAL STATES.
   (a)   A person acts purposely when it is the person’s specific intention to
cause a certain result, or, when the gist of the offense is a prohibition
against conduct of a certain nature, regardless of what the offender intends to
accomplish thereby, it is the offender’s specific intention to engage in
conduct of that nature.
   (b)   A person acts knowingly, regardless of purpose, when the person is
aware that the person’s conduct will probably cause a certain result or will
probably be of a certain nature. A person has knowledge of circumstances when
the person is aware that such circumstances probably exist. When knowledge of
the existence of a particular fact is an element of an offense, such knowledge
is established if a person subjectively believes that there is a high
probability of its existence and fails to make inquiry or acts with a conscious
purpose to avoid learning the fact.
   (c)   A person acts recklessly when, with heedless indifference to the
consequences, the person disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that
the person’s conduct is likely to cause a certain result or is likely to be of
a certain nature. A person is reckless with respect to circumstances when, with
heedless indifference to the consequences, the person disregards a substantial
and unjustifiable risk that such circumstances are likely to exist.
   (d)   A person acts negligently when, because of a substantial lapse from
due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that the person’s
conduct may cause a certain result or may be of a certain nature. A person is
negligent with respect to circumstances when, because of a substantial lapse
from due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that the
circumstances may exist.
   (e)   When the section defining an offense provides that negligence suffices
to establish an element thereof, then recklessness, knowledge or purpose is
also sufficient culpability for that element. When recklessness suffices to
establish an element of an offense, then knowledge or purpose is also
sufficient culpability for that element. When knowledge suffices to establish
an element of an offense, then purpose is also sufficient culpability for that
element.
(R.C. § 2901.22)
§ 606.03 CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENSES.
   As used in this General Offenses Code:
   (a)   Offenses include misdemeanors of the first, second, third and fourth
degree, minor misdemeanors and offenses not specifically classified.
   (b)   Regardless of the penalty that may be imposed, any offense
specifically classified as a misdemeanor is a misdemeanor.
   (c)   Any offense not specifically classified is a misdemeanor if
imprisonment for not more than one year may be imposed as a penalty.
   (d)   Any offense not specifically classified is a minor misdemeanor if the
only penalty that may be imposed is one of the following:
      (1)   For an offense committed prior to January 1, 2004, a fine not
exceeding $100; or
      (2)   For an offense committed on or after January 1, 2004, a fine not
exceeding $150, community service under R.C. § 2929.27(D), or a financial
sanction other than a fine under R.C. § 2929.28.
(R.C. § 2901.02)
§ 606.04 OFFENSES DEFINED.
   (a)   No conduct constitutes a criminal offense against the municipality
unless it is defined as an offense in this General Offenses Code.
   (b)   An offense is defined when one or more sections of this General
Offenses Code state a positive prohibition or enjoin a specific duty, and
provide a penalty for violation of the prohibition or failure to meet that
duty.
   (c)   This section does not affect the power of a court to punish for
contempt or to employ any sanction authorized by law to enforce an order, civil
judgment or decree.
(R.C. § 2901.03)
§ 606.05 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c) or (d) of this section,
sections of this General Offenses Code defining offenses or penalties shall be
strictly construed against the municipality and liberally construed in favor of
the accused.
   (b)   Rules of criminal procedure and sections of this General Offenses Code
providing for criminal procedure shall be construed so as to effect the fair,
impartial, speedy and sure administration of justice.
   (c)   Any provision of a section of this General Offenses Code that refers
to a previous conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of a section of
this General Offenses Code, the Ohio Revised Code or a division of a section of
this General Offenses Code or the Ohio Revised Code shall be construed to also
refer to a previous conviction of or plea of guilty to a substantially
equivalent offense under an existing or former law of this municipality, state,
another state or the United States or under an existing or former municipal
ordinance.
   (d)   Any provision of this code that refers to a section, or to a division
of a section, of this code that defines or specifies a criminal offense shall
be construed to also refer to an existing or former law of this state, another
state or the United States, to an existing or former municipal ordinance, or to
an existing or former division of any such existing or former law or ordinance
that defines or specifies, or that defined or specified, a substantially
equivalent offense.
(R.C. § 2901.04)
§ 606.055 CRIMINAL LAW JURISDICTION.
   (a)   A person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in this
municipality if any of the following occur:
      (1)   The person commits an offense under the laws of this municipality,
any element of which takes place in this municipality;
      (2)   While in this municipality, the person attempts to commit, or is
guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in another jurisdiction,
which offense is an offense under both the laws of this municipality and the
other jurisdiction, or, while in this municipality, the person conspires to
commit an offense in another jurisdiction, which offense is an offense under
both the laws of this municipality and the other jurisdiction, and a
substantial overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy is undertaken in this
municipality by the person or another person involved in the conspiracy,
subsequent to the person’s entrance into the conspiracy. In any case in which a
person attempts to commit, is guilty of complicity in the commission of, or
conspires to commit an offense in another jurisdiction as described in this
division (a)(2), the person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment
in this municipality for the attempt, complicity or conspiracy, and for any
resulting offense that is committed or completed in the other jurisdiction;
      (3)   While out of this municipality, the person conspires or attempts to
commit, or is guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in this
municipality;
      (4)   While out of this municipality, the person omits to perform a legal
duty imposed by the laws of this municipality, which omission affects a
legitimate interest of the municipality in protecting, governing or regulating
any person, property, thing, transaction or activity in this municipality;
      (5)   While out of this municipality, the person unlawfully takes or
retains property and subsequently brings any of the unlawfully taken or
retained property into this municipality;
      (6)   While out of this municipality, the person unlawfully takes or
entices another person and subsequently brings the other person into this
municipality; or
      (7)   The person, by means of a computer, computer system, computer
network, telecommunication, telecommunications device, telecommunications
service or information service, causes or knowingly permits any writing, data,
image or other telecommunication to be disseminated or transmitted into this
municipality in violation of the law of this state or municipality.
   (b)   In homicide, the element referred to in division (a)(1) of this
section includes the act that causes death, the physical contact that causes
death, the death itself, or any other element that is set forth in the offense
in question. If any part of the body of a homicide victim is found in this
municipality, the death is presumed to have occurred within this municipality.
   (c)   (1)   This municipality includes the land and water within its
boundaries and the air space above that land and water, with respect to which
this municipality has either exclusive or concurrent legislative jurisdiction.
Where the boundary between this municipality and another jurisdiction is
disputed, the disputed territory is conclusively presumed to be within this
municipality for purposes of this section.
      (2)   The Courts of Common Pleas of Adams, Athens, Belmont, Brown,
Clermont, Columbiana, Gallia, Hamilton, Jefferson, Lawrence, Meigs, Monroe,
Scioto and Washington counties have jurisdiction beyond the north or northwest
shore of the Ohio River extending to the opposite shore line, between the
extended boundary lines of any adjacent counties or adjacent state. Each of
those Courts of Common Pleas has concurrent jurisdiction on the Ohio River with
any adjacent Court of Common Pleas that borders on that river and with any
court of Kentucky or of West Virginia that borders on the Ohio River and that
has jurisdiction on the Ohio River under the law of Kentucky or the law of West
Virginia, whichever is applicable, or under federal law.
   (d)   When an offense is committed under the laws of this municipality, and
it appears beyond a reasonable doubt that the offense or any element of the
offense took place either in this municipality or in another jurisdiction or
jurisdictions, but it cannot reasonably be determined in which it took place,
the offense or element is conclusively presumed to have taken place in this
municipality for purposes of this section.
   (e)   When a person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in
this municipality for an offense committed or completed outside this
municipality, the person is subject to all specifications for that offense that
would be applicable if the offense had been committed within this municipality.
   (f)   Any act, conduct or element that is a basis of a person being subject
under this section to criminal prosecution and punishment in this municipality
need not be committed personally by the person as long as it is committed by
another person who is in complicity or conspiracy with the person.
   (g)   This section shall be liberally construed, consistent with
constitutional limitations, to allow this municipality the broadest possible
jurisdiction over offenses and persons committing offenses in, or affecting,
this municipality.
   (h)   For purposes of division (a)(2) of this section, an overt act is
substantial when it is of a character that manifests a purpose on the part of
the actor that the object of the conspiracy should be completed.
   (i)   As used in this section, COMPUTER, COMPUTER SYSTEM, COMPUTER NETWORK,
INFORMATION SERVICE, TELECOMMUNICATION, TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE,
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE, DATA AND WRITING have the same meanings as in R.C.
§ 2913.01.
(R.C. § 2901.11)
§ 606.06 LIMITATION ON CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), or (a)(5)
of this section or as otherwise provided in this section, a prosecution shall
be barred unless it is commenced within the following periods after an offense
is committed:
         A.   For a felony, six years;
         B.   For a misdemeanor other than a minor misdemeanor, two years; and
         C.   For a minor misdemeanor, six months.
      (2)   There is no period of limitation for the prosecution of a violation
of R.C. § 2903.01 or 2903.02 or for the prosecution of a conspiracy to commit,
attempt to commit, or complicity in committing a violation of R.C. § 2903.01 or
R.C. § 2903.02.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (b) to (j) of this
section, a prosecution of any of the following offenses shall be barred unless
it is commenced within 20 years after the offense is committed:
         A.   A violation of R.C. § 2903.03, 2903.04, 2905.01, 2905.32,
2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.21, 2909.02, 2909.22, 2909.23, 2909.24, 2909.26,
2909.27, 2909.28, 2909.29, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2911.12 or 2917.02, a
violation of R.C. § 2903.11 or 2903.12 if the victim is a peace officer, a
violation of R.C. § 2903.13 that is a felony, or a violation of former R.C. §
2907.12; and
         B.   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit or complicity in
committing a violation set forth in division (a)(3)A. of this section.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (d) to (l) of this
section, a prosecution of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 or a
conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in committing a
violation of either section shall be barred unless it is commenced within 25
years after the offense is committed.
      (5)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (a)(5)B. and (e) to
(i) of this section, a prosecution of a violation of R.C. § 2907.13 shall be
barred unless it is commenced within five years after the offense is committed.
         B.   Prosecution that would otherwise be barred under division (a)
(5)A. of this section may be commenced within five years after the date of the
discovery of the offense by either an aggrieved person or the aggrieved
person's legal representative who is not a party to the offense.
         C.   As used in division (a)(5)B. of this section, "aggrieved person"
includes any of the following individuals with regard to a violation of R.C. §
2907.13:
            1.   A patient who was the victim of the violation;
            2.   The spouse or surviving spouse of a patient who was the victim
of the violation;
            3.   Any child born as a result of the violation.
   (b)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(2) of this section,
if the period of limitation provided in division (a)(1) or (a)(3) of this
section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for an offense of which an
element is fraud or breach of fiduciary duty within one year after discovery of
the offense either by an aggrieved person or by the aggrieved person’s legal
representative who is not a party to the offense.
      (2)   If the period of limitation provided in division (a)(1) or (a)(3)
of this section has expired, prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 2913.49
shall be commenced within five years after discovery of the offense either by
an aggrieved person or the aggrieved person’s legal representative who is not a
party to the offense.
   (c)   (1)   If the period of limitation provided in division (a)(1) or (a)
(3) of this section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for the
following offenses during the following specified periods of time:
         A.   For an offense involving misconduct in office by a public servant
at any time while the accused remains a public servant, or within two years
thereafter; and
         B.   For an offense by a person who is not a public servant but whose
offense is directly related to the misconduct in office of a public servant, at
any time while that public servant remains a public servant, or within two
years thereafter.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   OFFENSE is directly related to the misconduct in office of a
public servant. The phrase includes but is not limited to a violation of R.C. §
101.71, 101.91, 121.61 or 2921.13, 102.03(F) or (H), 2921.02(A), 2921.43(A) or
(B), or 3517.13(F) or (G), that is directly related to an offense involving
misconduct in office of a public servant, or a violation of any municipal
ordinance substantially equivalent to those Ohio Revised Code sections listed
in this division (c)(2)A.
         B.   PUBLIC SERVANT has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.01.
   (d)   (1)   If a DNA record made in connection with the criminal
investigation of the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 is
determined to match another DNA record that is of an identifiable person and if
the time of the determination is later than 25 years after the offense is
committed, prosecution of that person for a violation of the section may be
commenced within five years after the determination is complete.
      (2)   If a DNA record made in connection with the criminal investigation
of the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 is determined to
match another DNA record that is of an identifiable person and if the time of
the determination is within 25 years after the offense is committed,
prosecution of that person for a violation of the section may be commenced
within the longer of 25 years after the offense is committed or five years
after the determination is complete.
      (3)   As used in this division, “DNA record” has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 109.573.
   (e)   An offense is committed when every element of the offense occurs. In
the case of an offense of which an element is a continuing course of conduct,
the period of limitation does not begin to run until the course of conduct or
the accused’s accountability for it terminates, whichever occurs first.
   (f)   A prosecution is commenced on the date an indictment is returned or an
information filed, or on the date a lawful arrest without a warrant is made, or
on the date a warrant, summons, citation or other process is issued, whichever
occurs first. A prosecution is not commenced by the return of an indictment or
the filing of an information unless reasonable diligence is exercised to issue
and execute process on the same. A prosecution is not commenced upon issuance
of a warrant, summons, citation or other process unless reasonable diligence is
exercised to execute the same.
   (g)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the corpus
delicti remains undiscovered.
   (h)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the
accused purposely avoids prosecution. Proof that the accused departed this
municipality or conceals the accused’s identity or whereabouts is prima facie
evidence of the accused’s purpose to avoid prosecution.
   (i)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time a prosecution
against the accused based on the same conduct is pending in this state, even
though the indictment, information or process that commenced the prosecution is
quashed or the proceedings on the indictment, information or process are set
aside or reversed on appeal.
   (j)   The period of limitation for a violation of this Part 6 or Title XXIX
of the Ohio Revised Code that involves a physical or mental wound, injury,
disability or condition of a nature that reasonably indicates abuse or neglect
of a child under 18 years of age or of a child with a developmental disability
or physical impairment under 21 years of age shall not begin to run until
either of the following occurs:
      (1)   The victim of the offense reaches the age of majority; or
      (2)   A public children services agency, or a municipal or county peace
officer that is not the parent or guardian of the child, in the county in which
the child resides or in which the abuse or neglect is occurring or has occurred
has been notified that abuse or neglect is known, suspected or believed to have
occurred.
   (k)   As used in this section, PEACE OFFICER has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2935.01.
   (l)   (1)   The amendments to divisions (a) and (d) of this section that
took effect on July 16, 2015, apply to a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03
committed on and after July 16, 2015, and apply to a violation of either of
those sections committed prior to July 16, 2015, if prosecution for that
violation was not barred under this section as it existed on July 16, 2015.
      (2)   The amendment to division (a)(2) of this section that took effect
on April 4, 2023, applies to a conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or
complicity in committing a violation of R.C. § 2903.01 or R.C. § 2903.02 if the
conspiracy, attempt, or complicity is committed on or after April 4, 2023, and
applies to a conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing a violation of either of those sections if the conspiracy, attempt,
or complicity was committed prior to April 4, 2023, and prosecution for that
conspiracy, attempt, or complicity was not barred under this section as it
existed on the day prior to April 4, 2023.
(R.C. § 2901.13)
§ 606.07 REQUIREMENTS FOR CRIMINAL LIABILITY; VOLUNTARY INTOXICATION.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, a person is not
guilty of an offense unless both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person’s liability is based on conduct that includes either a
voluntary act, or an omission to perform an act or duty that the person is
capable of performing; and
      (2)   The person has the requisite degree of culpability for each element
as to which a culpable mental state is specified by the language defining the
offense.
   (b)   When the language defining an offense does not specify any degree of
culpability, and plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict criminal
liability for the conduct described in the section, then culpability is not
required for a person to be guilty of the offense. The fact that one division
of a section plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict liability for an
offense defined in that division does not by itself plainly indicate a purpose
to impose strict criminal liability for an offense defined in other divisions
of the section that do not specify a degree of culpability.
   (c)   (1)   When language defining an element of an offense that is related
to knowledge or intent or to which mens rea could fairly be applied neither
specifies culpability nor plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict
liability, the element of the offense is established only if a person acts
recklessly.
      (2)   Division (c)(1) of this section does not apply to offenses defined
in R.C. Title XLV.
      (3)   Division (c)(1) of this section does not relieve the prosecution of
the burden of proving the culpable mental state required by any definition
incorporated into the offense.
   (d)   Voluntary intoxication may not be taken into consideration in
determining the existence of a mental state that is an element of a criminal
offense. Voluntary intoxication does not relieve a person of a duty to act if
failure to act constitutes a criminal offense. Evidence that a person was
voluntarily intoxicated may be admissible to show whether or not the person was
physically capable of performing the act with which the person is charged.
   (e)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CULPABILITY. Purpose, knowledge, recklessness or negligence, as
defined in R.C. § 2901.22.
      (2)   INTOXICATION. Includes but is not limited to intoxication resulting
from the ingestion of alcohol, a drug, or alcohol and a drug.
      (3)   INVOLUNTARY ACTS. Reflexes, convulsions, body movements during
unconsciousness or sleep, and body movements that are not otherwise a product
of the actor’s volition are INVOLUNTARY ACTS.
      (4)   POSSESSION. A voluntary act if the possessor knowingly procured or
received the thing possessed, or was aware of the possessor’s control of the
thing possessed for a sufficient time to have ended possession.
(R.C. § 2901.21)
§ 606.08 ORGANIZATIONAL CRIMINAL LIABILITY.
   (a)   An organization may be convicted of an offense under any of the
following circumstances.
      (1)   The offense is a minor misdemeanor committed by an officer, agent
or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s or employee’s office or employment, except that if the
section defining the offense designates the officers, agents or employees for
whose conduct the organization is accountable or the circumstances under which
it is accountable, those provisions shall apply.
      (2)   A purpose to impose organizational liability plainly appears in the
section defining the offense, and the offense is committed by an officer, agent
or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s or employee’s office or employment, except that if the
section defining the offense designates the officers, agents or employees for
whose conduct the organization is accountable or the circumstances under which
it is accountable, those provisions shall apply.
      (3)   The offense consists of an omission to discharge a specific duty
imposed by law on the organization.
      (4)   If, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise required for the
commission of the offense, its commission was authorized, requested, commanded,
tolerated or performed by the board of directors, trustees, partners or by a
high managerial officer, agent or employee acting in behalf of the organization
and within the scope of such a board’s or person’s office or employment.
   (b)   If strict liability is imposed for the commission of an offense, a
purpose to impose organizational liability shall be presumed, unless the
contrary plainly appears.
   (c)   In a prosecution of an organization for an offense other than one for
which strict liability is imposed, it is a defense that the high managerial
officer, agent or employee having supervisory responsibility over the subject
matter of the offense exercised due diligence to prevent its commission. This
defense is not available if it plainly appears inconsistent with the purpose of
the section defining the offense.
   (d)   As used in this section, ORGANIZATION means a corporation for profit
or not for profit, partnership, limited partnership, joint venture,
unincorporated nonprofit association, estate, trust or other commercial or
legal entity. ORGANIZATION does not include an entity organized as or by a
governmental agency for the execution of a governmental program.
(R.C. § 2901.23)
§ 606.09 PERSONAL ACCOUNTABILITY FOR ORGANIZATIONAL CONDUCT.
   (a)   An officer, agent or employee of an organization, as defined in R.C. §
2901.23, may be prosecuted for an offense committed by the organization, if he
or she acts with the kind of culpability required for the commission of the
offense, and any of the following apply:
      (1)   In the name of the organization or in its behalf, he or she engages
in conduct constituting the offense, or causes another to engage in that
conduct, or tolerates that conduct when it is of a type for which he or she has
direct responsibility; and
      (2)   He or she has primary responsibility to discharge a duty imposed on
the organization by law, and the duty is not discharged.
   (b)   When a person is convicted of an offense by reason of this section, he
or she is subject to the same penalty as if he or she had acted in his or her
own behalf.
(R.C. § 2901.24)
§ 606.10 FALSIFICATION.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement, or knowingly swear
or affirm the truth of a false statement previously made, when any of the
following applies:
      (1)   The statement is made in any official proceeding;
      (2)   The statement is made with purpose to incriminate another;
      (3)   The statement is made with purpose to mislead a public official in
performing his or her official function;
      (4)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the payment of
unemployment compensation; Ohio Works First; prevention, retention and
contingency benefits and services; disability financial assistance; retirement
benefits or health care coverage from a state retirement system; economic
development assistance as defined in R.C. § 9.66; or other benefits
administered by a governmental agency or paid out of a public treasury;
      (5)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the issuance by a
governmental agency of a license, permit, authorization, certificate,
registration, release or provider agreement;
      (6)   The statement is sworn or affirmed before a notary public or
another person empowered to administer oaths;
      (7)   The statement is in writing on or in connection with a report or
return that is required or authorized by law;
      (8)   The statement is in writing, and is made with purpose to induce
another to extend credit to or employ the offender, or to confer any degree,
diploma, certificate of attainment, award of excellence or honor on the
offender, or to extend to or bestow upon the offender any other valuable
benefit or distinction, when the person to whom the statement is directed
relies upon it to his or her detriment;
      (9)   The statement is made with purpose to commit or facilitate the
commission of a theft offense;
      (10)   The statement is knowingly made to a probate court in connection
with any action, proceeding or other matter within its jurisdiction, either
orally or in a written document, including but not limited to an application,
petition, complaint or other pleading, or an inventory, account or report;
      (11)   The statement is made on an account, form, record, stamp, label or
other writing that is required by law;
      (12)   The statement is made in connection with the purchase of a
firearm, as defined in R.C. § 2923.11, and in conjunction with the furnishing
to the seller of the firearm of a fictitious or altered driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit, a fictitious or altered identification card, or any
other document that contains false information about the purchaser’s identity;
      (13)   The statement is made in a document or instrument of writing that
purports to be a judgment, lien or claim of indebtedness and is filed or
recorded with the Secretary of State, a County Recorder, or the clerk of a
court of record;
      (14)   The statement is made in an application filed with a county
sheriff pursuant to R.C. § 2923.125 in order to obtain or renew a concealed
handgun license or is made in an affidavit submitted to a county sheriff to
obtain a concealed handgun license on a temporary emergency basis under R.C. §
2923.1213; and
      (15)   The statement is required under R.C. § 5743.71 in connection with
the person’s purchase of cigarettes or tobacco products in a delivery sale.
   (b)   No person, in connection with the purchase of a firearm as defined in
R.C. § 2923.11, shall knowingly furnish to the seller of the firearm a
fictitious or altered driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit, a
fictitious or altered identification card, or any other document that contains
false information about the purchaser’s identity.
   (c)   No person, in an attempt to obtain a concealed handgun license under
R.C. § 2923.125, shall knowingly present to a sheriff a fictitious or altered
document that purports to be certification of the person’s competence in
handling a handgun as described in division (B)(3) of that section.
   (d)   It is no defense to a charge under division (a)(6) of this section
that the oath or affirmation was administered or taken in an irregular manner.
   (e)   If contradictory statements relating to the same fact are made by the
offender within the period of the statute of limitations for falsification, it
is not necessary for the prosecution to prove which statement was false, but
only that one or the other was false.
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), (a)
(5), (a)(6), (a)(7), (a)(8), (a)(10), (a)(11), (a)(13) or (a)(15) of this
section is guilty of falsification. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, falsification is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(9) of this section is guilty of
falsification in a theft offense. Except as otherwise provided in this division
(f)(2), falsification in a theft offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the value of the property or services stolen is $1,000 or more,
falsification in a theft offense is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (a)(12) or (b) of this section is guilty
of falsification to purchase a firearm, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (a)(14) or (c) of this section is guilty
of falsification to obtain a concealed handgun license, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section in removal
proceedings under R.C. § 319.26, 321.37, 507.13 or 733.78 is guilty of
falsification regarding a removal proceeding, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.13)
   (g)   (1)   No person who has knowingly failed to maintain proof of
financial responsibility in accordance with R.C. § 4509.101 shall produce any
document or present to a peace officer an electronic wireless communications
device that is displaying any text or images with the purpose to mislead a
peace officer upon the request of a peace officer for proof of financial
responsibility made in accordance with R.C. § 4509.101(D)(2).
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (g) is guilty of falsification, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4509.102)
Statutory reference:
   Civil liability for violations of this section, see R.C. § 2921.13(G)
§ 606.105 FALSE REPORT OF CHILD ABUSE OR NEGLECT.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make or cause another person to make a false
report under R.C. § 2151.421(B) alleging that any person has committed an act
or omission that resulted in a child being an abused child as defined in R.C. §
2151.031 or a neglected child as defined in R.C. § 2151.03.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or causing a false
report of child abuse or child neglect, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2921.14)
§ 606.11 COMPOUNDING A CRIME.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly demand, accept or agree to accept anything
of value in consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon a pending
criminal prosecution.
   (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section when both
of the following apply:
      (1)   The pending prosecution involved is for a violation of R.C. §
2913.02, 2913.11, 2913.21(B)(2) or 2913.47, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, of which the actor under this section was the victim; and
      (2)   The thing of value demanded, accepted or agreed to be accepted, in
consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon the prosecution, did not
exceed an amount that the actor reasonably believed due him or her as
restitution for the loss caused him or her by the offense.
   (c)   When a prosecuting witness abandons or agrees to abandon a prosecution
under division (b) of this section, the abandonment or agreement in no way
binds the state to abandoning the prosecution.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of compounding a crime, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2921.21)
§ 606.12 FAILURE TO REPORT A CRIME OR DEATH.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2) of this section, no
person, knowing that a felony has been or is being committed, shall knowingly
fail to report the information to law enforcement authorities.
      (2)   No person, knowing that a violation of R.C. § 2913.04(B) has been
or is being committed or that the person has received information derived from
such a violation, shall knowingly fail to report the violation to law
enforcement authorities.
   (b)   Except for conditions that are within the scope of division (e) of
this section, no person giving aid to a sick or injured person shall
negligently fail to report to law enforcement authorities any gunshot or stab
wound treated or observed by the person, or any serious physical harm to
persons that the person knows or has reasonable cause to believe resulted from
an offense of violence.
   (c)   No person who discovers the body or acquires the first knowledge of
the death of a person shall fail to report the death immediately to a physician
or advanced practice registered nurse whom the person knows to be treating the
deceased for a condition from which death at such time would not be unexpected,
or to a law enforcement officer, an ambulance service, an emergency squad, or
the coroner in a political subdivision in which the body is discovered, the
death is believed to have occurred, or knowledge concerning the death is
obtained. For purposes of this division, “advanced practice registered nurse”
does not include a certified registered nurse anesthetist.
   (d)   No person shall fail to provide upon request of the person to whom a
report required by division (c) of this section was made, or to any law
enforcement officer who has reasonable cause to assert the authority to
investigate the circumstances surrounding the death, any facts within his or
her knowledge that may have a bearing on the investigation of the death.
   (e)   (1)   As used in this section, BURN INJURY means any of the following:
         A.   Second or third degree burns;
         B.   Any burns to the upper respiratory tract or laryngeal edema due
to the inhalation of super-heated air; and
         C.   Any burn injury or wound that may result in death.
         D.   Any physical harm to persons caused by or as the result of the
use of fireworks, novelties and trick noisemakers, and wire sparklers, as each
is defined by R.C. § 3743.01.
      (2)   No physician, nurse, physician assistant, or limited practitioner
who, outside a hospital, sanitarium or other medical facility, attends or
treats a person who has sustained a burn injury inflicted by an explosion or
other incendiary device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a
violent, malicious or criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury
immediately to the local arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the
jurisdiction in which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to local
law enforcement authorities.
      (3)   No manager, superintendent or other person in charge of a hospital,
sanitarium or other medical facility in which a person is attended or treated
for any burn injury inflicted by an explosion or other incendiary device, or
that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a violent, malicious or
criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury immediately to the local
arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the jurisdiction in which the person
is attended or treated, or otherwise to local law enforcement authorities.
      (4)   No person who is required to report any burn injury under division
(e)(2) or (e)(3) of this section shall fail to file, within three working days
after attending or treating the victim, a written report of the burn injury
with the office of the State Fire Marshal. The report shall be made on a form
provided by the State Fire Marshal.
      (5)   Anyone participating in the making of reports under division (e) of
this section or anyone participating in a judicial proceeding resulting from
the reports is immune from any civil or criminal liability that otherwise might
be incurred or imposed as a result of such actions. Notwithstanding R.C. §
4731.22, the physician-patient relationship or advanced practice registered
nurse-patient relationship is not a ground for excluding evidence regarding a
person’s burn injury or the cause of the burn injury in any judicial proceeding
resulting from a report submitted under division (e) of this section.
   (f)   (1)   Any doctor of medicine or osteopathic medicine, hospital intern
or resident, nurse, psychologist, social worker, independent social worker,
social work assistant, licensed professional clinical counselor, licensed
professional counselor, independent marriage and family therapist, or marriage
and family therapist who knows or has reasonable cause to believe that a
patient or client has been the victim of domestic violence, as defined in R.C.
§ 3113.31, shall note that knowledge or belief and the basis for it in the
patient’s or client’s records.
      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 4731.22, the physician-patient privilege or
advanced practice registered nurse-patient privilege shall not be a ground for
excluding any information regarding the report containing the knowledge or
belief noted under division (f)(1) of this section, and the information may be
admitted as evidence in accordance with the Rules of Evidence.
   (g)   Division (a) or (d) of this section does not require disclosure of
information, when any of the following applies:
      (1)   The information is privileged by reason of the relationship between
attorney and client; physician and patient; advanced practice registered nurse
and patient; licensed psychologist or licensed school psychologist and client;
licensed professional clinical counselor, licensed professional counselor,
independent social worker, social worker, independent marriage and family
therapist, or marriage and family therapist and client; member of the clergy,
rabbi, minister, or priest and any person communicating information
confidentially to the member of the clergy, rabbi, minister, or priest for a
religious counseling purpose of a professional character; husband and wife; or
a communications assistant and those who are a party to a telecommunications
relay service call.
      (2)   The information would tend to incriminate a member of the actor’s
immediate family;
      (3)   Disclosure of the information would amount to revealing a news
source, privileged under R.C. § 2739.04 or 2739.12;
      (4)   Disclosure of the information would amount to disclosure by a
member of the ordained clergy of an organized religious body of a confidential
communication made to that member of the clergy in that member's capacity as a
member of the clergy by a person seeking the aid or counsel of that member of
the clergy.
      (5)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the
actor in the course of the actor's duties in connection with a bona fide
program of treatment or services for persons with drug dependencies or persons
in danger of drug dependence, which program is maintained or conducted by a
hospital, clinic, person, agency, or community addiction services provider
whose alcohol and drug addiction services are certified pursuant to R.C. §
5119.36.
      (6)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the
actor in the course of the actor's duties in connection with a bona fide
program for providing counseling services to victims of crimes that are
violations of R.C. § 2907.02 or R.C. § 2907.05 or to victims of felonious
sexual penetration in violation of former R.C. § 2907.12. As used in this
division, "counseling services" include services provided in an informal
setting by a person who, by education or experience, is competent to provide
those services.
   (h)   No disclosure of information pursuant to this section gives rise to
any liability or recrimination for a breach of privilege or confidence.
   (i)   Whoever violates division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of
failure to report a crime. Violation of division (a)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Violation of division (a)(2) or (b) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (j)   Whoever violates division (c) or (d) of this section is guilty of
failure to report knowledge of a death, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (k)   (1)   Whoever negligently violates division (e) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Whoever knowingly violates division (e) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (l)   As used in this section, NURSE includes an advanced practice
registered nurse, registered nurse, and licensed practical nurse.
(R.C. § 2921.22)
§ 606.13 FAILURE TO AID A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   (a)   No person shall negligently fail or refuse to aid a law enforcement
officer, when called upon for assistance in preventing or halting the
commission of an offense, or in apprehending or detaining an offender, when the
aid can be given without a substantial risk of physical harm to the person
giving it.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to aid a law
enforcement officer, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2921.23)
§ 606.14 OBSTRUCTING OFFICIAL BUSINESS.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so and with purpose to prevent,
obstruct or delay the performance by a public official of any authorized act
within the public official’s official capacity, shall do any act that hampers
or impedes a public official in the performance of the public official’s lawful
duties.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing official
business. Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), obstructing
official business is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If a violation of this
section creates a risk of physical harm to any person, obstructing official
business is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.31)
§ 606.15 OBSTRUCTING JUSTICE.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to hinder the discovery, apprehension,
prosecution, conviction or punishment of another for crime, or to assist
another to benefit from the commission of a crime, and no person, with purpose
to hinder the discovery, apprehension, prosecution, adjudication as a
delinquent child, or disposition of a child for an act that if committed by an
adult would be a crime or to assist a child to benefit from the commission of
an act that if committed by an adult would be a crime, shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Harbor or conceal the other person or child;
      (2)   Provide the other person or child with money, transportation, a
weapon, a disguise or other means of avoiding discovery or apprehension;
      (3)   Warn the other person or child of impending discovery or
apprehension;
      (4)   Destroy or conceal physical evidence of the crime or act, or induce
any person to withhold testimony or information or to elude legal process
summoning him or her to testify or supply evidence;
      (5)   Communicate false information to any person; and
      (6)   Prevent or obstruct any person, by means of force, intimidation or
deception, from performing any act to aid in the discovery, apprehension or
prosecution of the other person or child.
   (b)   A person may be prosecuted for, and may be convicted of or adjudicated
a delinquent child for committing, a violation of division (a) of this section
regardless of whether the person or child aided ultimately is apprehended for,
is charged with, is convicted of, pleads guilty to or is adjudicated a
delinquent child for committing the crime or act the person or child aided
committed. The crime or act the person or child aided committed shall be used
under division (c) of this section in determining the penalty for violation of
division (a) of this section, regardless of whether the person or child aided
ultimately is apprehended for, is charged with, is convicted of, pleads guilty
to or is adjudicated a delinquent child for committing the crime or act the
person or child aided committed.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing justice.
      (1)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a misdemeanor or if
the act committed by the child aided would be a misdemeanor if committed by an
adult, obstructing justice is a misdemeanor of the same degree as the crime
committed by the person aided or a misdemeanor of the same degree that the act
committed by the child aided would be if committed by an adult.
      (2)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a felony or if the
act committed by the child aided would be a felony if committed by an adult, or
if the crime or act committed by the person or child aided is an act of
terrorism, obstructing justice is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (d)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   ACT OF TERRORISM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.21.
      (2)   ADULT and CHILD. Have the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.011.
      (3)   DELINQUENT CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2152.02.
(R.C. § 2921.32)
§ 606.16 RESISTING ARREST.
   (a)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of himself, herself or another.
   (b)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of the person or another person and, during the course of or as a
result of the resistance or interference, cause physical harm to a law
enforcement officer.
   (c)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of the person or another person if either of the following
applies:
      (1)   The offender, during the course of or as a result of the resistance
or interference, recklessly causes physical harm to a law enforcement officer
by means of a deadly weapon; or
      (2)   The offender, during the course of the resistance or interference,
brandishes a deadly weapon.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of resisting arrest. A
violation of division (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. A violation of division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. A violation of division (c) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (e)   As used in this section, DEADLY WEAPON has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2923.11.
(R.C. § 2921.33)
Statutory reference:
   Unlawful taking of deadly weapon from law enforcement officer, felony, see
R.C. § 2911.01
§ 606.165 COMPLIANCE WITH LAWFUL ORDER OF POLICE OFFICER; FLEEING.
   (a)   No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of
any police officer invested with authority to direct, control or regulate
traffic.
   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle so as willfully to elude or
flee a police officer after receiving a visible or audible signal from a police
officer to bring the person’s motor vehicle to a stop.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to comply
with an order or signal of a police officer.
      (2)   A violation of division (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (c)(4) and (c)(5) of this section,
a violation of division (b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   A violation of division (b) of this section is a felony and shall
be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier of fact
finds by proof beyond a reasonable doubt that in committing the offense, the
offender was fleeing immediately after the commission of a felony.
      (5)   A.   A violation of division (b) of this section is a felony and
shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier
of fact finds any of the following by proof beyond a reasonable doubt:
            1.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender was a
proximate cause of serious physical harm to persons or property; and
            2.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender caused a
substantial risk of serious physical harm to persons or property.
         B.   If a police officer pursues an offender who is violating division
(b) of this section and division (c)(5)A. of this section applies, the
sentencing court, in determining the seriousness of an offender’s conduct for
purposes of sentencing the offender for a violation of division (b) of this
section, shall consider, along with the factors set forth in R.C. §§ 2929.12
and 2929.13 that are required to be considered, all of the following:
            1.   The duration of the pursuit;
            2.   The distance of the pursuit;
            3.   The rate of speed at which the offender operated the motor
vehicle during the pursuit;
            4.   Whether the offender failed to stop for traffic lights or stop
signs during the pursuit;
            5.   The number of traffic lights or stop signs for which the
offender failed to stop during the pursuit;
            6.   Whether the offender operated the motor vehicle during the
pursuit without lighted lights during a time when lighted lights are required;
            7.   Whether the offender committed a moving violation during the
pursuit;
            8.   The number of moving violations the offender committed during
the pursuit; and
            9.   Any other relevant factors indicating that the offender’s
conduct is more serious than conduct normally constituting the offense.
   (d)   In addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of division
(a) of this section, the court shall impose a class five suspension from the
range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). If the offender previously has been
found guilty of an offense under this section or under R.C. § 2921.331 or any
other substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, in addition to any other
sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class one suspension
as described in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(1). The court may grant limited driving
privileges to the offender on a suspension imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of this section as set forth in R.C. § 4510.021. No judge shall suspend any
portion of the suspension under a class one suspension of an offender's
license, permit, or privilege required by this division.
   (e)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   MOVING VIOLATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2743.70.
      (2)   POLICE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(R.C. § 2921.331(A) - (C), (E), (F))
§ 606.17 HAVING AN UNLAWFUL INTEREST IN A PUBLIC CONTRACT.
   (a)   No public official shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Authorize or employ the authority of the public official’s office
to secure authorization of any public contract in which the public official, a
member of the public official’s family, or any of the public official’s
business associates has an interest;
      (2)   Authorize or employ the authority or influence of the public
official’s office to secure the investment of public funds in any share, bond,
mortgage or other security with respect to which the public official, a member
of the public official’s family or any of the public official’s business
associates either has an interest, is an underwriter or receives any brokerage,
origination or servicing fees;
      (3)   During the public official’s term of office or within one year
thereafter, occupy any position of profit in the prosecution of a public
contract authorized by the public official or by a legislative body, commission
or board of which the public official was a member at the time of
authorization, unless the contract was let by competitive bidding to the lowest
and best bidder;
      (4)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract
entered into by or for the use of the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality with which the public official is connected; and
      (5)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract
that is not let by competitive bidding when required by law, and that involves
more than $150.
   (b)   In the absence of bribery or a purpose to defraud, a public official,
member of a public official’s family or any of a public official’s business
associates shall not be considered as having an interest in a public contract
or the investment of public funds, if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The interest of that person is limited to owning or controlling
shares of the corporation, or being a creditor of the corporation or other
organization, that is the contractor on the public contract involved, or that
is the issuer of the security in which public funds are invested;
      (2)   The shares owned or controlled by that person do not exceed 5% of
the outstanding shares of the corporation, and the amount due that person as
creditor does not exceed 5% of the total indebtedness of the corporation or
other organization; and
      (3)   That person, prior to the time the public contract is entered into,
files with the political subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality
involved, an affidavit giving that person’s exact status in connection with the
corporation or other organization.
   (c)   This section does not apply to a public contract in which a public
official, member of a public official’s family, or one of a public official’s
business associates has an interest, when all of the following apply:
      (1)   The subject of the public contract is necessary supplies or
services for the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved;
      (2)   The supplies or services are unobtainable elsewhere for the same or
lower cost, or are being furnished to the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality as part of a continuing course of dealing established
prior to the public official’s becoming associated with the political
subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality involved;
      (3)   The treatment accorded the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality is either preferential to or the same as that
accorded other customers or clients in similar transactions; and
      (4)   The entire transaction is conducted at arm’s length, with full
knowledge by the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved, of the interest of the public official, member of the
public official’s family, or business associate, and the public official takes
no part in the deliberations or decision of the political subdivision or
governmental agency or instrumentality with respect to the public contract.
   (d)   Division (a)(4) of this section does not prohibit participation by a
public employee in any housing program funded by public monies if the public
employee otherwise qualifies for the program and does not use the authority or
influence of the public employee’s office or employment to secure benefits from
the program and if the monies are to be used on the primary residence of the
public employee. This participation does not constitute an unlawful interest in
a public contract in violation of this section.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of having an unlawful interest
in a public contract. Violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. Violation of division
(a)(3), (a)(4) or (a)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (f)   It is not a violation of this section for a prosecuting attorney to
appoint assistants and employees in accordance with R.C. §§ 309.06 and
2921.421, or for a chief legal officer of a municipality or an official
designated as prosecutor in a municipality to appoint assistants and employees
in accordance with R.C. §§ 733.621 and 2921.421, or for a township law director
appointed under R.C. § 504.15 to appoint assistants and employees in accordance
with R.C. §§ 504.151 and 2921.421.
   (g)   Any public contract in which a public official, a member of the public
official’s family or any of the public official’s business associates has an
interest in violation of this section is void and unenforceable. Any contract
securing the investment of public funds in which a public official, a member of
the public official’s family or any of the public official’s business
associates has an interest, is an underwriter or receives any brokerage,
origination or servicing fees and that was entered into in violation of this
section is void and unenforceable.
   (h)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CHIEF LEGAL OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 733.621.
      (2)   PUBLIC CONTRACT. Any of the following:
         A.   The purchase or acquisition, or a contract for the purchase or
acquisition, of property or services by or for the use of the state or any of
its political subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either,
including the employment of an individual by the state, any of its political
subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either; or
         B.   A contract for the design, construction, alteration, repair or
maintenance of any public property.
(R.C. § 2921.42)
§ 606.18 SOLICITING OR RECEIVING IMPROPER COMPENSATION.
   (a)   No public servant shall knowingly solicit or accept and no person
shall knowingly promise or give to a public servant either of the following:
      (1)   Any compensation, other than as allowed by R.C. § 102.03(G), (H),
(I) or other provisions of law, to perform the public servant’s official
duties, to perform any other act or service in the public servant’s public
capacity, for the general performance of the duties of the public servant’s
public office or public employment, or as a supplement to the public servant’s
public compensation; or
      (2)   Additional or greater fees or costs than are allowed by law to
perform the public servant’s official duties.
   (b)   No public servant for the public servant’s own personal or business
use and no person for the person’s own personal or business use or for the
personal or business use of a public servant or party official, shall solicit
or accept anything of value in consideration of either of the following:
      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining or renewing the appointment of
any person to any public office, employment or agency; or
      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with
respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion or other
material aspects of employment.
   (c)   No person for the benefit of a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing
entity shall coerce any contribution in consideration of either of the
following:
      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining or renewing the appointment of
any person to any public office, employment or agency; or
      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with
respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion or other
material aspects of employment.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of soliciting improper
compensation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (e)   A public servant who is convicted of a violation of this section is
disqualified from holding any public office, employment or position of trust in
this state for a period of seven years from the date of conviction.
   (f)   Divisions (a), (b) and (c) of this section do not prohibit any person
from making voluntary contributions to a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing
entity or prohibit a political party, campaign committee, legislative campaign
fund, political action committee or political contributing entity from
accepting voluntary contributions.
(R.C. § 2921.43)
§ 606.19 DERELICTION OF DUTY.
   (a)   No law enforcement officer shall negligently do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to serve a lawful warrant without delay; or
      (2)   Fail to prevent or halt the commission of an offense or to
apprehend an offender, when it is in the law enforcement officer’s power to do
so alone or with available assistance.
   (b)   No law enforcement, ministerial or judicial officer shall negligently
fail to perform a lawful duty in a criminal case or proceeding.
   (c)   No officer, having charge of a detention facility, shall negligently
do any of the following:
      (1)   Allow the detention facility to become littered or unsanitary;
      (2)   Fail to provide persons confined in the detention facility with
adequate food, clothing, bedding, shelter and medical attention;
      (3)   Fail to control an unruly prisoner, or to prevent intimidation of
or physical harm to a prisoner by another;
      (4)   Allow a prisoner to escape; and
      (5)   Fail to observe any lawful and reasonable regulation for the
management of the detention facility.
   (d)   No public official shall recklessly create a deficiency, incur a
liability or expend a greater sum than is appropriated by the Council for the
use in any one year of the department, agency or institution with which the
public official is connected.
   (e)   No public servant shall recklessly fail to perform a duty expressly
imposed by law with respect to the public servant’s office, or recklessly do
any act expressly forbidden by law with respect to the public servant’s office.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of dereliction of duty, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (g)   Except as otherwise provided by law, a public servant who is a county
treasurer; county auditor; township fiscal officer; city auditor; city
treasurer; village fiscal officer; village clerk-treasurer; village clerk; in
the case of a municipal corporation having a charter that designates an officer
who, by virtue of the charter, has duties and functions similar to those of the
city or village officers referred to in this section, the officer so designated
by the charter; school district treasurer; fiscal officer of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314; treasurer of a science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics school established under R.C. Chapter 3326; or
fiscal officer of a college-preparatory boarding school established under R.C.
Chapter 3328 and is convicted of or pleads guilty to dereliction of duty is
disqualified from holding any public office, employment, or position of trust
in this state for four years following the date of conviction or of entry of
the plea, and is not entitled to hold any public office until any repayment or
restitution required by the court is satisfied.
   (h)   As used in this section, PUBLIC SERVANT includes the following:
      (1)   An officer or employee of a contractor as defined in R.C. § 9.08;
      (2)   A fiscal officer employed by the operator of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314 or by the operator of a college-preparatory
boarding school established under R.C. Chapter 3328.
(R.C. § 2921.44)
§ 606.20 INTERFERING WITH CIVIL RIGHTS.
   (a)   No public servant, under color of the public servant’s office,
employment, or authority, shall knowingly deprive, or conspire or attempt to
deprive any person of a constitutional or statutory right.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interfering with civil
rights, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2921.45)
Statutory reference:
   Restraining or confining pregnant children or pregnant women, see R.C. §
2152.75(B) and R.C. § 2901.10
§ 606.21 ATTEMPTS.
   (a)   No person, purposely or knowingly, and when purpose or knowledge is
sufficient culpability for the commission of an offense, shall engage in
conduct that, if successful, would constitute or result in the offense.
   (b)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that, in retrospect,
commission of the offense that was the object of the attempt was either
factually or legally impossible under the attendant circumstances, if that
offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been as the
actor believed them to be.
   (c)   No person who is convicted of committing a specific offense, of
complicity in the commission of an offense or of conspiracy to commit an
offense, shall be convicted of an attempt to commit the same offense in
violation of this section.
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
actor abandoned his or her effort to commit the offense or otherwise prevented
its commission, under circumstances manifesting a complete and voluntary
renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an attempt to commit an
offense. An attempt to commit aggravated murder, murder or an offense for which
the maximum penalty is imprisonment for life is a felony of the first degree,
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. An attempt to commit a drug abuse
offense for which the penalty is determined by the amount or number of unit
doses of the controlled substance involved in the drug abuse offense is an
offense of the same degree as the drug abuse offense attempted would be if that
drug abuse offense had been committed and had involved an amount or number of
unit doses of the controlled substance that is within the next lower range of
controlled substance amounts than was involved in the attempt. An attempt to
commit any other offense is an offense of the next lesser degree than the
offense attempted. In the case of an attempt to commit an offense other than a
violation of R.C. Chapter 3734 that is not specifically classified, an attempt
is a misdemeanor of the first degree if the offense attempted is a felony, and
a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the offense attempted is a misdemeanor.
In the case of an attempt to commit a violation of any provision of R.C.
Chapter 3734, other than R.C. § 3734.18, that relates to hazardous wastes, an
attempt is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. An attempt to
commit a minor misdemeanor, or to engage in conspiracy, is not an offense under
this section.
   (f)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
      (2)   MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
(R.C. § 2923.02)
§ 606.22 COMPLICITY.
   (a)   No person, acting with the kind of culpability required for the
commission of an offense, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Solicit or procure another to commit the offense;
      (2)   Aid or abet another in committing the offense;
      (3)   Conspire with another to commit the offense in violation of R.C. §
2923.01; and
      (4)   Cause an innocent or irresponsible person to commit the offense.
   (b)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that no person with
whom the accused was in complicity has been convicted as a principal offender.
   (c)   No person shall be convicted of complicity under this section unless
an offense is actually committed, but a person may be convicted of complicity
in an attempt to commit an offense in violation of R.C. § 2923.02 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (d)   If an alleged accomplice of the defendant testifies against the
defendant in a case in which the defendant is charged with complicity in the
commission of or an attempt to commit an offense, an attempt to commit an
offense, or an offense, the court shall charge the jury in accordance with R.C.
§ 2923.03(D).
   (e)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that,
prior to the commission of or attempt to commit the offense, the actor
terminated his or her complicity, under circumstances manifesting a complete
and voluntary renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of complicity in the
commission of an offense, and shall be prosecuted and punished as if he or she
were a principal offender. A charge of complicity may be stated in terms of
this section, or in terms of the principal offense.
(R.C. § 2923.03)
§ 606.23 DETENTION OF SHOPLIFTERS AND THOSE COMMITTING MOTION PICTURE PIRACY;
PROTECTION OF INSTITUTIONAL PROPERTY.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   ARCHIVAL INSTITUTION. Any public or private building, structure or
shelter in which are stored historical documents, devices, records, manuscripts
or items of public interest, which historical materials are stored to preserve
the materials or the information in the materials, to disseminate the
information contained in the materials, or to make the materials available for
public inspection or for inspection by certain persons who have a particular
interest in, use for or knowledge concerning the materials.
      (2)   AUDIOVISUAL RECORDING FUNCTION AND FACILITY. Have the same meaning
as in R.C. § 2913.07.
      (3)   MUSEUM. Any public or private nonprofit institution that is
permanently organized for primarily educational or aesthetic purposes, owns or
borrows objects or items of public interest, and cares for and exhibits to the
public the objects or items.
      (4)   PRETRIAL DIVERSION PROGRAM. A rehabilitative, educational program
designed to reduce recidivism and promote personal responsibility that is at
least four hours in length and that has been approved by any court in this
state.
   (b)   A merchant, or an employee or agent of a merchant, who has probable
cause to believe that things offered for sale by a mercantile establishment
have been unlawfully taken by a person, may, for the purposes set forth in
division (d) below, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable
length of time within the mercantile establishment or its immediate vicinity.
   (c)   Any officer, employee or agent of a library, museum or archival
institution may, for the purposes set forth in division (d) below or for the
purpose of conducting a reasonable investigation of a belief that the person
has acted in a manner described in divisions (c)(1) and (c)(2) below, detain a
person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time within, or in the
immediate vicinity of, the library, museum or archival institution, if the
officer, employee or agent has probable cause to believe that the person has:
      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly moved, defaced, damaged,
destroyed or otherwise improperly tampered with property owned by or in the
custody of the library, museum or archival institution; or
      (2)   With purpose to deprive the library, museum or archival institution
of property owned by it or in its custody, knowingly obtained or exerted
control over the property without the consent of the owner or person authorized
to give consent, beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of the
owner or person authorized to give consent, by deception, or by threat.
   (d)   An officer, agent or employee of a library, museum or archival
institution pursuant to division (c) above or a merchant or an employee or
agent of a merchant pursuant to division (b) above may detain another person
for any of the following purposes:
      (1)   To recover the property that is the subject of the unlawful taking,
criminal mischief or theft;
      (2)   To cause an arrest to be made by a peace officer;
      (3)   To obtain a warrant of arrest; and
      (4)   To offer the person, if the person is suspected of the unlawful
taking, criminal mischief or theft and notwithstanding any other provision of
this Code or the Ohio Revised Code, an opportunity to complete a pretrial
diversion program and to inform the person of the other legal remedies
available to the library, museum, archival institution or merchant.
   (e)   The owner or lessee of a facility in which a motion picture is being
shown, or the owner’s or lessee’s employee or agent, who has probable cause to
believe that a person is or has been operating an audiovisual recording
function of a device in violation of R.C. § 2917.07 may, for the purpose of
causing an arrest to be made by a peace officer or of obtaining an arrest
warrant, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of
time within the facility or its immediate vicinity.
   (f)   The officer, agent or employee of the library, museum or archival
institution, the merchant or an employee or agent of a merchant, or the owner,
lessee, employee or agent of the facility acting under divisions (b), (c) or
(e) above shall not search the person detained, search or seize any property
belonging to the person detained without the person’s consent, or use undue
restraint upon the person detained.
   (g)   Any peace officer may arrest without a warrant any person that the
officer has probable cause to believe has committed any act described in
division (c)(1) or (c)(2) above, that the officer has probable cause to believe
has committed an unlawful taking in a mercantile establishment, or that the
officer has reasonable cause to believe has committed an act prohibited by R.C.
§ 2913.07. An arrest under this division (g) shall be made within a reasonable
time after the commission of the act or unlawful taking.
(R.C. § 2935.041)
§ 606.24 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED OR FORFEITED PROPERTY HELD BY POLICE
DEPARTMENT.
   (a)   Safekeeping of property in custody.
      (1)   A.   Any property that has been lost, abandoned, stolen, seized
pursuant to a search warrant, or otherwise lawfully seized or forfeited and
that is in the custody of the Police Department shall be kept safely by the
Police Department, pending the time it no longer is needed as evidence or for
another lawful purpose, and shall be disposed of pursuant to this section or
R.C. §§ 2981.12 and 2981.13.
         B.   This section does not apply to the custody and disposal of any of
the following:
            1.   Vehicles subject to forfeiture under R.C. Title 45, except as
provided in division (b)(1)F. of this section;
            2.   Abandoned junk motor vehicles or other property of negligible
value;
            3.   Property held by a department of rehabilitation and correction
institution that is unclaimed, that does not have an identified owner, that the
owner agrees to dispose of or that is identified by the Department as having
little value;
            4.   Animals taken, and devices used in unlawfully taking animals,
under R.C. § 1531.20;
            5.   Controlled substances sold by a peace officer in the
performance of the officer’s official duties under R.C. § 3719.141;
            6.   Property recovered by a township law enforcement agency under
R.C. §§ 505.105 to 505.109; and
            7.   Property held and disposed of under an ordinance of the
municipality or under R.C. §§ 737.29 to 737.33, except that if the municipality
has received notice of a citizens’ reward program as provided in division (b)
(5) of this section and disposes of property under an ordinance shall pay 25%
of any monies acquired from any sale or auction to the citizens’ reward
program.
      (2)   A.   The Police Department shall adopt and comply with a written
internal control policy that does all of the following:
            1.   Provides for keeping detailed records as to the amount of
property acquired by the Police Department and the date property was acquired;
            2.   Provides for keeping detailed records of the disposition of
the property, which shall include, but not be limited to, both of the
following:
               a.   The manner in which it was disposed, the date of
disposition, detailed financial records concerning any property sold and the
name of any person who received the property. The record shall not identify or
enable identification of the individual officer who seized any item of
property; and
               b.   An itemized list of the specific expenditures made with
amounts that are gained from the sale of the property and that are retained by
the agency, including the specific amount expended on each expenditure, except
that the policy shall not provide for or permit the identification of any
specific expenditure that is made in an ongoing investigation.
            3.   Complies with R.C. § 2981.13 if the Police Department has a
law enforcement trust fund or similar fund created under that section.
         B.   The records kept under the internal control policy shall be open
to public inspection during the Police Department’s regular business hours. The
policy adopted under this section and each report received by the Attorney
General is a public record open for inspection under R.C. § 149.43.
      (3)   The Police Department, with custody of property to be disposed of
under this section or R.C. § 2981.12 or 2981.13, shall make a reasonable effort
to locate persons entitled to possession of the property, to notify them of
when and where it may be claimed, and to return the property to them at the
earliest possible time. In the absence of evidence identifying persons entitled
to possession, it is sufficient notice to advertise in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county and to briefly describe the nature of the property in
custody and inviting persons to view and establish their right to it.
      (4)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   CITIZENS’ REWARD PROGRAM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 9.92.
         B.   LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Includes correctional institutions.
         C.   TOWNSHIP LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. An organized police department
of a township, a township police district, a joint police district, or the
office of a township constable.
(R.C. § 2981.11)
   (b)   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property.
      (1)   Unclaimed or forfeited property in the custody of the Police
Department, other than property described in division (a)(1)B. of this section,
shall be disposed of by order of any court of record that has territorial
jurisdiction over the municipality, as follows:
         A.   Drugs shall be disposed of pursuant to R.C. § 3719.11 or placed
in the custody of the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States for
disposal or use for medical or scientific purposes under applicable federal
law;
         B.   Firearms and dangerous ordnance suitable for police work may be
given to a law enforcement agency for that purpose. Firearms suitable for
sporting use or as museum pieces or collectors’ items may be sold at public
auction pursuant to division (b)(2) of this section. The Police Department may
sell other firearms and dangerous ordnance to a federally licensed firearms
dealer in a manner that the court considers proper. The Police Department shall
destroy any firearms or dangerous ordnance not given to a law enforcement
agency or sold or shall send them to the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation for destruction by the Bureau;
         C.   Obscene materials shall be destroyed;
         D.   Beer, intoxicating liquor or alcohol seized from a person who
does not hold a permit issued under R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303 or otherwise
forfeited to the state for an offense under R.C. § 4301.45 or 4301.53 shall be
sold by the Division of Liquor Control if the Division determines that it is
fit for sale or shall be placed in the custody of the Investigations Unit in
the Ohio Department of Public Safety and be used for training relating to law
enforcement activities. The Ohio Department of Public Safety, with the
assistance of the Division of Liquor Control, shall adopt rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 to provide for the distribution to state or local law
enforcement agencies upon their request. If any tax imposed under R.C. Title 43
has not been paid in relation to the beer, intoxicating liquor or alcohol, any
monies acquired from the sale shall first be used to pay the tax. All other
money collected under this division (b)(1)D. shall be paid into the state
treasury. Any beer, intoxicating liquor or alcohol that the Division determines
to be unfit for sale shall be destroyed;
         E.   Money received by an inmate of a correctional institution from an
unauthorized source or in an unauthorized manner shall be returned to the
sender, if known, or deposited in the inmates’ industrial and entertainment
fund of the institution if the sender is not known;
         F.   1.   Any mobile instrumentality forfeited under R.C. Chapter 2981
may be given to the law enforcement agency that initially seized the mobile
instrumentality for use in performing its duties, if the agency wants the
mobile instrumentality. The agency shall take the mobile instrumentality
subject to any security interest or lien on the mobile instrumentality; and
            2.   Vehicles and vehicle parts forfeited under R.C. §§ 4549.61 to
4549.63 may be given to a law enforcement agency for use in performing its
duties. Those parts may be incorporated into any other official vehicle. Parts
that do not bear vehicle identification numbers or derivatives of them may be
sold or disposed of as provided by rules of the Director of Public Safety.
Parts from which a vehicle identification number or derivative of it has been
removed, defaced, covered, altered or destroyed and that are not suitable for
police work or incorporation into an official vehicle shall be destroyed and
sold as junk or scrap.
         G.   Computers, computer networks, computer systems and computer
software suitable for police work may be given to a law enforcement agency for
that purpose or disposed of under division (b)(2) of this section; and
         H.   Money seized in connection with a violation of R.C. § 2905.32,
2907.21 or 2907.22 shall be deposited in the Victims of Human Trafficking Fund
created by R.C. § 5101.87.
      (2)   Unclaimed or forfeited property that is not described in division
(b)(1) of this section or division (a)(1)B. of this section, with court
approval, may be used by the law enforcement agency in possession of it. If it
is not used by the agency, it may be sold without appraisal at a public auction
to the highest bidder for cash or disposed of in another manner that the court
considers proper.
      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (b)(1) and (b)(5) of this section
and after compliance with division (b)(4) of this section when applicable, any
monies acquired from the sale of property disposed of pursuant to this section
shall be placed in the General Revenue Fund of the state, or the General Fund
of the municipality.
      (4)   If the property was in the possession of the Police Department in
relation to a delinquent child proceeding in a juvenile court, 10% of any
moneys acquired from the sale of property disposed of under this section shall
be applied to one or more community addiction services providers, as defined in
R.C. § 5119.01. A juvenile court shall not specify a services provider, except
as provided in this division, unless the services provider is in the same
county as the court or in a contiguous county. If no services provider is
located in any of those counties, the juvenile court may specify a services
provider anywhere in Ohio. The remaining 90% of the proceeds or cash shall be
applied as provided in division (b)(3) of this section.
      (5)   A.   If the Board of County Commissioners recognizes a citizens’
reward program under R.C. § 9.92, the Board shall notify the Police Department
of the recognition by filing a copy of its resolution conferring that
recognition with the Police Department. When the Board recognizes a citizens’
reward program and the county includes a part, but not all, of the territory of
the municipality, the Board shall so notify the Police Department of the
recognition of the citizens’ reward program only if the county contains the
highest percentage of the municipality’s population.
         B.   Upon being so notified, the Police Department shall pay 25% of
any forfeited proceeds or cash derived from each sale of property disposed of
pursuant to this section to the citizens’ reward program for use exclusively to
pay rewards. No part of the funds may be used to pay expenses associated with
the program. If a citizens’ reward program that operates in more than one
county or in another state in addition to this state receives funds under this
section, the funds shall be used to pay rewards only for tips and information
to law enforcement agencies concerning offenses committed in the county from
which the funds were received.
      (6)   Any property forfeited under R.C. Chapter 2981 not be used to pay
any fine imposed upon a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to an
underlying criminal offense or a different offense arising out of the same
facts and circumstances.
      (7)   Any monies acquired from the sale of personal effects, tools or
other property seized because the personal effects, tools or other property
were used in the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2905.32, 2907.21 or
2907.22 or derived from the proceeds of the commission of a violation of R.C. §
2905.32, 2907.21 or 2907.22 and disposed of pursuant to this division (b) shall
be placed in the Victims of Human Trafficking Fund created by R.C. § 5101.87.
(R.C. § 2981.12)
   (c)   Disposition of contraband, proceeds or instrumentalities. Except as
otherwise provided in R.C. § 2981.13, property ordered forfeited as contraband,
proceeds or an instrumentality pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2981 shall be disposed
of, used or sold pursuant to division (b) of this section or R.C. § 2981.12. If
the property is to be sold under division (b) of this section or R.C. §
2981.12, the prosecutor shall cause notice of the proposed sale to be given in
accordance with law.
(R.C. § 2981.13(A))
Statutory reference:
   Forfeiture of property generally, see R.C. Chapter 2981
§ 606.25 IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. An employee of the United States
who serves in a position the duties of which are primarily the investigation,
apprehension or detention of individuals suspected or convicted of offenses
under the criminal laws of the United States.
      (2)   IMPERSONATE. To act the part of, assume the identity of, wear the
uniform or any part of the uniform of, or display the identification of a
particular person or of a member of a class of persons with purpose to make
another person believe that the actor is that particular person or is a member
of that class of persons.
      (3)   INVESTIGATOR OF THE BUREAU OF CRIMINAL IDENTIFICATION AND
INVESTIGATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.11.
      (4)   PEACE OFFICER. A Sheriff, Deputy Sheriff, Marshal, Deputy Marshal,
member of the organized police department of a municipal corporation or
township constable, who is employed by a political subdivision of this state; a
member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under
R.C. § 3735.31(D); a member of a police force employed by a regional transit
authority under R.C. § 306.35(Y); a state university law enforcement officer
appointed under R.C. § 3345.04; a veterans’ home police officer appointed under
R.C. § 5907.02; a special police officer employed by a port authority under
R.C. § 4582.04 or 4582.28; an officer, agent or employee of the state or any of
its agencies, instrumentalities or political subdivisions, upon whom, by
statute, a duty to conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is
imposed and the authority to arrest violators is conferred, within limits of
that statutory duty and authority; or a State Highway Patrol trooper whose
primary duties are to preserve the peace, to protect life and property and to
enforce the laws, ordinances or rules of the state or any of its political
subdivisions.
      (5)   PRIVATE POLICE OFFICER. Any security guard, special police officer,
private detective or other person who is privately employed in a police
capacity.
   (b)   No person shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation or
federal law enforcement officer.
   (c)   No person, by impersonating a peace officer, private police officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation or
federal law enforcement officer, shall arrest or detain any person, search any
person or search the property of any person.
   (d)   No person, with purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of an
offense, shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer, federal law
enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the municipality or the
state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation.
   (e)   No person shall commit a felony while impersonating a peace officer,
private police officer, federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or
employee of the municipality or of the state or investigator of the Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation.
   (f)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (b) of this
section that the impersonation of the peace officer, private police officer,
federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the
municipality or of the state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal
Identification and Investigation was for a lawful purpose.
   (g)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Whoever violates division (c) or (d) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the purpose of a
violation of division (d) of this section is to commit or facilitate the
commission of a felony, a violation of division (d) is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. Whoever violates division (e) of this
section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.51)
§ 606.26 DISPLAY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY EMBLEM.
   (a)   No person who is not entitled to do so shall knowingly display on a
motor vehicle the emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law
enforcement officers.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of the unlawful display of the
emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law enforcement
officers, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2913.441)
§ 606.27 USING SHAM LEGAL PROCESS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   LAWFULLY ISSUED. Adopted, issued or rendered in accordance with the
United States Constitution, the constitution of a state, and the applicable
statutes, rules, regulations and ordinances of the United States, a state and
the political subdivisions of a state.
      (2)   POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS. Municipal corporations, townships,
counties, school districts and all other bodies corporate and politic that are
organized under state law and are responsible for governmental activities only
in geographical areas smaller than that of a state.
      (3)   SHAM LEGAL PROCESS. An instrument that meets all of the following
conditions:
         A.   It is not lawfully issued;
         B.   It purports to do any of the following:
            1.   To be a summons, subpoena, judgment or order of a court, a law
enforcement officer or a legislative, executive or administrative body;
            2.   To assert jurisdiction over or determine the legal or
equitable status, rights, duties, powers or privileges of any person or
property; and
            3.   To require or authorize the search, seizure, indictment,
arrest, trial or sentencing of any person or property.
         C.   It is designed to make another person believe that it is lawfully
issued.
      (4)   STATE. A state of the United States, including without limitation
the state legislature, the highest court of the state that has statewide
jurisdiction, the offices of all elected state officers, and all departments,
boards, offices, commissions, agencies, institutions and other
instrumentalities of the state. STATE does not include the political
subdivisions of the state.
   (b)   No person shall, knowing the sham legal process to be a sham legal
process, do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly issue, display, deliver, distribute or otherwise use sham
legal process;
      (2)   Knowingly use sham legal process to arrest, detain, search or seize
any person or the property of another person;
      (3)   Knowingly commit or facilitate the commission of an offense using
sham legal process; and
      (4)   Knowingly commit a felony by using sham legal process.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (b)(1) or (b)
(2) of this section that the use of sham legal process was for a lawful
purpose.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using sham legal process. A
violation of division (b)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. A violation of division (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree, except that if the purpose of a violation of
division (b)(3) of this section is to commit or facilitate the commission of a
felony, a violation of division (b)(3) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division (b)(4) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.52(A) - (D))
§ 606.28 FAILURE TO DISCLOSE PERSONAL INFORMATION.
   (a)   No person who is in a public place shall refuse to disclose the
person’s name, address or date of birth, when requested by a law enforcement
officer who reasonably suspects either of the following:
      (1)   The person is committing, has committed or is about to commit a
criminal offense;
      (2)   The person witnessed any of the following:
         A.   An offense of violence that would constitute a felony under the
laws of this state;
         B.   A felony offense that causes or results in, or creates a
substantial risk of, serious physical harm to another person or property;
         C.   Any attempt or conspiracy to commit, or complicity in committing,
any offenses identified in division (a)(2)A. or (a)(2)B. of this section; and
         D.   Any conduct reasonably indicating that any offense identified in
division (a)(2)A. or (a)(2)B. of this section or any attempt, conspiracy or
complicity described in division (a)(2)C. of this section has been, is being or
is about to be committed.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of failure to
disclose one’s personal information, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (c)   Nothing in division (a) of this section requires a person to answer
any questions beyond that person’s name, address or date of birth. Nothing in
division (a) of this section authorizes a law enforcement officer to arrest a
person for not providing any information beyond the person’s name, address or
date of birth or for refusing to describe the offense observed.
   (d)   It is not a violation of division (a) of this section to refuse to
answer a question that would reveal a person’s age or date of birth if age is
an element of the crime that the person is suspected of committing.
(R.C. § 2921.29)
   (e)   No person entering an airport, train station, port or other similar
critical transportation infrastructure site shall refuse to show identification
when requested by a law enforcement officer when there is a threat to security
and the law enforcement officer is requiring identification of all persons
entering the site.
   (f)   A law enforcement officer may prevent any person who refuses to show
identification when asked under the circumstances described in division (e) of
this section from entering the critical transportation infrastructure site.
(R.C. § 2909.31)
§ 606.29 MISUSE OF 9-1-1 SYSTEM.
   (a)   As used in this section, "9-1-1 system" means a system through which
individuals can request emergency service using the access number 9-1-1.
(R.C. § 128.01(A))
   (b)   No person shall knowingly use the telephone number of a 9-1-1 system
established under R.C. Chapter 128 to report an emergency if the person knows
that no emergency exists.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly use a 9-1-1 system for a purpose other than
obtaining emergency service.
   (d)   No person shall disclose or use any information concerning telephone
numbers, addresses or names obtained from the database that serves the public
safety answering point of a 9-1-1 system established under R.C. Chapter 128,
except for any of the following purposes or under any of the following
circumstances:
      (1)   For the purpose of the 9-1-1 system;
      (2)   For the purpose of responding to an emergency call to an emergency
service provider;
      (3)   In the circumstance of the inadvertent disclosure of such
information due solely to technology of the wireless telephone network portion
of the 9-1-1 system not allowing access to the database to be restricted to 9-
1-1 specific answering lines at a public safety answering point;
      (4)   In the circumstance of access to a database being given by a
telephone company that is a wireless service provider to a public utility or
municipal utility in handling customer calls in times of public emergency or
service outages. The charge, terms and conditions for the disclosure or use of
the information for the purpose of such access to a database shall be subject
to the jurisdiction of the Steering Committee; and
      (5)   In the circumstance of access to a database given by a telephone
company that is a wireline service provider to a state and local government in
warning of a public emergency, as determined by the Steering Committee. The
charge, terms and conditions for the disclosure or use of that information for
the purpose of access to a database is subject to the jurisdiction of the
Steering Committee.
(R.C. § 128.96(F) - (H))
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (c) or (d) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 128.99(A), (B))
§ 606.30 SELF DEFENSE: LIMITATIONS ON DUTY TO RETREAT PRIOR TO USING FORCE.
   (a)   As used in this section, RESIDENCE has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2901.05.
   (b)   For purposes of any section of this code that sets forth a criminal
offense, a person has no duty to retreat before using force in self-defense,
defense of another, or defense of that person’s residence if that person is in
a place in which the person lawfully has a right to be.
   (c)   A trier of fact shall not consider the possibility of retreat as a
factor in determining whether or not a person who used force in self-defense,
defense of another, or defense of that person’s residence reasonably believed
that the force was necessary to prevent injury, loss, or risk to life or
safety.
(R.C. § 2901.09)
CHAPTER 612: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
   
612.01   Definitions
   
612.02   Sales to underage persons; prohibitions and misrepresentations
   
612.03   Sales to intoxicated persons
   
612.04   Liquor consumption in motor vehicle
   
612.05   Permit required
   
612.06   Posting liquor age and firearm warning signs
   
612.07   Open container prohibited
   
612.08   Hours of sale or consumption
   
612.09   Unlawful possession
   
612.10   Sales on premises
   
612.11   Gifts in connection with business
   
612.12   Adulteration
   
612.13   Conveying intoxicating liquor or cash onto grounds of detention
facilities or other specified governmental facilities
   
612.14   Keeping place violating law
   
612.15   Bottle clubs
   
612.16   Sales of low-alcohol beverages to underage persons; prohibitions and
misrepresentations
   
612.17   Alcohol vaporizing devices prohibited
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Disorderly conduct while voluntarily intoxicated, see §
648.04
   Driving or physical control while intoxicated, see §
434.01
   Effect of voluntary intoxication on criminal liability, see §
606.07
   Liquor Control Law, see R.C. Ch. 4301
   Liquor permits, see R.C. Ch. 4303
   Local option, see R.C. § 4303.29
   Suspension of alcohol sales during emergency, see R.C. § 4301.251
   Using weapons while intoxicated, see §
672.03
§ 612.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, whether rectified or diluted with water or
not, whatever its origin may be, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol. The term
does not include denatured alcohol and wood alcohol.
   (b)   AT RETAIL. For use or consumption by the purchaser and not for resale.
   (c)   BEER. 
      (1)   Includes all beverages brewed or fermented wholly or in part from
malt products and containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume.
      (2)   Beer, regardless of the percent of alcohol by volume, is not
intoxicating liquor for purposes of this code, the Ohio Revised Code, or any
rules adopted under it.
   (d)   CIDER. All liquids that are fit to use for beverage purposes that
contain 0.5% of alcohol by volume, but not more than 6% of alcohol by weight
that are made through the normal alcoholic fermentation of the juice of sound,
ripe apples, including without limitation flavored, sparkling or carbonated
cider and cider made from pure condensed apple must.
   (e)   CLUB. A corporation or association of individuals organized in good
faith for social, recreational, benevolent, charitable, fraternal, political,
patriotic or athletic purposes, which is the owner, lessor or occupant of a
permanent building or part of a permanent building operated solely for those
purposes, membership in which entails the prepayment of regular dues, and
includes the place so operated.
   (f)   COMMUNITY FACILITY. Either of the following:
      (1)   Any convention, sports or entertainment facility or complex, or any
combination of these, that is used by or accessible to the general public and
that is owned or operated in whole or in part by the state, a state agency or a
political subdivision of the state or that is leased from, or located on
property owned by or leased from, the state, a state agency, a political
subdivision of the state or a convention facilities authority created pursuant
to R.C. § 351.02; or
      (2)   An area designated as a community entertainment district pursuant
to R.C. § 4301.80.
   (g)   CONTROLLED ACCESS ALCOHOL AND BEVERAGE CABINET. A closed container,
either refrigerated, in whole or in part, or nonrefrigerated, access to the
interior of which is restricted by means of a device that requires the use of a
key, magnetic card or similar device and from which beer, intoxicating liquor,
other beverages or food may be sold.
   (h)   HOTEL. The same meaning as in R.C. § 3731.01, subject to the
exceptions mentioned in R.C. § 3731.03.
   (i)   INTOXICATING LIQUOR and LIQUOR. All liquids and compounds, other than
beer, containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume which are fit to use for
beverage purposes, from whatever source and by whatever process produced, by
whatever name called, and whether they are medicated, proprietary or patented.
INTOXICATING LIQUOR and LIQUOR include cider and alcohol, and all solids and
confections which contain 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume.
   (j)   LOW-ALCOHOL BEVERAGE. Any brewed or fermented malt product or any
product made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits or other agricultural
products that contains either no alcohol or less than 0.5% of alcohol by
volume. The beverages described in this definition do not include a soft drink
such as root beer, birch beer or ginger beer.
   (k)   MANUFACTURE. All processes by which beer or intoxicating liquor is
produced, whether by distillation, rectifying, fortifying, blending,
fermentation, brewing or in any other manner.
   (l)   MANUFACTURER. Any person engaged in the business of manufacturing beer
or intoxicating liquor.
   (m)   MIXED BEVERAGES. Includes bottled and prepared cordials, cocktails,
highballs, and solids and confections that are obtained by mixing any type of
whiskey, neutral spirits, brandy, gin or other distilled spirits with, or over,
carbonated or plain water, pure juices from flowers and plants, and other
flavoring materials. The completed product shall contain not less than 0.5% of
alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume. The phrase
includes the contents of a pod.
   (n)   NIGHTCLUB. A place habitually operated for profit, where food is
served for consumption on the premises, and one or more forms of amusement are
provided or permitted for a consideration that may be in the form of a cover
charge or may be included in the price of the food and beverages, or both,
purchased by patrons.
   (o)   PERSON. Includes firms and corporations.
   (p)   PHARMACY. An establishment as defined in R.C. § 4729.01, that is under
the management or control of a licensed pharmacist in accordance with R.C. §
4729.27.
   (q)   POD. Means a sealed capsule made from plastic, glass, aluminum, or a
combination thereof to which all of the following apply:
      (1)   The capsule contains intoxicating liquor of more than 21% of
alcohol by volume.
      (2)   The capsule also contains a concentrated flavoring mixture.
      (3)   The contents of the capsule are not readily accessible or intended
for consumption unless certain manufacturer’s processing instructions are
followed.
      (4)   The instructions include releasing the contents of the capsule
through a machine specifically designed to process the contents.
      (5)   After being properly processed according to the manufacturer’s
instructions, the final product produced from the capsule contains not less
than 0.5% of alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume.
   (r)   RESTAURANT. A place located in a permanent building provided with
space and accommodations wherein, in consideration of the payment of money, hot
meals are habitually prepared, sold and served at noon and evening, as the
principal business of the place. The term does not include pharmacies,
confectionery stores, lunch stands, nightclubs and filling stations.
   (s)   SALE and SELL. The exchange, barter, gift, offer for sale, sale,
distribution and delivery of any kind, and the transfer of title or possession
of beer and intoxicating liquor either by constructive or actual delivery by
any means or devices whatever, including the sale of beer or intoxicating
liquor by means of a controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet pursuant to
R.C. § 4301.21. These terms do not include the mere solicitation of orders for
beer or intoxicating liquor from the holders of permits issued by the Division
of Liquor Control authorizing the sale of the beer or intoxicating liquor, but
no solicitor shall solicit any orders until the solicitor has been registered
with the Division pursuant to R.C. § 4303.25.
   (t)   SALES AREA OR TERRITORY. An exclusive geographic area or territory
that is assigned to a particular A or B permit holder and that either has one
or more political subdivisions as its boundaries or consists of an area of land
with readily identifiable geographic boundaries. SALES AREA OR TERRITORY does
not include, however, any particular retail location in an exclusive geographic
area or territory that had been assigned to another A or B permit holder before
April 9, 2001.
   (u)   SEALED CONTAINER. Any container having a capacity of not more than 128
fluid ounces, the opening of which is closed to prevent the entrance of air.
   (v)   SPIRITUOUS LIQUOR. All intoxicating liquors containing more than 21%
of alcohol by volume. The phrase does not include the contents of a pod.
   (w)   VEHICLE. All means of transportation by land, by water or by air, and
everything made use of in any way for the transportation.
   (x)   WHOLESALE DISTRIBUTOR and DISTRIBUTOR. A person engaged in the
business of selling to retail dealers for purposes of resale.
   (y)   WINE. All liquids fit to use for beverage purposes containing not less
than 0.5% of alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume, that
is made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits, or other agricultural
products. The term includes cider, except as used in R.C. §§ 4301.13, 4301.421,
4301.422, 4301.432, and 4301.44, and, for purposes of determining the rate of
the tax that applies, R.C. § 4301.43(B), the term does not include cider.
(R.C. §§ 4301.01, 4301.244)
§ 612.02 SALES TO UNDERAGE PERSONS; PROHIBITIONS AND MISREPRESENTATIONS.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301,
no person shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor to an underage person, shall
buy beer or intoxicating liquor for an underage person, or shall furnish it to
an underage person unless given by a physician in the regular line of the
physician’s practice or given for established religious purposes or unless the
underage person is supervised by a parent, spouse who is not an underage
person, or legal guardian. In proceedings before the Liquor Control Commission,
no permit holder, or no employee or agent of a permit holder, charged with a
violation of this division (a) shall be charged, for the same offense, with a
violation of R.C. § 4301.22(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (b)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private place
shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the place while
possessing or consuming beer or intoxicating liquor, unless the intoxicating
liquor or beer is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that
person’s parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian and
the parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian is present
at the time of the person’s possession or consumption of the beer or
intoxicating liquor. An owner of a public or private place is not liable for
acts or omissions in violation of this division (b) that are committed by a
lessee of that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee’s
acts or omissions.
   (c)   No person shall engage or use accommodations at a hotel, inn, cabin,
campground or restaurant when the person knows or has reason to know either of
the following:
      (1)   That beer or intoxicating liquor will be consumed by an underage
person on the premises of the accommodations that the person engages or uses,
unless the person engaging or using the accommodations is the spouse of the
underage person and who is not an underage person, or is the parent or legal
guardian of all of the underage persons, who consume beer or intoxicating
liquor on the premises and that person is on the premises at all times when
beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by an underage person; or
      (2)   That a drug of abuse will be consumed on the premises of the
accommodations by any person, except a person who obtained the drug of abuse
pursuant to a prescription issued by a licensed health professionals authorized
to prescribe drugs and has the drug of abuse in the original container in which
it was dispensed to the person.
   (d)   (1)   No person is required to permit the engagement of accommodations
at any hotel, inn, cabin or campground by an underage person or for an underage
person, if the person engaging the accommodations knows or has reason to know
that the underage person is intoxicated, or that the underage person possesses
any beer or intoxicating liquor and is not supervised by a parent, spouse who
is not an underage person, or legal guardian who is or will be present at all
times when the beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by the underage
person.
      (2)   No underage person shall knowingly engage or attempt to engage
accommodations at any hotel, inn, cabin or campground by presenting
identification that falsely indicates that the underage person is 21 years of
age or older for the purpose of violating this section.
   (e)   (1)   No underage person shall knowingly order, pay for, share the
cost of, attempt to purchase, possess or consume any beer or intoxicating
liquor in any public or private place. No underage person shall knowingly be
under the influence of any beer or intoxicating liquor in any public place. The
prohibitions set forth in this division (e)(1) against an underage person
knowingly possessing, consuming or being under the influence of any beer or
intoxicating liquor shall not apply if the underage person is supervised by a
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, or the beer or
intoxicating liquor is given by a physician in the regular line of the
physician’s practice or given for established religious purposes.
      (2)   A.   If a person is charged with violating division (e)(1) of this
section in a complaint filed under R.C. § 2151.27, the court may order the
child into a diversion program specified by the court and hold the complaint in
abeyance pending successful completion of the diversion program. A child is
ineligible to enter into a diversion program under this division (e)(2) if the
child previously has been diverted pursuant to this division (e)(2). If the
child completes the diversion program to the satisfaction of the court, the
court shall dismiss the complaint and order the child’s record in the case
sealed under R.C. §§ 2151.356 through 2151.358. If the child fails to
satisfactorily complete the diversion program, the court shall proceed with the
complaint.
         B.   If a person is charged in a criminal complaint with violating
division (e)(1) of this section, R.C. § 2935.36 shall apply to the offense,
except that a person is ineligible for diversion under that section if the
person previously has been diverted pursuant to divisions (e)(2)A. or (e)(2)B.
of this section. If the person completes the diversion program to the
satisfaction of the court, the court shall dismiss the complaint and order the
record in the case sealed under R.C. § 2953.33. If the person fails to
satisfactorily complete the diversion program, the court shall proceed with the
complaint.
   (f)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian of
a minor shall knowingly permit the minor to violate this section or R.C. §
4301.63, 4301.633 or 4301.634, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (g)   The operator of any hotel, inn, cabin or campground shall make the
provisions of this section available in writing to any person engaging or using
accommodations at the hotel, inn, cabin or campground.
   (h)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   DRUG OF ABUSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.
      (2)   HOTEL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3731.01.
      (3)   LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS and
PRESCRIPTION. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
      (4)   MINOR. A person under the age of 18 years.
      (5)   UNDERAGE PERSON. A person under the age of 21 years.
(R.C. § 4301.69)
   (i)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301,
no person under the age of 21 years shall purchase beer or intoxicating liquor.
(R.C. § 4301.63)
   (j)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301,
no person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the name, age or
other identification of any person under 21 years of age, for the purpose of
obtaining, or with the intent to obtain, beer or intoxicating liquor for a
person under 21 years of age, by purchase or as a gift.
(R.C. § 4301.633)
   (k)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301,
no person under the age of 21 years shall knowingly show or give false
information concerning his or her name, age or other identification for the
purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining beer or intoxicating liquor in any
place in this municipality where beer or intoxicating liquor is sold under a
permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control, or sold by the Division of
Liquor Control.
(R.C. § 4301.634)
   (l)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor, shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, and in
addition to the fine, may be imprisoned for a definite term of not more than
six months.
(R.C. § 4301.99(I))
   (m)   Whoever violates division (b), (c), (d),(f), (g) or (j) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(C))
   (n)   Whoever violates division (e)(1) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If an offender who violates division (e)(1) of
this section was under the age of 18 years at the time of the offense and the
offense occurred while the offender was the operator of or a passenger in a
motor vehicle, the court, in addition to any other penalties it imposes upon
the offender, shall suspend the offender's temporary instruction permit or
probationary driver's license for a period of not less than six months and not
more than one year. If the offender is 15 years and six months of age or older
and has not been issued a temporary instruction permit or probationary driver's
license, the offender shall not be eligible to be issued such a license or
permit for a period of six months. If the offender has not attained the age of
15 years and six months, the offender shall not be eligible to be issued a
temporary instruction permit until the offender attains the age of 16 years.
(R.C. § 4301.99(D))
   (o)   Whoever violates division (i) of this section shall be fined not less
than $25 nor more than $100. The court imposing a fine for a violation of this
section may order that the fine be paid by the performance of public work at a
reasonable hour rate established by the court. The court shall designate the
time within which the public work shall be completed.
(R.C. § 4301.99(E))
   (p)   (1)   Whoever violates division (k) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If, in committing a first violation of
division (k), the offender presented to the permit holder or his or her
employee or agent a false, fictitious or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $250 and not
more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more
than six months.
      (2)   On a second violation in which, for the second time, the offender
presented to the permit holder or his or her employee or agent a false,
fictitious or altered identification card, a false or fictitious driver’s
license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s license issued by any
state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree and shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, and
may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months. The
court also may impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operation privilege from
the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
      (3)   On a third or subsequent violation in which, for the third or
subsequent time, the offender presented to the permit holder or his or her
employee or agent a false, fictitious or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $500 nor more
than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than
six months. Except as provided in this division (o)(3), the court also may
impose a class six suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified
in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6), and the court may order that the suspension or denial
remain in effect until the offender attains the age of 21 years. The court, in
lieu of suspending the offender’s temporary instruction permit, probationary
driver’s license or driver’s license, instead may order the offender to perform
a determinate number of hours of community service, with the court determining
the actual number of hours and the nature of the community service the offender
shall perform.
(R.C. § 4301.99(F))
§ 612.03 SALES TO INTOXICATED PERSONS.
   (a)   No permit holder and no agent or employee of a permit holder shall
sell or furnish beer or intoxicating liquor to an intoxicated person.
(R.C. § 4301.22(B))
   (b)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(D), (H))
§ 612.04 LIQUOR CONSUMPTION IN MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (a)   No person shall consume any beer or intoxicating liquor in a motor
vehicle. This section does not apply to persons described in R.C. § 4301.62(D)
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 4301.64)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If an offender who violates this section was under the age of 18 years
at the time of the offense, the court, in addition to any other penalties it
imposes upon the offender, may suspend the offender’s temporary instruction
permit, probationary driver’s license or driver’s license for a period of not
less than six months and not more than one year. In lieu of suspending the
offender’s temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license or
driver’s license, the court instead may require the offender to perform
community service for a number of hours determined by the court. If the
offender is 15 years and six months of age or older and has not been issued a
temporary instruction permit or probationary driver’s license, the offender
shall not be eligible to be issued such a license or permit for a period of six
months. If the offender has not attained the age of 15 years and six months,
the offender shall not be eligible to be issued a temporary instruction permit
until the offender attains the age of 16 years.
(R.C. § 4301.99(B))
§ 612.05 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   (1)   No person personally or by the person’s clerk, agent or
employee, shall manufacture, manufacture for sale, offer, keep or possess for
sale, furnish or sell, or solicit the purchase or sale of any beer or
intoxicating liquor in this state, or transport, import or cause to be
transported or imported any beer, intoxicating liquor or alcohol in or into
this municipality for delivery, use or sale, unless the person has fully
complied with R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303 or is the holder of a permit issued
by the Division of Liquor Control and in force at the time.
      (2)   No manufacturer, supplier, wholesale distributor, broker or
retailer of beer or intoxicating liquor, or other person shall employ, retain
or otherwise utilize any person in this state to act as an employee, agent,
solicitor or salesperson, or act in any other representative capacity to sell,
solicit, take orders or receive offers to purchase or expressions of interest
to purchase beer or intoxicating liquor from any person, at any location other
than a liquor permit premises, except as specifically authorized by R.C.
Chapter 4301 or Chapter 4303 or rules adopted thereunder. No function, event or
party shall take place at any location other than a liquor permit premises
where any person acts in any manner to sell, solicit, take orders or receive
offers to purchase or expressions of intent to purchase beer or intoxicating
liquor to or from any person, except as specifically authorized by R.C. Chapter
4301 or Chapter 4303 or rules adopted thereunder.
(R.C. § 4303.25)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
§ 612.06 POSTING LIQUOR AGE AND FIREARM WARNING SIGNS.
   (a)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4301.691, every place in
this municipality where beer, intoxicating liquor or any low-alcohol beverage
is sold for beverage purposes shall display at all times, in a prominent place
on the premises thereof, a printed card, which shall be furnished by the
Division of Liquor Control and which shall read substantially as follows:
      WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER AGE
      If you are under the age of 21
      Under the statutes of the State of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share the
cost of or attempt to purchase, or possess or consume beer or intoxicating
liquor in any public place, or furnish false information as to name, age or
other identification, you are subject to a fine of up to $1,000, or
imprisonment up to 6 months, or both.
      If you are under the age of 18
      Under the statutes of the State of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share the
cost of or attempt to purchase, or possess or consume, any type of beer or wine
that contains either no alcohol or less than one-half of one percent of alcohol
by volume in any public place, or furnish false information as to the name,
age, or other identification, you are subject to a fine of up to $250 or to
imprisonment up to 30 days, or both.
      (2)   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution or any
proceedings before the Department or the Liquor Control Commission for failing
to display this card. No permit issued by the Department shall be suspended,
revoked or canceled because of the failure of the permit holder to display this
card.
   (b)   (1)   Every place in this municipality for which a D permit has been
issued under R.C. Chapter 4303 shall be issued a printed card by the Division
of Liquor Control that shall read substantially as follows:
      WARNING
      If you are carrying a firearm
      Under the statutes of Ohio, if you possess a firearm in any room in which
liquor is being dispensed in premises for which a D permit has been issued
under Chapter 4303 of the Revised Code, you may be guilty of a felony and may
be subjected to a prison term of up to one year.
      (2)   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution or any
proceedings before the Division of Liquor Control or the Liquor Control
Commission for failing to display this card. No permit issued by the Department
shall be suspended, revoked or canceled because of the failure of the permit
holder to display this card.
(R.C. § 4301.637)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4301.70, 4301.99(A))
§ 612.07 OPEN CONTAINER PROHIBITED.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE. A vehicle registered under R.C. § 4503.24.
      (2)   STREET, HIGHWAY and MOTOR VEHICLE. Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 4511.01.
   (b)   No person shall have in the person’s possession an opened container of
beer or intoxicating liquor in any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(1)E. of this section, in a state
liquor store;
      (2)   Except as provided in division (c) or (j) of this section, on the
premises of the holder of any permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control;
      (3)   In any other public place;
      (4)   Except as provided in division (d) or (e) of this section while
operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on any street, highway
or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking;
      (5)   Except as provided in division (d) or (e) of this section while
being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on any street, highway or other
public or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking.
   (c)   (1)   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened container
of any of the following:
         A.   Beer or intoxicating liquor that has been lawfully purchased for
consumption on the premises where bought from the holder of an A-1-A, A-2, A-
2f, A-3a, D-1, D-2, D-3, D-3a, D-4, D-4a, D-5, D-5a, D-5b, D-5c, D-5d, D-5e, D-
5f, D-5g, D-5h, D-5i, D-5j, D-5k, D-5l, D-5m, D-5n, D-5o, D-7, D-8, D-9, E, F,
F-2, F-5, F-7, F-8, or F-9 permit;
         B.   Beer, wine, or mixed beverages served for consumption on the
premises by the holder of an F-3 permit, wine served as a tasting sample by an
A-2, A-2f, S-1, or S-2 permit holder for consumption on the premises of a
farmers market for which an F-10 permit has been issued, or wine served for
consumption on the premises by the holder of an F-4 or F-6 permit;
         C.   Beer or intoxicating liquor consumed on the premises of a
convention facility as provided in R.C. § 4303.201;
         D.   Beer or intoxicating liquor to be consumed during tastings and
samplings approved by rule of the Liquor Control Commission; and
         E.   Spiritous liquor to be consumed for purposes of a tasting sample,
as defined in R.C. § 4301.171.
         F.   Beer or intoxicating liquor to be consumed in an outdoor area
described in R.C. § 4303.188(B)(1).
      (2)   A person may have in the person’s possession on an F liquor permit
premises an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor that was not
purchased from the holder of the F permit if the premises for which the F
permit is issued is a music festival and the holder of the F permit grants
permission for that possession on the premises during the period for which the
F permit is issued. As used in this division (c)(2), MUSIC FESTIVAL means a
series of outdoor live musical performances extending for a period of at least
three consecutive days and located on an area of land of at least 40 acres.
      (3)   A.   A person may have in the person’s possession on a D-2 liquor
permit premises an opened or unopened container of wine that was not purchased
from the holder of the D-2 permit if the premises for which the D-2 permit is
issued is an outdoor performing arts center, the person is attending
an orchestral performance, and the holder of the D-2 permit grants permission
for the possession and consumption of wine in certain predesignated areas of
the premises during the period for which the D-2 permit is issued.
         B.   As used in division (c)(3)A. of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
            1.   ORCHESTRAL PERFORMANCE. A concert comprised of a group of not
fewer than 40 musicians playing various musical instruments.
            2.   OUTDOOR PERFORMING ARTS CENTER. An outdoor performing arts
center that is located on not less than 150 acres of land and that is open for
performances from the first day of April to the last day of October of each
year.
      (4)   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened or unopened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location at which the
person is attending an orchestral performance as defined in division (c)(3)B.
of this section if the person with supervision and control over the
performance grants permission for the possession and consumption of beer or
intoxicating liquor in certain predesignated areas of that outdoor location.
      (5)   A person may have in the person's possession on an F-9 liquor
permit premises an opened or unopened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
that was not purchased from the holder of the F-9 permit if the F-9 permit
holder grants permission for the possession and consumption of beer or
intoxicating liquor in certain predesignated areas of the premises during the
period for which the F-9 permit is issued.
      (6)   A.   A person may have in the person’s possession on the property
of an outdoor motorsports facility an opened or unopened container of beer or
intoxicating liquor that was not purchased from the owner of the facility if
both of the following apply:
            1.   The person is attending a racing event at the facility; and
            2.   The owner of the facility grants permission for the possession
and consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor on the property of the facility.
         B.   As used in division (c)(6)A. of this section:
            1.   “Outdoor motorsports facility.” An outdoor racetrack to which
all of the following apply:
               a.   It is 2.4 miles or more in length.
               b.   It is located on 200 acres or more of land.
               c.   The primary business of the owner of the facility is the
hosting and promoting of racing events.
               d.   The holder of a D-1, D-2, or D-3 permit is located on the
property of the facility.
            2.   “Racing event.” A motor vehicle racing event sanctioned by one
or more motor racing sanctioning organizations.
Repl.
      (7)   A.   A person may have in the person's possession an opened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location within an
outdoor refreshment area created under R.C. § 4301.82 if the opened container
of beer or intoxicating liquor was purchased from an A-1, A-1-A, A-1c, A-2, A-
2f, D class, or F class permit holder to which both of the following apply:
            1.   The permit holder’s premises is located within the outdoor
refreshment area.
            2.   The permit held by the permit holder has an outdoor
refreshment area designation.
         B.   Division (c)(7) of this section does not authorize a person to do
either of the following:
            1.   Enter the premises of an establishment within an outdoor
refreshment area while possessing an opened container of beer or intoxicating
liquor acquired elsewhere;
            2.   Possess an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
while being in or on a motor vehicle within an outdoor refreshment area, unless
the possession is otherwise authorized under division (d) or (e) of this
section.
         C.   As used in division (c)(7) of this section, “D class permit
holder” does not include a D-6 or D-8 permit holder.
      (8)   A.   A person may have in the person’s possession on the property
of a market, within a defined F-8 permit premises, an opened container of beer
or intoxicating liquor that was purchased from a D permit premises that is
located immediately adjacent to the market if both of the following apply:
            1.   The market grants permission for the possession and
consumption of beer and intoxicating liquor within the defined F-8 permit
premises;
            2.   The market is hosting an event pursuant to an F-8 permit and
the market has notified the division of liquor control about the event in
accordance with R.C. § 4303.208(A)(3).
         B.   As used in division (c)(8) of this section, “market” means a
market, for which an F-8 permit is held, that has been in operation since 1860.
   (d)   This section does not apply to a person who pays all or a portion of
the fee imposed for use of a chauffeured limousine pursuant to a prearranged
contract or the guest of the person, when all of the following apply:
      (1)   The person or guest is a passenger in the limousine;
      (2)   The person or guest is located in the limousine, but is not
occupying a seat in the front compartment of the limousine where the operator
of the limousine is located; and
      (3)   The limousine is located on any street, highway or other public or
private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking.
   (e)   An opened bottle of wine that was purchased from the holder of a
permit that authorizes the sale of wine for consumption on the premises where
sold is not an opened container for the purposes of this section if both of the
following apply:
      (1)   The opened bottle of wine is securely resealed by the permit holder
or an employee of the permit holder before the bottle is removed from the
premises. The bottle shall be secured in such a manner that it is visibly
apparent if the bottle has been subsequently opened or tampered with; and
      (2)   The opened bottle of wine that is resealed in accordance with
division (e)(1) of this section is stored in the trunk of a motor vehicle or,
if the motor vehicle does not have a trunk, behind the last upright seat or in
an area not normally occupied by the driver or passengers and not easily
accessible by the driver.
   (f)   (1)   Except if an ordinance or resolution is enacted or adopted under
division (f)(2) of this section, this section does not apply to a person who,
pursuant to a prearranged contract, is a passenger riding on a commercial
quadricycle when all of the following apply:
         A.   The person is not occupying a seat in the front of the commercial
quadricycle where the operator is steering or braking.
         B.   The commercial quadricycle is being operated on a street,
highway, or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking.
         C.   The person has in their possession on the commercial quadricycle
an opened container of beer or wine.
         D.   The person has in their possession on the commercial quadricycle
not more than either 36 ounces of beer or 18 ounces of wine.
      (2)   The Legislative Authority may enact an ordinance or adopt a
resolution, as applicable, that prohibits a passenger riding on a commercial
quadricycle from possessing an opened container of beer or wine.
      (3)   As used in this section, “commercial quadricycle” means a vehicle
that has fully- operative pedals for propulsion entirely by human power and
that meets all of the following requirements:
         A.   It has four wheels and is operated in a manner similar to a
bicycle.
         B.   It has at least five seats for passengers.
         C.   It is designed to be powered by the pedaling of the operator and
the passengers.
         D.   It is used for commercial purposes.
         E.   It is operated by the vehicle owner or an employee of the owner.
   (g)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person that has in the person’s
possession an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor on the premises
of a market if the beer or intoxicating liquor has been purchased from a D
liquor permit holder that is located in the market.
      (2)   As used in division (g) of this section, “market” means an
establishment that:
         (a)   Leases space in the market to individual vendors, not less than
50% of which are retail food establishments or food service operations licensed
under R.C. Chapter 3717;
         (b)   Has an indoor sales floor area of not less than 22,000 square
feet;
         (c)   Hosts a farmer’s market on each Saturday from April through
December.
   (h)   (1)   As used in this section, ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE has the same meaning
as in R.C. § 4303.185.
      (2)   An alcoholic beverage in a closed container being transported under
R.C. § 4303.185 to its final destination is not an opened container for the
purposes of this section if the closed container is securely sealed in such a
manner that it is visibly apparent if the closed container has been
subsequently opened or tampered with after sealing.
   (i)   This section does not apply to a person who has in the person’s
possession an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor in a public-use
airport, as described in R.C. § 4303.181(D)(2)(a)(iii), when both of the
following apply:
      (1)   Consumption of the opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
occurs in the area of the airport terminal that is restricted to persons taking
flights to and from the airport; and
      (2)   The consumption is authorized under R.C. § 4303.181(D)(2)(a).
   (j)   This section does not apply to a person that has in the person’s
possession an opened container of homemade beer or wine that is served in
accordance with R.C. § 4301.201(E).
(R.C. § 4301.62)
   (k)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4301.99(A))
§ 612.08 HOURS OF SALE OR CONSUMPTION.
   (a)   This section shall apply to the retail sale of beer, wine, mixed
beverages or spirituous liquor.
   (b)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages or spirituous liquor shall be sold or
delivered by an A-1, A-1C, A-2, B-1, B-2, B-4, B-5, C-1, C-2, C-2X, D-1, D-2,
D-2X, D-3 when issued without a D-3A, D-3X, D-4, D-5H, D-5K, D-8, F, F-1, F-2,
F-3, F-4, F-5, F-6, F-7, F-8, F-9, G or I permit holder:
      (1)   From Monday to Saturday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:30
a.m.;
      (2)   On Sunday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and Sunday midnight,
unless statutorily authorized otherwise; and
      (3)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages or spirituous liquor is
also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises of the above permit
holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages
or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.
   (c)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages or spirituous liquor shall be sold or
delivered by an A-1A, D-3 when issued with a D-3A, D-4A, D-5, D-5A, D-5B, D-5C,
D-5D, D-5E, D-5F, D-5G, D-5I, D-5J, D-5L, D-5M, D-5N, D-5O, or D-7 permit
holder:
      (1)   From Monday to Saturday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 5:30
a.m.;
      (2)   On Sunday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and Sunday midnight,
unless statutorily authorized otherwise; and
      (3)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages or spirituous liquor is
also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises of the above permit
holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages
or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.
   (d)   Permit holders authorized to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages or
spirituous liquor at retail who are not specifically identified in divisions
(b) or (c) above shall be subject to the provisions of division (b), unless
statutorily authorized otherwise.
   (e)   The hours on Sunday during which sales, delivery or consumption of
alcoholic beverages may take place are established by statute, but in no event
shall they begin prior to 5:30 a.m.
(O.A.C. 4301:1-1-49)
   (f)   No association, corporation, local unit of an association or
corporation or D permit holder who holds an F-2 permit shall sell beer or
intoxicating liquor beyond the hours of sale allowed by the permit. This
division (f) imposes strict liability on the holder of the permit and on any
officer, agent or employee of the permit holder.
(R.C. § 4303.202(D)(2))
   (g)   No F-8 permit holder shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor beyond the
hours of sale allowed by the permit. This division (g) imposes strict liability
on the holder of an F-8 permit and on any officer, agent or employee of that
permit holder.
(R.C. § 4303.208(C))
   (h)   Whoever violates divisions (f) or (g) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4303.99(D))
§ 612.09 UNLAWFUL POSSESSION.
   (a)   No person shall have in his or her possession any spirituous liquor,
in excess of one liter, in one or more containers, which was not purchased at
wholesale or retail from the Ohio Division of Liquor Control or otherwise
lawfully acquired pursuant to R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303, or any other
intoxicating liquor or beer, in one or more containers, which was not lawfully
acquired pursuant to R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(1964 Code, § 529.09)
Statutory reference:
   Illegal possession of spirituous or intoxicating liquor or beer prohibited,
see R.C. § 4301.67
   Liquor control law, penalty, see R.C. § 4301.99
§ 612.10 SALES ON PREMISES.
   (a)   The sale of beer or intoxicating liquor for consumption on the
premises is subject to the following restrictions, in addition to those imposed
by the rules and orders of the Department of Liquor Control:
      (1)   Beer or intoxicating liquor may be served to a person not seated at
a table unless there is a reason to believe such beer or intoxicating liquor
will be consumed by a person under 21 years of age;
      (2)   Beer or intoxicating liquor may be served by a hotel in the room of
a bona fide guest;
      (3)   Neither the seller not the Liquor Control Commission by its
regulations shall require the purchase of food with the purchase of beer or
intoxicating liquor, nor shall the seller of beer or intoxicating liquor give
away food of any kind in connection with the sale of beer or intoxicating
liquor, except as authorized by regulation of the Liquor Control Commission;
and
      (4)   The seller shall not permit the purchaser to remove the beer or
intoxicating liquor so sold from the premises.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(1964 Code, § 529.10)
§ 612.11 GIFTS IN CONNECTION WITH BUSINESS.
   (a)   No holder of a permit shall give away any beer or intoxicating liquor
of any kind at any time in connection with his or her business.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(1964 Code, § 529.11)
Statutory reference:
   Liquor control law, penalty, see R.C. § 4301.99(A)
   Liquor control law, violations not otherwise specified, see R.C. § 4301.70
   Rules for sales of beer and intoxicating liquor under all classes of permits
and from state liquor stores, see R.C. § 4301.22(E)
§ 612.12 ADULTERATION.
   (a)   No person, for the purpose of sale, shall adulterate spirituous,
alcoholic or malt liquor used or intended for drink or medicinal or mechanical
purposes, with cocculus indicus, vitriol, grains of paradise, opium, alum,
capsicum, copperas, laurel water, logwood, Brazilwood, cochineal, sugar of
lead, aloes, glucose, tannic acid or any other substance which is poisonous or
injurious to health, or with a substance not a necessary ingredient in the
manufacture thereof, or sell or offer or keep for sale, liquors so adulterated.
   (b)   In addition to the penalties provided in division (c) of this section,
a person convicted of violating this section shall pay all necessary costs and
expenses incurred in inspecting and analyzing liquors so adulterated, sold, or
kept, or offered for sale.
(1964 Code, § 529.12)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
Statutory reference:
   Adulterated spirituous liquor, alcoholic liquor or beer, see R.C. § 4399.15
§ 612.13 CONVEYING INTOXICATING LIQUOR OR CASH ONTO GROUNDS OF DETENTION
FACILITIES OR OTHER SPECIFIED GOVERNMENTAL FACILITIES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly convey, or attempt to convey, onto the
grounds of a detention facility or of an institution, office building or other
place that is under the control of the Department of Mental Health and
Addiction Services, the Department of Developmental Disabilities, the
Department of Youth Services or the Department of Rehabilitation and
Correction, any of the following items:
      (1)   Any deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance, as defined in R.C. §
2923.11, or any part of or ammunition for use in the deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance;
      (2)   Any drug of abuse, as defined in R.C. § 3719.011; and
      (3)   Any intoxicating liquor, as defined in R.C. § 4301.01, except for
small amounts of wine for sacramental purposes when the person engaging in the
specified conduct is a cleric, as defined in R.C. § 2317.02.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any person who conveys
or attempts to convey an item onto the grounds of a detention facility or of an
institution, office building or other place under the control of the Department
of Mental Health and Addiction Services, the Department of Developmental
Disabilities, the Department of Youth Services or the Department of
Rehabilitation and Correction, with written authorization of the person in
charge of the detention facility or the institution and in accordance with the
written rules of the detention facility or the institution, office building or
other place.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, to a prisoner who is temporarily released from confinement
for a work assignment, or to any patient in an institution under the control of
the Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services or the Department of
Developmental Disabilities, any item listed in division (a).
   (d)   No person shall knowingly deliver or attempt to deliver cash to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, or to a prisoner who is temporarily released from
confinement for a work assignment.
   (e)   No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, or to a prisoner who is temporarily released from
confinement for a work assignment a cellular telephone, two-way radio or other
electronic communications device.
   (f)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (a)(1)
of this section that the weapon or dangerous ordnance in question was being
transported in a motor vehicle for any lawful purpose, that it was not on the
actor’s person, and if the weapon or dangerous ordnance was a firearm, that it
was unloaded and was being carried in a closed package, box or case or in a
compartment that can be reached only by leaving the vehicle.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (c) of this
section that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by law from delivering the
item to the confined person, the child, the prisoner or the patient and that
either of the following applies:
         A.   The actor was permitted by the written rules of the detention
facility or the institution, office building or other place to deliver the item
to the confined person or the patient; or
         B.   The actor was given written authorization by the person in charge
of the detention facility or the institution, office building or other place to
deliver the item to the confined person or the patient.
   (g)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) of this section or commits a
violation of division (c) of this section involving any item listed in division
(a)(1) of this section is guilty of illegal conveyance of weapons onto the
grounds of a specified governmental facility, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(2) of this section or commits a
violation of division (c) of this section involving any drug of abuse is guilty
of illegal conveyance of drugs of abuse onto the grounds of a specified
governmental facility, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (a)(3) of this section or commits a
violation of division (c) of this section involving any intoxicating liquor is
guilty of illegal conveyance of intoxicating liquor onto the grounds of a
specified governmental facility, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of illegal
conveyance of cash onto the grounds of a detention facility, a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (d) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, illegal conveyance of cash onto
the grounds of a detention facility is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (e) of this section is guilty of illegal
conveyance of a communications device onto the grounds of a specified
governmental facility, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (e)
of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
illegal conveyance of a communications device onto the grounds of a detention
facility is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.36)
§ 612.14 KEEPING PLACE VIOLATING LAW.
   (a)   No person shall keep a place where intoxicating liquors are sold,
furnished or given away in violation of law. The court, on conviction for a
subsequent offense, shall order the place where such liquor is sold, furnished
or given away to be abated as a nuisance, or shall order the person convicted
for such offense to give bond payable to the state in the sum of $1,000, with
sureties to the acceptance of the court. The condition of such bond shall be
that such person will not sell, furnish or give away intoxicating liquor in
violation of law and will pay all fines, costs and damages assessed against him
or her for such violation. The giving away of intoxicating liquors or other
device to evade this section constitutes lawful selling.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the third degree on each
subsequent offense.
(1964 Code, § 529.14)
§ 612.15 BOTTLE CLUBS.
   (a)   No person, club, organization, association or company who or which is
unlicensed in accordance with R.C. Title XLIII (Liquor), shall keep, set up,
maintain or operate any place as a storage area wherein members, their guests
or other persons are allowed to keep and maintain intoxicating liquors for the
purpose of consumption therein.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(1964 Code, § 529.15)
§ 612.16 SALES OF LOW-ALCOHOL BEVERAGES TO UNDERAGE PERSONS; PROHIBITIONS AND
MISREPRESENTATIONS.
   (a)   As used in this section, UNDERAGE PERSON means a person under 18 years
of age.
   (b)   No underage person shall purchase any low-alcohol beverage.
   (c)   No underage person shall order, pay for, share the cost of or attempt
to purchase any low-alcohol beverage.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the
name, age or other identification of any underage person for the purpose of
obtaining or with the intent to obtain any low-alcohol beverage for an underage
person, by purchase or as a gift.
   (e)   No underage person shall knowingly show or give false information
concerning his or her name, age or other identification for the purpose of
purchasing or otherwise obtaining any low-alcohol beverage in any place in this
municipality.
   (f)   No person shall sell or furnish any low-alcohol beverage to, or buy
any low-alcohol beverage for, an underage person, unless given by a physician
in the regular line of his or her practice or given for established religious
purposes, or unless the underage person is accompanied by a parent, spouse who
is not an underage person, or legal guardian.
   (g)   (1)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private
place shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the place
while possessing or consuming any low-alcohol beverage, unless the low-alcohol
beverage is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that person’s
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, and the
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian is present when
the person possesses or consumes the low-alcohol beverage.
      (2)   An owner of a public or private place is not liable for acts or
omissions in violation of division (g)(1) that are committed by a lessee of
that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee’s acts or
omissions.
   (h)   No permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control shall be suspended,
revoked or cancelled because of a violation of either division (f) or (g).
   (i)   No underage person shall knowingly possess or consume any low-alcohol
beverage in any public or private place, unless he or she is accompanied by a
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, or unless the
low-alcohol beverage is given by a physician in the regular line of his or her
practice or given for established religious purposes.
   (j)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian of
an underage person shall knowingly permit the underage person to violate this
section.
(R.C. § 4301.631)
   (k)   No low-alcohol beverage shall be sold to any person under 18 years of
age.
(R.C. § 4301.22(A)(2))
   (l)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section shall be fined not less
than $25 nor more than $100. The court imposing a fine for a violation of
division (b) of this section may order that the fine be paid by the performance
of public work at a reasonable hour rate established by the court. The court
shall designate the time within which the public work shall be completed.
(R.C. § 4301.99(E))
   (m)   Whoever violates divisions (c) through (k) hereof is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(B))
§ 612.17 ALCOHOL VAPORIZING DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   (a)   As used in this section, ALCOHOL VAPORIZING DEVICE means a machine or
other device that mixes beer or intoxicating liquor with pure oxygen or any
other gas to produce a vaporized product for the purpose of consumption by
inhalation.
   (b)   No person shall sell or offer for sale an alcohol vaporizing device.
   (c)   No person shall purchase or use an alcohol vaporizing device.
(R.C. § 4301.65)
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
misdemeanor of the third degree. For a second or subsequent violation occurring
within a period of five consecutive years after the first violation, a person
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(J))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4301.99(A))
CHAPTER 618: ANIMALS
Section
   
618.01   Animal Warden
   
618.02   Abandoning animals
   
618.03   Killing or injuring animals
   
618.04   Poisoning animals
   
618.05   Cruelty to animals; cruelty to companion animals
   
618.06   Coloring rabbits and baby poultry; sale or display of poultry
   
618.07   Barking or howling dogs
   
618.08   Registration of dogs required
   
618.09   Hindering capture of unregistered dog
   
618.095   Dogs required to wear tags
   
618.10   Unlawful tags
   
618.11   Rabies control
   
618.12   Hunting and trapping regulated
   
618.125   Special permits for culling excessive deer
   
618.126   Interference with taking wildlife
   
618.127   Feeding of deer prohibited
   
618.13   Bird sanctuary
   
618.14   Nuisance conditions
   
618.15   Reporting escapes (Repealed)
   
618.16   Animals at large
   
618.17   Confinement of certain dogs and other animals
   
618.18   Dangerous dogs
   
618.19   Impounding and disposition
   
618.20   Leg-hold traps
   
618.21   Stables (Repealed)
   
618.22   Nondomestic animals
   
618.23   Restrictions on dog ownership for certain convicted felons
   
618.24   Sexual conduct with an animal
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Assaulting police dog or horse or assistance dog, see §
642.08
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Driving animals upon roadway, see §§
404.04,
412.05
   Offensive odors from places where animals are kept or fed, see §
660.04
   Power to restrain and impound animals, see R.C. § 715.23
§ 618.01 ANIMAL WARDEN.
   There is hereby established the position of Animal Warden. The Animal Warden
shall be appointed by the Mayor pursuant to
Article V, § 5(b), of the City Charter. The Animal Warden shall work under and
be subject to the supervision of the Police Chief and shall perform such duties
as may be required by the Police Chief pursuant to the position’s job
description on file in the Human Resource Department.
(Ord. 2001-123, passed 6-4-2001)
§ 618.02 ABANDONING ANIMALS.
   (a)   No owner or keeper of a dog, cat or other domestic animal shall
abandon the animal.
(R.C. § 959.01)
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
first degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 959.99(E)(2))
§ 618.03 KILLING OR INJURING ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person shall maliciously, or willfully and without the consent of
the owner, kill or injure a dog, cat or any other domestic animal that is the
property of another. This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian
acting in an official capacity.
(R.C. § 959.02)
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
If the value of the animal killed or the injury done amounts to $300 or more,
whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(R.C. § 959.99(B))
§ 618.04 POISONING ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person shall maliciously, or willfully and without the consent of
the owner, administer poison, except a licensed veterinarian acting in that
capacity, to a dog, cat or any other domestic animal that is the property of
another; and no person shall, willfully and without the consent of the owner,
place any poisoned food where it may be easily found and eaten by any such
animal, either upon his or her own lands or the lands of another.
(R.C. § 959.03)
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 959.99(C))
§ 618.05 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS; CRUELTY TO COMPANION ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person shall:
      (1)   Torture an animal, deprive one of necessary sustenance,
unnecessarily or cruelly beat, needlessly mutilate or kill, or impound or
confine an animal without supplying it during the confinement with a sufficient
quantity of good wholesome food and water;
      (2)   Impound or confine an animal without affording it, during the
confinement, access to shelter from wind, rain, snow or excessive direct
sunlight, if it can reasonably be expected that the animal would otherwise
become sick or in some other way suffer. This division (a)(2) does not apply to
animals impounded or confined prior to slaughter. For the purpose of this
section, SHELTER means an artificial enclosure, windbreak, sunshade or natural
windbreak or sunshade that is developed from the earth’s contour, tree
development or vegetation;
      (3)   Carry or convey an animal in a cruel or inhuman manner;
      (4)   Keep animals other than cattle, poultry or fowl, swine, sheep or
goats in an enclosure without wholesome exercise and change of air, nor feed
cows on food that produces impure or unwholesome milk; and
      (5)   Detain livestock in railroad cars or compartments longer than 28
hours after they are so placed without supplying them with necessary food,
water and attention, nor permit the stock to be so crowded as to overlie,
crush, wound or kill each other.
   (b)   Upon the written request of the owner or person in custody of any
particular shipment of livestock, which written request shall be separate and
apart from any printed bill of lading or other railroad form, the length of
time in which the livestock may be detained in any cars or compartment without
food, water, and attention may be extended to 36 hours without penalty
therefor. Division (a) of this section does not prevent the dehorning of
cattle.
   (c)   All fines collected for violations of division (a) of this section
shall be paid to the Society or Association for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals, if there is one in the municipality; otherwise, all fines shall be
paid to the General Fund.
(R.C. § 959.13)
   (d)   Cruelty to companion animals.
      (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   ANIMAL RESCUE FOR DOGS. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 956.01.
         B.   BOARDING KENNEL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 956.01.
         C.   CAPTIVE WHITE-TAILED DEER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
1531.01.
         D.   COMPANION ANIMAL. Any animal that is kept inside a residential
dwelling and any dog or cat regardless of where it is kept, including a pet
store as defined in R.C. § 956.01. “Companion animal” does not include
livestock or any wild animal.
         E.   CRUELTY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1717.01.
         F.   DOG KENNEL. Means an animal rescue for dogs, a boarding kennel,
or a training kennel.
         G.   FEDERAL ANIMAL WELFARE ACT. The “Laboratory Animal Act of 1966”,
Pub. L. No. 89-544, 80 Stat. 350 (1966), 7 U.S.C. 2131 et seq., as amended by
the “Animal Welfare Act of 1970”, Pub. L. No. 91-579, 84 Stat. 1560 (1970), the
“Animal Welfare Act Amendments of 1976”, Pub. L. No. 94-279, 90 Stat. 417
(1976), and the “Food Security Act of 1985", Pub. L. No. 99-198, 99 Stat. 1354
(1985), and as it may be subsequently amended.
         H.   LIVESTOCK. Means horses, mules, and other equidae; cattle, sheep,
goats, and other bovidae; swine and other suidae; poultry; alpacas; llamas;
captive white-tailed deer; and any other animal that is raised or maintained
domestically for food or fiber.
         I.   PRACTICE OF VETERINARY MEDICINE. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 4741.01.
         J.    RESIDENTIAL DWELLING. A structure or shelter or the portion of a
structure or shelter that is used by one or more humans for the purpose of a
habitation.
         K.   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM. Means any of the following:
            1.   Physical harm that carries an unnecessary or unjustifiable
substantial risk of death;
            2.   Physical harm that involves either partial or total permanent
incapacity;
            3.   Physical harm that involves acute pain of a duration that
results in substantial suffering or that involves any degree of prolonged or
intractable pain.
         L.   TORMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1717.01.
         M.   TORTURE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1717.01.
         N.    TRAINING KENNEL. Means an establishment operating for profit
that keeps, houses, and maintains dogs for the purpose of training the dogs in
return for a fee or other consideration.
         O.   WILD ANIMAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1531.01.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly torture, torment, needlessly mutilate or
maim, cruelly beat, poison, needlessly kill or commit an act of cruelty against
a companion animal.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly cause serious physical harm to a
companion animal.
      (4)   No person who confines or who is the custodian or caretaker of a
companion animal shall negligently do any of the following:
         A.   Torture, torment, or commit an act of cruelty against the
companion animal;
         B.   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if it can reasonably be
expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way
as a result of or due to the deprivation or confinement;
         C.   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it can reasonably be expected
that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way as a
result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
      (5)   No person who confines or who is the custodian or caretaker of a
companion animal shall recklessly deprive the companion animal of necessary
sustenance or confine the companion animal without supplying it during the
confinement with sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water.
      (6)   No owner, manager, or employee of a dog kennel who confines or is
the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall knowingly do any of the
following:
         A.   Torture, torment, needlessly mutilate or maim, cruelly beat,
poison, needlessly kill, or commit an act of cruelty against the companion
animal;
         B.   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if it is reasonably
expected that the companion animal would die or experience unnecessary or
unjustifiable pain or suffering as a result of the deprivation or confinement;
         C.   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it is reasonably expected
that the companion animal would die or experience unnecessary or unjustifiable
pain or suffering as a result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
      (7)   No owner, manager, or employee of a dog kennel who confines or is
the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall negligently do any of
the following:
         A.   Torture, torment, or commit an act of cruelty against the
companion animal;
         B.   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if it can reasonably be
expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way
as a result of or due to the deprivation or confinement;
         C.   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it can reasonably be expected
that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way as a
result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
      (8)   Divisions (d)(2), (d)(3), (d)(4), (d)(5), (d)(6), and (d)(7) of
this section do not apply to any of the following:
         A.   A companion animal used in scientific research conducted by an
institution in accordance with the federal animal welfare act and related
regulations;
         B.   The lawful practice of veterinary medicine by a person who has
been issued a license, temporary permit, or registration certificate to do so
under R.C. Chapter 4741;
         C.   Dogs being used or intended for use for hunting or field trial
purposes, provided that the dogs are being treated in accordance with usual and
commonly accepted practices for the care of hunting dogs;
         D.   The use of common training devices, if the companion animal is
being treated in accordance with usual and commonly accepted practices for the
training of animals;
         E.   The administering of medicine to a companion animal that was
properly prescribed by a person who has been issued a license, temporary
permit, or registration certificate under R.C. Chapter 4741.
      (9)   Notwithstanding any section of the Ohio Revised Code that otherwise
provides for the distribution of fine moneys, the Clerk of Court shall forward
all fines the Clerk collects that are so imposed for any violation of this
division (D) to the Treasurer of the municipality, whose county humane society
or law enforcement agency is to be paid the fine money as determined under this
division. The Treasurer shall pay the fine moneys to the county humane society
or the county, township, municipal corporation, or state law enforcement agency
in this state that primarily was responsible for or involved in the
investigation and prosecution of the violation. If a county humane society
receives any fine moneys under this division, the county humane society shall
use the fine moneys either to provide the training that is required for humane
society agents under R.C. § 1717.061 or to provide additional training for
humane society agents.
(R.C. § 959.131)
   (e)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree. In addition, the court may order the offender
to forfeit the animal or livestock and may provide for its disposition,
including but not limited to the sale of the animal or livestock. If an animal
or livestock is forfeited and sold pursuant to this division (e), the proceeds
from the sale first shall be applied to pay the expenses incurred with regard
to the care of the animal from the time it was taken from the custody of the
former owner. The balance of the proceeds from the sale, if any, shall be paid
to the former owner of the animal.
(R.C. § 959.99(D))
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates division (d)(2) or (d)(5) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (d)(3) of this section is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (d)(4) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
first degree on each subsequent offense.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (d)(6) of this section is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (d)(7) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (6)   A.   A court may order a person who is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of division (d) of this section to forfeit to an
impounding agency, as defined in R.C. § 959.132, any or all of the companion
animals in that person’s ownership or care. The court also may prohibit or
place limitations on the person’s ability to own or care for any companion
animals for a specified or indefinite period of time.
         B.   A court may order a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty
to a violation of division (A) of this section or division (D) of this section
to reimburse an impounding agency for the reasonably necessary costs incurred
by the agency for the care of a companion animal that the agency impounded as a
result of the investigation or prosecution of the violation, provided that the
costs were not otherwise paid under R.C. § 959.132.
      (7)   If a court has reason to believe that a person who is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of division (d) of this section has a mental or
emotional disorder that contributed to the violation, the court may impose as a
community control sanction or as a condition of probation a requirement that
the offender undergo psychological evaluation or counseling. The court shall
order the offender to pay the costs of the evaluation or counseling.
(R.C. § 959.99(E))
Statutory reference:
   Impoundment of companion animals; notice and hearing, see R.C. § 959.132
§ 618.06 COLORING RABBITS AND BABY POULTRY; SALE OR DISPLAY OF POULTRY.
   (a)   No person shall dye or otherwise color any rabbit or baby poultry,
including, but not limited to, chicks and ducklings. No person shall sell,
offer for sale, expose for sale, raffle or give away any rabbit or baby poultry
which has been dyed or otherwise colored. No poultry younger than four weeks of
age may be sold, given away or otherwise distributed to any person in lots of
less than six. Stores, shops, vendors and others offering young poultry for
sale or other distribution shall provide and operate brooders or other heating
devices that may be necessary to maintain poultry in good health, and shall
keep adequate food and water available to the poultry at all times.
(R.C. § 925.62)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree on a first offense; each subsequent offense is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
(R.C. § 925.99(B))
§ 618.07 BARKING OR HOWLING DOGS.
   (a)   No person shall own, harbor or keep in custody a dog which disturbs
the peace by barking, yelping, howling or making other loud noises to the
annoyance and/or discomfort of any person. Continuous barking, yelping, howling
and/or making other loud noises for 15 consecutive minutes by the dog, whether
confined inside a residence or building or to the outside area, shall be deemed
to have disturbed the peace and to have caused the annoyance and discomfort of
persons; provided, that at the time of the complaint, no person or persons were
trespassing or threatening to trespass upon the private property of the owner,
and provided that the dog was not being teased or provoked in any manner.
   (b)   Any person who shall allow any dog habitually to remain, be lodged or
fed within any dwelling, building, yard or enclosure owned or occupied by the
person shall be considered as harboring or keeping the dog.
   (c)   Upon an initial complaint, an enforcement officer shall warn the
person in writing of the violation. Upon a second such complaint within 30
days, the enforcement officer shall charge the person with a violation of this
section.
   (d)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to owners, operators or
employees of licensed veterinary hospitals, licensed kennels or licensed animal
boarding establishments, nor does this section apply to blind, deaf or hearing
impaired, or mobility impaired persons when the dog serves as an assistance
dog.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 618.08 REGISTRATION OF DOGS REQUIRED.
   (a)   No owner, keeper or harborer of a dog more than three months of age,
nor owner of a dog kennel, shall fail to file an application for registration
required by R.C. § 955.01, nor shall he or she fail to pay the legal fee
therefor.
(R.C. § 955.21)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $25 nor
more than $100 on a first offense, and on each subsequent offense shall be
fined not less than $75 nor more than $250 and may be imprisoned for not more
than 30 days.
(R.C. § 955.99(E))
§ 618.09 HINDERING CAPTURE OF UNREGISTERED DOG.
   (a)   No person shall obstruct or interfere with anyone lawfully engaged in
capturing an unlicensed dog or making an examination of a dog wearing a tag.
(R.C. § 955.24)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 955.99(B))
§ 618.095 DOGS REQUIRED TO WEAR TAGS.
   (a)   No owner of a dog, except a dog constantly confined to a dog kennel
registered under R.C. Chapter 955 or one licensed under R.C. Chapter 956, shall
fail to require the dog to wear, at all times, a valid tag issued in connection
with a certificate of registration. A dog found not wearing at any time a valid
tag shall be prima-facie evidence of lack of registration and shall subject any
dog found not wearing such a tag to impounding, sale, or destruction.
(R.C. § 955.10)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 955.99(B))
§ 618.10 UNLAWFUL TAGS.
   (a)   No person shall own, keep or harbor a dog wearing a fictitious,
altered or invalid registration tag or a registration tag not issued by the
County Auditor in connection with the registration of that animal.
(R.C. § 955.25)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 955.99(B))
§ 618.11 RABIES CONTROL.
   (a)   Reports; quarantine.
      (1)   Every animal that bites a person shall be promptly reported to the
Animal Warden and shall thereupon be examined by a practicing veterinarian and
securely confined for clinical observation at the direction of the Animal
Warden for a period of ten days.
      (2)   After a laboratory confirmed case of rabies has occurred within the
last 12 months, such confinement shall be at the City Animal Shelter or, at the
owner’s option and expense, in a veterinary hospital of his or her choice.
      (3)   Dogs that have been vaccinated within three years with CEO, or
within one year with phenolized vaccine, may be confined on the premises of the
owner, isolated from all individuals other than the immediate family. The
animal must be examined by a practicing veterinarian on the first and tenth
days after the bite and a written report sent to the Animal Warden.
      (4)   Confinement may be on the premises of the owner as provided in
division (a)(3) of this section if there have been no laboratory confirmed
cases of rabies during the past 12 months within the county.
      (5)   In the case of stray animals, or in the case of animals whose
ownership is not known, such confinement shall be at the direction of the
Animal Warden. At the end of the ten-day confinement, the animals shall be
examined a second time and a written report sent to the Animal Warden.
      (6)   The owner, upon demand by the Animal Warden, shall forthwith
surrender any animal that has bitten a human being, or that is suspected of
having been exposed to rabies, for supervised confinement, the expense of which
shall be borne by the owner. Such animal may be reclaimed by the owner, if it
is adjudged free of rabies, upon payment of the actual costs incurred for such
confinement.
      (7)   When rabies has been diagnosed in an animal confined for clinical
observation, or when rabies is suspected by a practicing veterinarian, or when
the animal has bitten anyone within ten days and the animal dies while under
such observation, the head of such animal shall be sent to the State Health
Department by the local health authorities for pathological examination and the
proper public health officer shall be notified of reports of human contacts and
the diagnosis.
      (8)   When a positive diagnosis of rabies has been made, the Animal
Warden shall recommend an area-wide quarantine for a period of ten days, during
which all animals must be on a leash. All pets shall be under restraint of the
owner. During such quarantine, no animal shall be taken or shipped from the
city without written permission of the Animal Warden.
      (9)   During the quarantine period and as long afterward as he or she
decides it is necessary to prevent the spread of rabies, the Animal Warden may
require that all dogs that are three months of age and older be vaccinated
against rabies by an accredited veterinarian with a canine rabies vaccine
approved by the Biologics Control Section of the U.S. Department of
Agriculture. The types of approved canine anti-rabies vaccine to be used and
the recognized duration of immunity for each shall be established by any
qualified health officer or veterinarian. All vaccinated dogs shall be
restricted (leashing or confinement on enclosed premises) for 30 days after
vaccination. During the quarantine period, the health officer or veterinarian
shall be empowered to provide for a program of mass immunization by the
establishment of temporary emergency canine rabies vaccination clinics
strategically located throughout the area of health jurisdiction.
      (10)   Dogs bitten by a known rabid animal shall be immediately
destroyed. If the owner is unwilling to destroy the exposed animal, strict
isolation and observation of the animal in the City Animal Shelter or, at the
owner’s option and expense, in a veterinary hospital of his or her choice, for
six months, shall be enforced. If the dog has been previously vaccinated, re-
vaccination and restraint (leashing and confinement) for 30 days shall be
carried out.
      (11)   If additional cases of rabies occur during the period of the
quarantine, such quarantine may be extended for additional six-month periods.
      (12)   No person shall kill or cause to be killed any rabid animal, any
animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies, or any animal biting a human
being, except as herein provided, nor remove any such animal from the city
without written permission from the Animal Warden.
      (13)   The carcass of any animal exposed to rabies shall, upon demand, be
surrendered to the Animal Warden.
      (14)   The Animal Warden shall direct the disposition of any animal found
to be infected with rabies.
      (15)   No person shall fail or refuse to surrender any animal for
quarantine or destruction as required herein when demand is made therefor by
the Animal Warden.
   (b)   Responsibility of physicians and medical practitioners. It shall be
the duty of every physician or other medical practitioner to report to the
Animal Warden or a law enforcement officer within the city the names and
addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with such
other information as will be helpful in rabies control.
   (c)   Responsibilities of veterinarians. It shall be the duty of every
veterinarian to notify the Animal Warden promptly upon presentation of any
suspected rabid animal or any animal presented for quarantine examination. At
the termination of the quarantine, a written report shall be submitted to the
Animal Warden or a law enforcement officer within the city. During the
quarantine period, any animal showing clinical signs of rabies shall be
reported immediately to the Animal Warden.
   (d)   Penalty. Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the
provisions of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 618.12 HUNTING AND TRAPPING REGULATED.
   (a)   The hunting of animals or birds within the territorial limits of the
city is regulated. No person shall hunt, kill or attempt to kill any animals or
birds by use of firearm, bow and arrow, cross bow or any other means that may
endanger the life or safety of persons or cause injury or destruction of
property, except as follows:
      (1)   A law enforcement officer or animal warden in discharge of his or
her duties;
      (2)   Any person authorized by the Police Chief while participating in a
city authorized animal control program;
      (3)   A state licensed nuisance animal trapper or property owner
operating under the authority of an Ohio Division of Wildlife Damage Control
permit and utilizing trapping in accordance with rules and regulations
established by the Police Chief; or
      (4)   Any person participating in a city approved Deer Management
Program.
   (b)   No person shall set or maintain any trap within the municipality,
except under the authority of the owner or lawful occupant of the premises upon
which such trap is set or maintained.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(Ord. 2002-257, passed 10-18-2004)
§ 618.125 SPECIAL PERMITS FOR CULLING EXCESSIVE DEER.
   (a)   Notwithstanding §
618.12, special permits may be issued by the Police Chief with the approval of
the Mayor for culling excessive deer on private or public property by means of
clover traps, nets, captive bolt and sharp shooting provided that the trapping
and removal of the deer is to be done by a city approved Wildlife Management
Specialist or by a licensed nuisance trapper and provided further that an
appropriate permit has already been obtained from the State of Ohio, Division
of Wildlife, and there is compliance with all state and local regulations.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(Ord. 2002-257, passed 10-18-2004)
§ 618.126 INTERFERENCE WITH TAKING WILDLIFE.
   (a)   No person may, for the purpose of hindering or preventing the lawful
taking of wildlife pursuant to the city’s Wildlife Management Program as set
forth in Codified Ordinance §§
618.12 and
618.125 herein, engage in any of the following conduct:
      (1)   Block, obstruct, impede or attempt to block, obstruct or impede a
person lawfully taking wildlife;
      (2)   Erect a barrier with the intent to deny ingress or egress from
areas where wildlife may be lawfully taken;
      (3)   Make or attempt to make unauthorized physical contact with or in
any way interfere with a person lawfully taking wildlife;
      (4)   Engage in or attempt to engage in theft, vandalism or destruction
of personal or real property;
      (5)   Disturb or alter, or attempt to disturb or alter the condition or
authorized placement of personal or real property intended for use in the
lawful taking of wildlife;
      (6)   Enter or remain upon public lands or waters, or upon private lands
or waters without the permission of the owner thereof, or an agent of that
landowner, where wildlife may be lawfully taken; and
      (7)   Make or attempt to make loud noises or gestures; set out or attempt
to set out animal baits, scents, lures or human scent; use any other natural or
artificial visual, aural, olfactory or physical stimuli, or engage in or
attempt to engage in any other similar action or activity in order to disturb,
alarm, drive, attract or affect the behavior of wildlife, or disturb, alarm,
disrupt, annoy or interfere with a person lawfully taking wildlife.
   (b)   There is hereby established a 200-foot buffer zone around any
authorized and designated site being used for an animal or wildlife control
program as established in §§
618.12 and
618.125. No person shall enter the 200-foot buffer zone during the
implementation of any program as authorized in §§
618.12 and
618.125; provided, however, that the buffer zone authorized herein shall not
extend over any land owned by a private landowner unless such private landowner
has consented to the use of his or her land as an authorized and designated
site.
   (c)   This section shall not apply to a law enforcement officer, game
officer or conservation officer enforcing the laws of the state or any local
ordinance, nor shall it apply to any private landowner, or agent thereof, on
land or waters owned by that private landowner, nor anyone officially
authorized by the city to engage in the city’s Wildlife Management Program.
   (d)   The city and/or the Division of Wildlife may initiate a civil action
in the Court of Common Pleas for injunctive and other relief for any violation
of this section.
   (e)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor of the first degree for each violation.
   (f)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply:
      (1)   TAKING. To hunt, capture, kill, trap, catch, net, possess, collect
or attempt to hunt, capture, kill, trap, catch, net, possess or collect
wildlife.
      (2)   WILDLIFE. Any wild mammal, bird, reptile, amphibian, fish,
shellfish, mollusk, crustacean or other wild animal, or any part, product, egg,
offspring or the dead body or parts thereof.
(Ord. 2005-6, passed 1-18-2005; Ord. 2005-283, passed 12-19-2005)
§ 618.127 FEEDING OF DEER PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall purposely or knowingly feed, cause to be fed, or
provide food for wild white-tail deer in any location where undomesticated
animals can access such food, or through ground-feeding stations, salt licks or
other established mechanisms to feed wild white-tail deer on lands publicly or
privately owned; provided, however, this prohibition shall only apply in the
60-day time period before and during a city-sponsored deer culling program.
   (b)   This section shall not apply to a law enforcement officer, game
officer or conservation officer enforcing the laws of the state or any local
ordinance, nor anyone officially authorized by the city to engage in an animal
control program as provided in §§
618.12 and
618.125.
   (c)   The city and/or the Division of Wildlife may initiate a civil action
in the Court of Common Pleas for injunctive and other relief for any violation
of this section.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree for the first offense and a misdemeanor of the first degree for each
subsequent offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day on
or during which a violation of this ordinance occurs.
(Ord. 2005-280, passed 12-19-2005)
§ 618.13 BIRD SANCTUARY.
   (a)   No person shall trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any
manner any bird or wildfowl, or rob bird nests or wildfowl nests, within the
city, except as allowed by this chapter.
(1964 Code, § 523.03)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(1964 Code, § 523.99)
§ 618.14 NUISANCE CONDITIONS.
   (a)   No person shall keep or harbor any animal or fowl in the municipality
so as to create noxious or offensive odors or unsanitary conditions which are a
menace to the health, comfort or safety of the public.
   (b)   No owner shall allow his or her dog, cat or other domestic animal to
become a public nuisance. Excessive barking, whining or howling, molesting
passersby, chasing vehicles, attacking other domestic animals and damaging
property shall be considered nuisances under this section.
   (c)   Any animal that scratches, digs, urinates or defecates upon any lawn,
tree, shrub, plat, building or other public or private property, other than the
property of the owner or person in charge or control of such animal, is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance. Where the owner or person in charge or
control of such animal immediately removes all feces deposited by such animal
and disposes of the same in a sanitary manner, such nuisance shall be
considered abated.
   (d)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(1964 Code, § 503.13)
§ 618.15 REPORTING ESCAPES (REPEALED).
Editor’s note:
   Section 618.15 was repealed as part of the 2012 recodification of these
Codified Ordinances because substantially equivalent state law (Ohio
R.C.2927.21) was repealed by the Ohio General Assembly.
§ 618.16 ANIMALS AT LARGE.
   (a)   The owner of a dog or cat shall keep his or her dog or cat under
restraint at all times and shall not permit such dog or cat to be at large off
the premises or property of such owner, unless under the control of a competent
person.
   (b)   The owner of a dog shall keep his or her dog on leash under the
control of a competent person at all times that the dog is off the premises of
the property owner and not confined in a cage or motor vehicle.
   (c)   No person, being the owner or keeper of dogs, cats, horses, mules,
cattle, sheep, geese, swine, goats, ducks, turkeys, chickens or other fowl or
animals, shall permit them to run at large upon any public place, or upon any
unenclosed lands other than those owned or lawfully occupied by the owner or
keeper of such fowl or animals.
   (d)   The running at large of any such fowl or animal in or upon any of the
places mentioned in this section is prima-facie evidence that it is running at
large in violation of this section.
   (e)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to law enforcement
officers or the Animal Warden acting in the course and scope of their
employment.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(1964 Code, §§ 503.14, 503.99) (Ord. 1993-90, passed 9-20-1993; Ord. 1994-187,
passed 5-15-1995)
§ 618.17 CONFINEMENT OF CERTAIN DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS.
   (a)   The owner shall confine within a building or secure enclosure every
fierce, dangerous or vicious dog and shall not take such dog out of such
building or secure enclosure unless such dog is securely muzzled.
   (b)   Every female dog in heat shall be kept confined in a building or
secure enclosure, or in a veterinary hospital or boarding kennel, in such
manner that such female dog cannot come in contact with another dog, except for
intentional breeding purposes.
   (c)   Any animal described in divisions (a) and (b) of this section that is
found at large shall be impounded by the Animal Warden and shall not be
redeemed by the owner unless such redemption is authorized by a court having
jurisdiction.
   (d)   The owner shall confine within a building any dog that barks or howls
in a way to disturb the peace or annoy the adjoining neighbors, and if such
confinement does not remedy the annoyance, the owner, upon being notified by
the Animal Warden, shall remove such dog from the city.
   (e)   No dog, cat or other animal that is impounded for being a public
nuisance shall be redeemed unless such redemption is authorized by a court
having jurisdiction.
(1964 Code, § 503.08)
   (f)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(1964 Code, § 503.99)
§ 618.18 DANGEROUS DOGS.
   (a)   (1)   As used in this section, DANGEROUS DOG means and includes:
         A.   Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to
attack unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human
beings or domesticated animals;
         B.   Any dog which attacks a human being or domesticated animal
without provocation; or
         C.   Any dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of
dog fighting or any dog trained for dog fighting.
      (2)   No dog shall be deemed dangerous if it harms or menaces anyone who
has tormented or abused it.
   (b)   No person owning, harboring or having the care or custody of a
dangerous dog shall suffer or permit such dog to go unconfined on the premises
of such person. A dangerous dog is unconfined, as the term is used in this
section, if such dog is not securely confined indoors or confined in a securely
enclosed and locked pen or dog run area upon the premises of such person. Such
pen or dog run area must also have secure sides and a secure top. If the pen or
structure has no bottom secured to the sides, or if the dog is a type which
burrows, the sides must be imbedded into the ground not less than one foot.
Such pen or dog run area must be not closer than six feet from any property
line.
   (c)   No person owning, harboring or having the care or custody of a
dangerous dog shall suffer or permit such dog to go beyond the premises of such
person, unless such dog is securely muzzled and restrained with a chain having
a minimum tensile strength of 300 pounds and not exceeding three feet in
length, and a double collar and double latch. Such dog shall be accompanied by
an adult.
   (d)   No person shall own or harbor any dog for the purpose of fighting, or
train, torment, badger, bait or use any dog for the purpose of causing or
encouraging such dog to unprovoked attacks upon human beings or domesticated
animals.
   (e)   No person shall possess with intent to sell, offer for sale, breed,
buy or attempt to buy, within the city, any dangerous dog.
(Ord. 1987-108, passed 6-15-1987)
   (f)   Penalties under this section shall be as follows.
      (1)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the second degree for a first offense and shall be fined not
less than $100 and not more than $750 or imprisoned not more than 90 days, or
both. The minimum fine provided for in this division (f) shall be mandatory and
shall not be suspended or remitted unless the court finds that the defendant is
indigent.
      (2)   For a second offense, whoever violates any of the provisions of
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined
not less than $200 and not more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than six
months, or both. The minimum fine provided for in this division (f)(2) shall
not be suspended or remitted unless the court finds that the defendant is
indigent.
      (3)   In addition to the penalties set forth in divisions (f)(l) and (f)
(2) of this section, any dangerous dog which attacks a human being or
domesticated animal may be ordered destroyed when, in the court’s judgment,
such dangerous dog represents a continuing threat of harm to human beings or
domesticated animals. The Animal Warden shall be authorized by the court to
deliver such dog to a doctor of veterinary medicine or the Animal Protective
League for the purpose of humanely euthanizing such dog.
(1964 Code, § 503.081(f))
§ 618.19 IMPOUNDING AND DISPOSITION.
   (a)   Generally.
      (1)   Any dog or cat found running at large shall be taken up by the
Animal Warden and impounded in a shelter designated as the city animal shelter,
and there confined in a humane manner. Thereafter, such dog or cat may be
disposed of in a humane manner if not claimed by its owner. Any dog or cat not
claimed by its owner after the expiration of three days may be disposed of at
the discretion of the Animal Warden, except as hereinafter provided in this
chapter.
      (2)   The Animal Warden may transfer title of all animals so held to the
Animal Protective League or the Dog Kennel of Cuyahoga County after the legal
detention period has expired and the animal has not been claimed by its owner.
      (3)   When licensed dogs are found running at large, such dogs need not
be impounded, but the owners of such dogs shall be subject to citation for a
violation of this chapter.
      (4)   Immediately upon impounding dogs or other animals, the Animal
Warden shall make every reasonable effort to notify the owners of such dogs, or
other animals so impounded, and inform such owners of the conditions whereby
they may regain custody of such animals.
      (5)   Animals other than dogs and cats may be impounded when found
running at large within the city and may be disposed of in accordance with this
chapter.
(1964 Code, § 503.04)
   (b)   Redemption.
      (1)   The owner of an impounded animal shall be entitled to resume
possession of such impounded animal, except as hereinafter provided, upon
payment of the impoundment fees set forth herein. Proof of ownership must be
given and may include a license receipt, affidavits of neighbors, a photograph
or other suitable evidence.
      (2)   Any other animal impounded under the provisions of this chapter may
be reclaimed by the owner upon the payment of impoundment fees as provided in
division (c) of this section.
(1964 Code, § 503.05)
   (c)   Fees. Any animal impounded hereunder may be reclaimed as herein
provided upon payment by the owner to the Animal Warden of the sum of $20 for
the first day and $20 for each day thereafter.
(1964 Code, § 503.06)
§ 618.20 LEG-HOLD TRAPS.
   (a)   No person shall set, use or maintain a leg-hold trap on land or water,
for the purpose of taking a wild animal.
   (b)   The prohibitions contained in division (a) hereof shall not apply to
the Animal Warden or persons working under the direction and control of the
Animal Warden.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(1964 Code, § 503.19)
§ 618.21 STABLES (REPEALED).
Editor’s note:
   Section 618.21 was repealed by Ordinance 2004-171, passed August 15, 2005.
Please see the Solon Zoning Code as published separately by the city.
§ 618.22 NONDOMESTIC ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person shall keep or harbor any nondomestic animal, which, for the
purposes of this section, shall include all felines (other than the domestic
house cat), nonhuman primates, bears, wolves, coyotes, foxes, venomous and/or
constricting reptiles, and any cross-breed of such animals which have similar
characteristics of the animals specified herein.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(1964 Code, § 503.07)
§ 618.23 RESTRICTIONS ON DOG OWNERSHIP FOR CERTAIN CONVICTED FELONS.
   (a)   No person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a felony offense of
violence committed on or after May 22, 2012 or a felony violation of any
provision of R.C. Chapter 959, R.C. Chapter 2923 or R.C. Chapter 2925 committed
on or after May 22, 2012 shall knowingly own, possess, have custody of or
reside in a residence with either of the following for a period of three years
commencing either upon the date of release of the person from any period of
incarceration imposed for the offense or violation or, if the person is not
incarcerated for the offense or violation, upon the date of the person’s final
release from the other sanctions imposed for the offense or violation:
      (1)   An unspayed or unneutered dog older than 12 weeks of age;
      (2)   Any dog that has been determined to be a dangerous dog under R.C.
Chapter 955 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (b)   A person described in division (a) of this section shall microchip for
permanent identification any dog owned, possessed by or in the custody of the
person.
   (c)   (1)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any person who is
confined in a correctional institution of the Department of Rehabilitation and
Correction.
      (2)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any person with
respect to any dog that the person owned, possessed, had custody of or resided
in a residence with prior to May 22, 2012.
(R.C. § 955.54)
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 955.99(O))
§ 618.24 SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH AN ANIMAL.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   ANIMAL. Means a nonhuman mammal, bird, reptile, or amphibian,
either dead or alive.
      (2)   OFFENSE. Means a violation of this section or an attempt, in
violation of R.C. § 2923.02, to violate this section.
      (3)   OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 959.132.
      (4)   SEXUAL CONDUCT. Means either of the following committed for the
purpose of sexual gratification:
         A.   Any act done between a person and animal that involves contact of
the penis of one and the vulva of the other, the penis of one and the penis of
the other, the penis of one and the anus of the other, the mouth of one and the
penis of the other, the mouth of one and the anus of the other, the vulva of
one and the vulva of the other, the mouth of one and the vulva of the other,
any other contact between a reproductive organ of one and a reproductive organ
of the other, or any other insertion of a reproductive organ of one into an
orifice of the other;
         B.   Without a bona fide veterinary or animal husbandry purpose to do
so, the insertion, however slight, of any part of a person’s body or any
instrument, apparatus, or other object into the vaginal, anal, or reproductive
opening of an animal.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly engage in sexual conduct with an animal or
knowingly possess, sell, or purchase an animal with the intent that it be
subjected to sexual conduct.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly organize, promote, aid, or abet in the
conduct of an act involving any sexual conduct with an animal.
(R.C. § 959.21)
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
second degree. In addition, the court may order the offender to forfeit the
animal or livestock and may provide for its disposition including but not
limited to the sale of the animal or livestock. If an animal or livestock is
forfeited and sold pursuant to this division, the proceeds from the sale first
shall be applied to pay the expenses incurred with regard to the care of the
animal from the time it was taken from the custody of the former owner. The
balance of the proceeds from the sale, if any, shall be paid to the former
owner of the animal.
(R.C. § 959.99(D))
      (2)   If a court has reason to believe that a person who is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of this section suffers from a mental or
emotional disorder that contributed to the violation, the court may impose as a
community control sanction or as a condition of probation a requirement that
the offender undergo psychological evaluation or counseling. The court shall
order the offender to pay the costs of the evaluation or counseling.
(R.C. § 959.99(E)(7))
CHAPTER 624: DRUGS
Section
   
624.01   Definitions
   
624.02   Adult use cannabis control; limitations on conduct by individuals
   
624.025   Cultivation of marihuana
   
624.03   Drug possession offenses
   
624.04   Possession of drug abuse instruments
   
624.05   Permitting drug abuse
   
624.06   Deception to obtain a dangerous drug (Repealed)
   
624.07   Abusing harmful intoxicants
   
624.073   Improperly dispensing or distributing nitrous oxide
   
624.076   Possessing nitrous oxide in motor vehicles
   
624.08   Illegal dispensing of drug samples
   
624.09   Possession, sale and disposal of hypodermics
   
624.10   Evidence
   
624.11   Double jeopardy
   
624.12   Controlled substance schedules
   
624.13   Controlled substance or prescription labels
   
624.14   Possession, manufacture and sale of paraphernalia
   
624.15   Counterfeit controlled substances
   
624.16   Pseudoephedrine sales
   
624.17   Sale of pure caffeine product
   
624.18   Sale of dextromethorphan
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Alcoholic beverages, see
Ch. 612
   Administration of epinephrine, exemption from prosecution, see R.C. §
2925.64
   Disorderly conduct while voluntarily intoxicated, see §
648.04
   Driving or physical control while under the influence, see §
434.01
   Effect of voluntary intoxication on criminal liability, see §
606.07
   Intoxicated pedestrians, see §
416.10
   Placing harmful substance or objects in food or confection, see §
636.16
   Treatment of drug dependent persons in lieu of conviction, see R.C. §
2951.041
   Using weapons while intoxicated, see §
672.03
§ 624.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words,
terms and phrases and their derivatives used in this chapter which are not
defined in this section shall have the meanings given to them in the Ohio
Revised Code.
   (a)   ADMINISTER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (b)   ADULTERATE. To cause a drug to be adulterated as described in R.C. §
3715.63.
   (c)   ALCOHOL AND DRUG ADDICTION SERVICES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5119.01.
   (d)   BULK AMOUNT. Of a controlled substance means any of the following:
      (1)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in
Schedule I, Schedule II, or Schedule III, with the exception of any controlled
substance analog, marihuana, cocaine, L.S.D., heroin, any fentanyl-related
compound, and hashish and except as provided in division (2), (5), or (6) of
this definition, whichever of the following is applicable:
         A.   An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams or 25 unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
a Schedule I opiate or opium derivative;
         B.   An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams of a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of raw or gum opium;
         C.   An amount equal to or exceeding 30 grams or ten unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
a Schedule I hallucinogen other than tetrahydrocannabinol or lysergic acid
amide, or a Schedule I stimulant or depressant;
         D.   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five times the
maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II opiate or opium
derivative;
         E.   An amount equal to or exceeding five grams or ten unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
phencyclidine;
         F.   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule II stimulant that is in a final dosage form
manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
(21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the federal drug abuse control laws,
as defined in this section, that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II
depressant substance or a Schedule II hallucinogenic substance;
         G.   An amount equal to or exceeding three grams of a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule
II stimulant, or any of its salts or isomers, that is not in a final dosage
form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the federal drug abuse
control laws;
      (2)   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III or IV substance other than an anabolic
steroid or a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;
      (3)   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;
      (4)   An amount equal to or exceeding 250 milliliters or 250 grams of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
a Schedule V substance;
      (5)   An amount equal to or exceeding 200 solid dosage units, 16 grams,
or 16 milliliters of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III anabolic steroid;
      (6)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is a
combination of a fentanyl-related compound and any other compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V,
if the defendant is charged with a violation of R.C. § 2925.11 and the
sentencing provisions set forth in R.C. § 2925.11(C)(10)(b) and (C)(11) will
not apply regarding the defendant and the violation, the bulk amount of the
controlled substance for purposes of the violation is the amount specified in
division (1), (2), (3), (4), or (5) of this definition for the other Schedule
III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V controlled substance that is combined with the
fentanyl-related compound.
   (e)   CERTIFIED GRIEVANCE COMMITTEE. A duly constituted and organized
committee of the Ohio State Bar Association or of one or more local bar
associations of the state that complies with the criteria set forth in Rule V,
Section 6 of the Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.
   (f)   COCAINE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A cocaine salt, isomer, or derivative, a salt of a cocaine isomer
or derivative, or the base form of cocaine.
      (2)   Coca leaves or a salt, compound, derivative, or preparation of coca
leaves, including ecgonine, a salt, isomer, or derivative of ecgonine, or a
salt of an isomer or derivative of ecgonine.
      (3)   A salt, compound, derivative, or preparation of a substance
identified in division (1) or (2) of this definition that is chemically
equivalent to or identical with any of those substances, except that the
substances shall not include decocainized coca leaves or extraction of coca
leaves if the extractions do not contain cocaine or ecgonine.
   (g)   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A JUVENILE. An offense is “committed in
the vicinity of a juvenile” if the offender commits the offense within 100 feet
of a juvenile or within the view of a  juvenile, regardless of whether the
offender knows the age of the juvenile, whether the offender knows the offense
is being committed within 100 feet of or within view of the juvenile, or
whether the juvenile actually views the commission of the offense.
   (h)   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SCHOOL. An offense is “committed in the
vicinity of a school” if the offender commits the offense on school premises,
in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of any school
premises, regardless of whether the offender knows the offense is being
committed on school premises, in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the
boundaries of any school premises.
   (i)   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SUBSTANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER
OR A RECOVERING ADDICT. An offense is “committed in the vicinity of a substance
addiction services provider or a recovering addict” if either of the following
apply:
      (1)   The offender commits the offense on the premises of a substance
addiction services provider’s facility, including a facility licensed prior to
June 29, 2019, under R.C. § 5119.391 to provide methadone treatment or an
opioid treatment program licensed on or after that date under R.C. § 5119.37,
or within 500 feet of the premises of a substance addiction services provider’s
facility and the offender knows or should know that the offense is being
committed within the vicinity of the substance addiction services provider’s
facility.
      (2)   The offender sells, offers to sell, delivers, or distributes the
controlled substance or controlled substance analog to a person who is
receiving treatment at the time of the commission of the offense, or received
treatment within 30 days prior to the commission of the offense, from a
substance addiction services provider and the offender knows that the person is
receiving or received that treatment.
   (j)   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (k)   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE ANALOG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
3719.01.
   (l)   COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any drug that bears, or whose container or label bears, a
trademark, trade name, or other identifying mark used without authorization of
the owner of rights to the trademark, trade name, or identifying mark.
      (2)   Any unmarked or unlabeled substance that is represented to be a
controlled substance manufactured, processed, packed, or distributed by a
person other than the person that manufactured, processed, packed, or
distributed it.
      (3)   Any substance that is represented to be a controlled substance but
is not a controlled substance or is a different controlled substance.
      (4)   Any substance other than a controlled substance that a reasonable
person would believe to be a controlled substance because of its similarity in
shape, size, and color, or its markings, labeling, packaging, distribution, or
the price for which it is sold or offered for sale.
   (m)   CULTIVATE. Includes planting, watering, fertilizing or tilling.
   (n)   DANGEROUS DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   (o)   DECEPTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   (p)   DISCIPLINARY COUNSEL. The disciplinary counsel appointed by the Board
of Commissioners on Grievances and Discipline of the Ohio Supreme Court under
the Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.
   (q)   DISPENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (r)   DISTRIBUTE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (s)   DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   (t)   DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2913.02(A) that constitutes theft of drugs,
or any violation of R.C. § 2925.02, 2925.03, 2925.04, 2925.041, 2925.05,
2925.06, 2925.11, 2925.12, 2925.13, 2925.22, 2925.23, 2925.24, 2925.31,
2925.32, 2925.36, or 2925.37.
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former law of a municipality, state
or any other state or of the United States, that is substantially equivalent to
any section listed in division (1) of this definition.
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former law of a municipality, state
or any other state, or of the United States, of which planting, cultivating,
harvesting, processing, making, manufacturing, producing, shipping,
transporting, delivering, acquiring, possessing, storing, distributing,
dispensing, selling, inducing another to use, administering to another, using,
or otherwise dealing with a controlled substance is an element.
      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing or attempting to commit, any offense under division (1), (2), or (3)
of this definition.
   (u)   DRUG OF ABUSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.
   (v)   FELONY DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Any drug abuse offense that would
constitute a felony under the laws of this state, any other state, or the
United States.
   (w)   FENTANYL-RELATED COMPOUND. Any of the following:
      (1)   Fentanyl;
      (2)   Alpha-methylfentanyl (N-[1-(alpha-methyl-beta-phenyl)ethyl-4-
piperidyl] propionanilide; 1-(1-methyl-2-phenylethyl)-4-(N-propanilido)
piperidine);
      (3)   Alpha-methylthiofentanyl (N-[1-methyl-2-(2-thienyl)ethyl-4-
piperidinyl]-N- phenylpropanamide);
      (4)   Beta-hydroxyfentanyl (N-[1-(2-hydroxy-2-phenethyl-4-piperidinyl]-N-
phenylpropanamide);
      (5)   Beta-hydroxy-3-methylfentanyl (other name: N-[1-(2-hydroxy-2-
phenethyl)-3- methyl-4-piperidinyl]-N-phenylpropanamide);
      (6)   3-methylfentanyl (N-[3-methyl-1-(2-phenylethyl)-4-piperidyl]-N-
phenylpropanamide);
      (7)   3-methylthiofentanyl (N-[3-methyl-1-[2-(thienyl)ethyl]-4-
piperidinyl]-– phenylpropanamide);
      (8)   Para-fluorofentanyl (N-(4-fluorophenyl)-N-[1-(2-phenethyl)-4-
piperidinyl]propanamide;
      (9)   Thiofentanyl (N-phenyl-N-[1-(2-thienyl)ethyl-4-piperidinyl]-
propanamide;
      (10)   Alfentanil;
      (11)   Carfentanil;
      (12)   Remifentanil;
      (13)   Sufentanil;
      (14)   Acetyl-alpha-methylfentanyl (N-[1-(1-methyl-2-phenethyl)-4-
piperidinyl]-N- phenylacetamide); and
      (15)   Any compound that meets all of the following fentanyl
pharmacophore requirements to bind at the mu receptor, as identified by a
report from an established forensic laboratory, including acetylfentanyl,
furanylfentanyl, valerylfentanyl, butyrylfentanyl, isobutyrylfentanyl, 4-
methoxybutyrylfentanyl, para-fluorobutyrylfentanyl, acrylfentanyl, and ortho-
fluorofentanyl:
         A.   A chemical scaffold consisting of both of the following:
            1.   A five, six, or seven member ring structure containing a
nitrogen, whether or not further substituted;
            2.   An attached nitrogen to the ring, whether or not that nitrogen
is enclosed in a ring structure, including an attached aromatic ring or other
lipophilic group to that nitrogen.
         B.   A polar functional group attached to the chemical scaffold,
including but not limited to a hydroxyl, ketone, amide, or ester;
         C.   An alkyl or aryl substitution off the ring nitrogen of the
chemical scaffold; and
         D.   The compound has not been approved for medical use by the United
States food and drug administration.
   (x)   HARMFUL INTOXICANT. Does not include beer or intoxicating liquor, but
means any of the following:
      (1)   Any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance the gas, fumes, or
vapor of which when inhaled can induce intoxication, excitement, giddiness,
irrational behavior, depression, stupefaction, paralysis, unconsciousness,
asphyxiation, or other harmful physiological effects, and includes but is not
limited to any of the following:
         A.   Any volatile organic solvent, plastic cement, model cement,
fingernail polish remover, lacquer thinner, cleaning fluid, gasoline, or other
preparation containing a volatile organic solvent.
         B.   Any aerosol propellant.
         C.   Any fluorocarbon refrigerant.
         D.   Any anesthetic gas.
      (2)   Gamma Butyrolactone;
      (3)   1,4 Butanediol.
   (y)   HASHISH.
      (1)   A resin or a preparation of a resin to which both of the following
apply:
         A.   It is contained in or derived from any part of the plant of the
genus cannabis, whether in solid form or in a liquid concentrate, liquid
extract, or liquid distillate form.
         B.   It has a delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol concentration of more than
0.3%.
      (2)   The term does not include a hemp byproduct in the possession of a
licensed hemp processor under R.C. Chapter 928, provided that the hemp
byproduct is being produced, stored, and disposed of in accordance with rules
adopted under R.C. § 928.03.
   (z)   HYPODERMIC. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (aa)   JUVENILE. A person under 18 years of age.
   (bb)   LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS. Has the
same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   (cc)   L.S.D. Lysergic acid diethylamide.
   (dd)   MAJOR DRUG OFFENDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   (ee)   MANDATORY PRISON TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   (ff)   MANUFACTURE. To plant, cultivate, harvest, process, make, prepare, or
otherwise engage in any part of the production of a drug, by propagation,
extraction, chemical synthesis, or compounding, or any combination of the same,
and includes packaging, repackaging, labeling, and other activities incident to
production.
   (gg)   MANUFACTURER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (hh)   MARIHUANA. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01, except that it
does not include hashish.
   (ii)   METHAMPHETAMINE. Methamphetamine, any salt, isomer, or salt of an
isomer of methamphetamine, or any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance
containing methamphetamine or any salt, isomer, or salt of an isomer of
methamphetamine.
   (jj)   MINOR DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSE. Either of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2925.11 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996,
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   A violation of R.C. § 2925.11 as it exists on and after July 1,
1996, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that is a misdemeanor
or a felony of the fifth degree.
   (kk)   OFFICIAL WRITTEN ORDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (ll)   PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (mm)   PERSON WITH A DRUG DEPENDENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
3719.011.
   (nn)   PHARMACIST. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (oo)   PHARMACY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (pp)   POSSESS or POSSESSION. Having control over a thing or substance but
may not be inferred solely from mere access to the thing or substance through
ownership or occupation of the premises upon which the thing or substance is
found.
   (qq)   PREMISES OF A SUBSTANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER'S FACILITY. Means
the parcel of real property on which any substance addiction service provider’s
facility is situated.
   (rr)   PRESCRIPTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   (ss)   PRESUMPTION FOR A PRISON TERM or PRESUMPTION THAT A PRISON TERM SHALL
BE IMPOSED. A presumption as described in R.C. § 2929.13(D) that a prison term
is a necessary sanction for a felony in order to comply with the purposes and
principles of sentencing under R.C. § 2929.11.
   (tt)   PROFESSIONAL LICENSE. Any license, permit, certificate, registration,
qualification, admission, temporary license, temporary permit, temporary
certificate, or temporary registration that is described in R.C. § 2925.01(W)
(1) through (W)(37) and that qualifies a person as a professionally licensed
person.
   (uu)   PROFESSIONALLY LICENSED PERSON. Any of the following:
      (1)   A person who has received a certificate or temporary certificate as
a certified public accountant or who has registered as a public accountant
under R.C. Chapter 4701 and who holds an Ohio permit issued under that chapter;
      (2)   A person who holds a certificate of qualification to practice
architecture issued or renewed and registered under R.C. Chapter 4703;
      (3)   A person who is registered as a landscape architect under R.C.
Chapter 4703 or who holds a permit as a landscape architect issued under that
chapter;
      (4)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4707;
      (5)   A person who has been issued a barber's license, barber
instructor's license, assistant barber instructor's license, or independent
contractor's license under R.C. Chapter 4709;
      (6)   A person licensed and regulated to engage in the business of a debt
pooling company by a legislative authority, under authority of R.C. Chapter
4710;
      (7)   A person who has been issued a cosmetologist's license, hair
designer's license, manicurist's license, esthetician's license, natural hair
stylist's license, advanced license to practice cosmetology, advanced license
to practice hair design, advanced license to practice manicuring, advanced
license to practice esthetics, advanced license to practice natural hair
styling, cosmetology instructor's license, hair design instructor's license,
manicurist instructor's license, esthetics instructor's license, natural hair
style instructor's license, independent contractor's license, or tanning
facility permit under R.C. Chapter 4713;
      (8)   A person who has been issued a license to practice dentistry, a
general anesthesia permit, a conscious sedation permit, a limited resident’s
license, a limited teaching license, a dental hygienist’s license, or a dental
hygienist’s teacher’s certificate under R.C. Chapter 4715;
      (9)   A person who has been issued an embalmer’s license, a funeral
director’s license, a funeral home license, or a crematory license, or who has
been registered for an embalmer’s or funeral director’s apprenticeship under
R.C. Chapter 4717;
      (10)   A person who has been licensed as a registered nurse or practical
nurse, or who has been issued a certificate for the practice of nurse-midwifery
under R.C. Chapter 4723;
      (11)   A person who has been licensed to practice optometry or to engage
in optical dispensing under R.C. Chapter 4725;
      (12)   A person licensed to act as a pawnbroker under R.C. Chapter 4727;
      (13)   A person licensed to act as a precious metals dealer under R.C.
Chapter 4728;
      (14)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 as a pharmacist or
pharmacy intern or registered under that chapter as a registered pharmacy
technician, certified pharmacy technician, or pharmacy technician trainee;
      (15)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 as a manufacturer of
dangerous drugs, outsourcing facility, third-party logistics provider,
repackager of dangerous drugs, wholesale distributor of dangerous drugs, or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs;
      (16)   A person who is authorized to practice as a physician assistant
under R.C. Chapter 4730;
      (17)   A person who has been issued a license to practice medicine and
surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery, or podiatric medicine and surgery
under R.C. Chapter 4731 or has been issued a certificate to practice a limited
branch of medicine under that chapter;
      (18)   A person licensed as a psychologist, independent school
psychologist, or school psychologist under R.C. Chapter 4732;
      (19)   A person registered to practice the profession of engineering or
surveying under R.C. Chapter 4733;
      (20)   A person who has been issued a license to practice chiropractic
under R.C. Chapter 4734;
      (21)   A person licensed to act as a real estate broker or real estate
salesperson under R.C. Chapter 4735;
      (22)   A person registered as a registered environmental health
specialist under R.C. Chapter 3776;
      (23)   A person licensed to operate or maintain a junkyard under R.C.
Chapter 4737;
      (24)   A person who has been issued a motor vehicle salvage dealer’s
license under R.C. Chapter 4738;
      (25)   A person who has been licensed to act as a steam engineer under
R.C. Chapter 4739;
      (26)   A person who has been issued a license or temporary permit to
practice veterinary medicine or any of its branches, or who is registered as a
graduate animal technician under R.C. Chapter 4741;
      (27)   A person who has been issued a hearing aid dealer’s or fitter’s
license or trainee permit under R.C. Chapter 4747;
      (28)   A person who has been issued a class A, class B, or class C
license or who has been registered as an investigator or security guard
employee under R.C. Chapter 4749;
      (29)   A person licensed to practice as a nursing home administrator
under R.C. Chapter 4751;
      (30)   A person licensed to practice as a speech-language pathologist or
audiologist under R.C. Chapter 4753;
      (31)   A person issued a license as an occupational therapist or physical
therapist under R.C. Chapter 4755;
      (32)   A person who is licensed as a licensed professional clinical
counselor, licensed professional counselor, social worker, independent social
worker, independent marriage and family therapist, or marriage and family
therapist, or registered as a social work assistant under R.C. Chapter 4757;
      (33)   A person issued a license to practice dietetics under R.C. Chapter
4759;
      (34)   A person who has been issued a license or limited permit to
practice respiratory therapy under R.C. Chapter 4761;
      (35)   A person who has been issued a real estate appraiser certificate
under R.C. Chapter 4763;
      (36)   A person who has been issued a home inspector license under R.C.
Chapter 4764;
      (37)   A person who has been admitted to the bar by order of the Ohio
Supreme Court in compliance with its prescribed and published rules.
   (vv)   PUBLIC PREMISES. Any hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall,
or other place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort.
   (ww)   SALE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (xx)   SAMPLE DRUG. A drug or pharmaceutical preparation that would be
hazardous to health or safety if used without the supervision of a licensed
health professional authorized to prescribe drugs, or a drug of abuse, and
that, at one time, had been placed in a container plainly marked as a sample by
a manufacturer.
   (yy)   SCHEDULE I, SCHEDULE II, SCHEDULE III, SCHEDULE IV or SCHEDULE V.
Have the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (zz)   SCHOOL. Any school operated by a board of education, any community
school established under R.C. Chapter 3314, or any nonpublic school for which
the Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum standards under R.C.
§ 3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities or
training provided by the school is being conducted at the time a criminal
offense is committed.
   (aaa)   SCHOOL BUILDING. Any building in which any of the instruction,
extracurricular activities, or training provided by a school is conducted,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training
provided by the school is being conducted in the school building at the time a
criminal offense is committed.
   (bbb)   SCHOOL PREMISES. Either of the following:
      (1)   The parcel of real property on which any school is situated,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training
provided by the school is being conducted on the premises at the time a
criminal offense is committed.
      (2)   Any other parcel of real property that is owned or leased by a
board of education of a school, the governing authority of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314, or the governing body of a nonpublic
school for which the Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum
standards under R.C. § 3301.07 and on which some of the instruction,
extracurricular activities or training of the school is conducted, whether or
not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training provided by the
school is being conducted on the parcel of real property at the time a criminal
offense is committed.
   (ccc)   STANDARD PHARMACEUTICAL REFERENCE MANUAL. The current edition, with
cumulative changes if any, of references that are approved by the State Board
of Pharmacy.
   (ddd)   SUBSTANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER. Means an agency, association,
corporation or other legal entity, individual, or program that provides one or
more of the following at a facility:
      (1)   Either alcohol addiction services, or drug addiction services, or
both such services that are certified by the Ohio Director of Mental Health and
Addiction Services under R.C. § 5119.36;
      (2)   Recovery supports that are related to either alcohol addiction
services, or drug addiction services, or both such services and paid for with
federal, state, or local funds administered by the Ohio Department of Mental
Health and Addiction Services or a board of alcohol, drug addiction, and mental
health services.
   (eee)   UNIT DOSE. An amount or unit or a compound, mixture, or preparation
containing a controlled substance that is separately identifiable and in a form
that indicates that it is the amount or unit by which the controlled substance
is separately administered to or taken by an individual.
   (fff)   WHOLESALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
(R.C. § 2925.01)
§ 624.02 ADULT USE CANNABIS CONTROL; LIMITATIONS ON CONDUCT BY INDIVIDUALS.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780 and notwithstanding
any conflicting provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code, an adult use
consumer, may do the following:
      (1)   Use adult use cannabis;
      (2)   Possess, transfer without remuneration to another adult consumer,
or transport adult use cannabis, subject to division (b) of this section; and
      (3)   Purchase adult use cannabis from an adult use dispensary per day in
amounts that do not exceed the possession limits set forth in division (b)(1)
of this section.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3796:
      (1)   The amount of cannabis that may be possessed by an adult use
consumer shall not exceed:
         A.   Two and one-half ounces of adult use cannabis in any form except
adult use extract; and
         B.   Fifteen grams of adult use cannabis in the form of adult use
extract.
      (2)   The amount of cannabis that may be transferred by an adult use
consumer without remuneration and not advertised or promoted to the public
shall not exceed:
         A.   Two and one-half ounces of adult use cannabis in any form except
adult use extract; and
         B.   Fifteen grams of adult use cannabis in the form of adult use
extract.
      (3)   The amount of cannabis that may be transported by an adult use
consumer shall not exceed:
         A.   Two and one-half ounces of adult use cannabis in any form except
adult use extract; and
         B.   Fifteen grams of adult use cannabis in the form of adult use
extract.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780, an adult use
consumer shall not be subject to arrest, criminal prosecution, or civil penalty
for engaging in any of the activities authorized under R.C. Chapter 3780,
including:
      (1)   Obtaining, using, possessing, or transporting adult use cannabis;
      (2)   Performing conduct authorized under R.C. § 3780.29;
      (3)   Acquiring, possessing, using, purchasing, manufacturing, selling,
or transporting paraphernalia; and
      (4)   Assisting another adult use consumer, or allowing property to be
used, in any of the acts authorized by R.C. Chapter 3780.
   (d)   (1)   An individual is prohibited from operating a vehicle, motor
vehicle, streetcar, trackless trolley, bike, watercraft, or aircraft while
using adult use cannabis or while under the influence of adult use cannabis and
is subject to R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance
for any violation of this division.
      (2)   An individual is prohibited from smoking, vaporizing, or using any
other combustible adult use cannabis product while in a vehicle, motor vehicle,
streetcar, trackless trolley, bike, watercraft, or aircraft and is subject to
R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for any
violation of this division.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780, no individual under
21 years of age shall knowingly show or give false information concerning the
individual's name, age, or other identification for the purpose of purchasing
adult use cannabis from an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C. Chapter
3780.
   (f)   Nothing in R.C. Chapter 3780 is intended to permit the transfer or
sale of adult use cannabis, with or without remuneration, to an individual
under 21 years of age, or to allow an individual under 21 years of age to
purchase, possess, use, process, transport, or cultivate cannabis except where
authorized by R.C. Chapter 3796.
   (g)   It is unlawful for any parent or guardian to knowingly permit their
residence, any other private property under their control, or any vehicle,
conveyance, or watercraft under their control to be used by an invitee of the
parent's child or the guardian's ward, if the invitee is under 21 years of age,
in a manner that constitutes a violation of R.C. Chapter 3780.
      (1)   A parent or guardian is deemed to have knowingly permitted their
residence, any other private property under their control, or any vehicle,
conveyance, or watercraft under their control to be used in violation of R.C.
Chapter 3780 if they knowingly authorize or permit consumption of cannabis by
underage invitees.
      (2)   Where the residence or other property has an owner and a tenant or
lessee, the trier of fact may infer that the residence or other property is
occupied only by the tenant or lessee.
(R.C. § 3780.36)
   (h)   Penalties.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3796, R.C. § 2925.11
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall apply when an adult use
consumer possesses an amount of cannabis greater than the limits set forth in
division (b)(1) of this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780, an adult use
consumer who uses adult use cannabis in public areas, or who violates division
(d)(2) of this section as a passenger, is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (3)   A.   An individual under 21 years of age who knowingly shows or
gives false information concerning the individual's name, age, or other
identification for the purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining adult use
cannabis from an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C. Chapter 3780 is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If, in committing a first
violation, the offender presented to an adult use dispensary licensed under
R.C. Chapter 3780 a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver's license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver's
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $250 and not
more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more
than six months.
         B.   On a second violation in which, for the second time, the offender
presented to an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C. Chapter 3780 a false,
fictitious, or altered identification card, a false or fictitious driver's
license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver's license issued by any
state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree and shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, and
may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months. The
court also may impose a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's or
commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from
the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7). The court, in lieu of suspending
the offender's temporary instruction permit, probationary driver's license, or
driver's license, instead may order the offender to perform a determinate
number of hours of community service, with the court determining the actual
number of hours and the nature of the community service the offender shall
perform.
         C.   On a third or subsequent violation in which, for the third or
subsequent time, the offender presented to an adult use dispensary licensed
under R.C. Chapter 3780 a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a
false or fictitious driver's license purportedly issued by any state, or a
driver's license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than
$500 nor more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of
not more than six months. Except as provided in this division, the court also
may impose a class six suspension of the offender's driver's or commercial
driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6), and the court may order that the suspension
or denial remain in effect until the offender attains the age of 21 years. The
court, in lieu of suspending the offender's temporary instruction permit,
probationary driver's license, or driver's license, instead may order the
offender to perform a determinate number of hours of community service, with
the court determining the actual number of hours and the nature of the
community service the offender shall perform.
      (4)   An individual who is under 21 years of age and who solicits another
individual to purchase adult use cannabis from an adult use dispensary licensed
under R.C. Chapter 3780 is guilty of:
         A.   For a first violation, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; and
         B.   For a second or subsequent violation, a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
      (5)   An employee or agent of an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C.
Chapter 3780 who knowingly sells cannabis to an individual under 21 years of
age is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (6)   Any individual who violates R.C. § 3780.10(A), or R.C. § 3780.29
(F), is guilty of the illegal trafficking in drugs under R.C. § 2925.03 and the
illegal manufacture of drugs under R.C. § 2925.04.
      (7)   Any individual who violates division (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this
section guilty of the illegal trafficking in drugs under R.C. § 2925.03.
      (8)   Any individual who violates R.C. § 3780.20(B) is guilty of illegal
dispensing of drug samples under R.C. § 2925.36 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
      (9)   A.   An individual who violates division (g) of this section is
guilty of:
            1.   For a first violation, a misdemeanor of the third degree; and
            2.   For a second or subsequent violation, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
         B.   If a violation of division (g) of this section directly or
indirectly results in great bodily harm or death to any individual, the
individual violating division (g) is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 3780.99)
§ 624.025 CULTIVATION OF MARIHUANA.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cultivate marihuana.
   (b)   This section does not apply to any person listed in R.C. § 2925.03(B)
(1), (B)(2) or (B)(3), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, to
the extent and under the circumstances described in that division.
   (c)   Whoever commits a violation of division (a) of this section is guilty
of illegal cultivation of marihuana.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in the following divisions, illegal
cultivation of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor or, if the offense was
committed in the vicinity of a school or in the vicinity of a juvenile, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   If the amount of marihuana involved equals or exceeds 100 grams but
is less than 200 grams, illegal cultivation of marihuana is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree or, if the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school
or in the vicinity of a juvenile, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   If the amount of marihuana involved equals or exceeds 200 grams,
illegal cultivation of marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (d)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section
does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s criminal
record, including any inquiries contained in any application for employment,
license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s
appearance as a witness.
(R.C. § 2925.04(A), (B), (C)(5), (G))
§ 624.03 DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly obtain, possess or use a controlled
substance.
   (b)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   Manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to
prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies and other persons whose
conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731
and 4741;
      (2)   If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any person who is
conducting or participating in a research project involving the use of an
anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the United States Food and
Drug Administration;
      (3)   Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes, dispenses or
administers for livestock or other nonhuman species an anabolic steroid that is
expressly intended for administration through implants to livestock or other
nonhuman species and approved for that purpose under the Federal Food, Drug and
Cosmetic Act, and is sold, offered for sale, prescribed, dispensed or
administered for that purpose in accordance with that Act; or
      (4)   Any person who obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of one of the
following:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (c)(2), (c)(3), (c)(4)
and (c)(5), if the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation or substance included in Schedule I or II of R.C. § 3719.41, or is
cocaine, L.S.D., heroin or a compound, mixture or preparation containing such
drugs, possession of drugs is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law;
      (2)   A.   If the drug involved is a compound, mixture, preparation or
substance included in Schedule III, IV or V of R.C. § 3719.41, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of possession of drugs.
         B.   The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows.
Except as otherwise provided in the following division, possession of drugs is
a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender previously has been
convicted of a drug abuse offense, it is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the drug involved in the violation is marihuana, drug abuse is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(Ord. 1998-181, passed 9-24-1998)
Statutory reference:
   Possession of controlled substances, see R.C. § 2925.11
§ 624.04 POSSESSION OF DRUG ABUSE INSTRUMENTS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make, obtain, possess or use any instrument,
article or thing the customary and primary purpose of which is for the
administration or use of a dangerous drug, other than marihuana, when the
instrument involved is a hypodermic or syringe, whether or not of crude or
extemporized manufacture or assembly, and the instrument, article or thing
involved has been used by the offender to unlawfully administer or use a
dangerous drug, other than marihuana, or to prepare a dangerous drug, other
than marihuana, for unlawful administration or use.
   (b)   (1)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies
and other persons whose conduct was in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719,
4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731 and 4741.
      (2)   Division (B)(2) of R.C. § 2925.11 applies with respect to a
violation of this section when a person seeks or obtains medical assistance for
another person who is experiencing a drug overdose, a person experiences a drug
overdose and seeks medical assistance for that overdose, or a person is the
subject of another person seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that
overdose.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing drug abuse
instruments, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a drug abuse offense, violation of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   (1)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a
violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more than five years
the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit. However, if
the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or the law of another
state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the
violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit for not more than five years. If the offender is a
professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction imposed for a
violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply with R.C. §
2925.38.
      (2)   A.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         B.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (d)(2) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.12)
§ 624.05 PERMITTING DRUG ABUSE.
   (a)   No person who is the owner, operator or person in charge of a
locomotive, watercraft, aircraft or other vehicle, as defined in R.C. §
4501.01, shall knowingly permit the vehicle to be used for the commission of a
felony drug abuse offense.
   (b)   No person, who is the owner, lessee or occupant, or who has custody,
control or supervision of premises, or real estate, including vacant land,
shall knowingly permit his or her premises, or real estate, including vacant
land, to be used for the commission of a felony drug abuse offense by another
person.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting drug abuse.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(2) of this section, permitting
drug abuse is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Permitting drug abuse is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the felony drug abuse offense in question is a
violation of R.C. § 2925.02, 2925.03, or 2925.04, or if the felony drug abuse
offense in question is a violation of R.C. § 2925.041 and the offender had
actual knowledge, at the time the offender permitted the vehicle, premises, or
real estate to be used as described in division (a) or (b) of this section,
that the person who assembled or possessed the chemicals in question in
violation of R.C. § 2925.041 had assembled or possessed them with the intent to
manufacture a controlled substance in Schedule I or Schedule II in violation of
R.C. § 2925.04.
   (d)   Any premises or real estate that is permitted to be used in violation
of division (b) of this section constitutes a nuisance subject to abatement
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2925.13(A) - (C), (F))
§ 624.06 DECEPTION TO OBTAIN A DANGEROUS DRUG (REPEALED).
Editor’s note:
   Section 624.06 was repealed as part of the 1992 updating and revision of
these Codified Ordinances because a violation of substantially equivalent state
law (R.C. § 2925.22) was made a felony by the Ohio General Assembly by Am. Sub.
H.B. No. 615, effective March 27, 1991.
§ 624.07 ABUSING HARMFUL INTOXICANTS.
   (a)   Except for lawful research, clinical, medical, dental or veterinary
purposes, no person, with purpose to induce intoxication or similar
physiological effects, shall obtain, possess or use a harmful intoxicant.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of abusing harmful
intoxicants, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a drug abuse offense, abusing harmful intoxicants is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (c)   (1)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a
violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more than five years
the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit. However, if
the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or the law of another
state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the
violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit for not more than five years. If the offender is a
professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction imposed for a
violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply with R.C. §
2925.38.
      (2)   A.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to the September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         B.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (c)(2) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.31)
§ 624.073 IMPROPERLY DISPENSING OR DISTRIBUTING NITROUS OXIDE.
   (a)   No person who dispenses or distributes nitrous oxide in cartridges
shall fail to comply with either of the following:
      (1)   The record-keeping requirements established under division (c) of
this section; or
      (2)   The labeling and transaction identification requirements
established under division (d) of this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is guilty
of improperly dispensing or distributing nitrous oxide, a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
   (c)   Beginning July 1, 2001, a person who dispenses or distributes nitrous
oxide shall record each transaction involving the dispensing or distribution of
the nitrous oxide on a separate card. The person shall require the purchaser to
sign the card and provide a complete residence address. The person dispensing
or distributing the nitrous oxide shall sign and date the card. The person
shall retain the card recording a transaction for one year from the date of the
transaction. The person shall maintain the cards at the person’s business
address and make them available during normal business hours for inspection and
copying by officers or employees of the State Board of Pharmacy or of other law
enforcement agencies that are authorized to investigate violations of this
code, R.C. Chapter 2925, Chapter 3719 or Chapter 4729, or federal drug abuse
control laws. The cards used to record each transaction shall inform the
purchaser of the following:
      (1)   That nitrous oxide cartridges are to be used only for purposes of
preparing food;
      (2)   That inhalation of nitrous oxide can have dangerous health effects;
and
      (3)   That it is a violation of state law to distribute or dispense
cartridges of nitrous oxide to any person under age 21, punishable as a felony
of the fifth degree.
   (d)   (1)   Each cartridge of nitrous oxide dispensed or distributed in this
municipality shall bear the following printed warning: “Nitrous oxide
cartridges are to be used only for purposes of preparing food. Nitrous oxide
cartridges may not be sold to persons under age 21. Do not inhale contents.
Misuse can be dangerous to your health.”
      (2)   Each time a person dispenses or distributes one or more cartridges
of nitrous oxide, the person shall mark the packaging containing the cartridges
with a label or other device that identifies the person who dispensed or
distributed the nitrous oxide and the person’s business address.
(R.C. § 2925.32(B)(4), (D)(2), (F), (G))
Statutory reference:
   Trafficking in harmful intoxicants, felony offenses, see R.C. § 2925.32
§ 624.076 POSSESSING NITROUS OXIDE IN MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (a)   As used in this section, MOTOR VEHICLE, STREET and HIGHWAY have the
same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   (b)   Unless authorized by these Codified Ordinances or by state law, no
person shall possess an open cartridge of nitrous oxide in either of the
following circumstances:
      (1)   While operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on a
street, highway or other public or private property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic or parking; or
      (2)   While being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on a street,
highway or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular traffic or parking.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing nitrous oxide in
a motor vehicle, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (d)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for
possessing nitrous oxide in a motor vehicle, the court may suspend for not more
than five years the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit.
(R.C. § 2925.33)
§ 624.08 ILLEGAL DISPENSING OF DRUG SAMPLES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly furnish a sample drug to another person.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to manufacturers,
wholesalers, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, licensed health professionals
authorized to prescribe drugs, and other persons whose conduct is in accordance
with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4725, 4729, 4730, 4731 and 4741.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal dispensing of
drug samples.
      (2)   If the drug involved in the offense is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule I or Schedule II, with the
exception of marihuana, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the drug involved in the offense is a dangerous drug or a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule
IV or Schedule V, or is marihuana, the penalty for the offense shall be
determined as follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in the following division, illegal
dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor of the second degree; and
         B.   If the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school or in
the vicinity of a juvenile, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2925.36(A) - (C))
Statutory reference:
   Felony offenses, see R.C. § 2925.36(C)(2)
§ 624.09 POSSESSION, SALE AND DISPOSAL OF HYPODERMICS.
   (a)   Possession of a hypodermic is authorized for the following:
      (1)   A manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in hypodermics, or
medication packaged in hypodermics, and any authorized agent of employee of
that manufacturer, distributor or dealer, in the regular course of business;
      (2)   A terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, in the regular course of
business;
      (3)   A person authorized to administer injections, in the regular course
of the person’s profession or employment;
      (4)   A person, when the hypodermic in his or her possession was lawfully
obtained and is kept and used for the purpose of self-administration of insulin
or other drug prescribed for the treatment of disease by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs;
      (5)   A person whose use of a hypodermic is for legal research, clinical,
educational or medicinal purposes;
      (6)   A farmer, for the lawful administration of a drug to an animal; and
      (7)   A person whose use of a hypodermic is for lawful professional,
mechanical, trade or craft purposes.
   (b)   No manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in, hypodermics or
medication packaged in hypodermics, or their authorized agents or employees,
and no terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall display any hypodermic for
sale. No person authorized to possess a hypodermic pursuant to division (a) of
this section shall negligently fail to take reasonable precautions to prevent
any hypodermic in the person’s possession from theft or acquisition by any
unauthorized person.
(R.C. § 3719.172(A), (B))
   (c)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of a violation of division (b) of this section, R.C. § 3719.05, 3719.06,
3719.13, 3719.172(B) or 3719.31, or a drug abuse offense, a violation of
division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 3719.99(E))
Statutory reference:
   Felony offenses, see R.C. § 3719.172(C), (D)
§ 624.10 EVIDENCE.
   (a)   (1)   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of this chapter or
R.C. Chapter 2925 or Chapter 3719, a laboratory report from the Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation or a laboratory operated by another
law enforcement agency, or a laboratory established by or under the authority
of an institution of higher education that has its main campus in this state
and that is accredited by the Association of American Universities or the North
Central Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, primarily for the
purpose of providing scientific service to law enforcement agencies, and signed
by the person performing the analysis, stating that the substance that is the
basis of the alleged offense has been weighed and analyzed and stating the
findings as to the content, weight and identity of the substance and that it
contains any amount of a controlled substance and the number and description of
unit dosages, is prima facie evidence of the content, identity and weight or
the existence and number of unit dosages of the substance. In any criminal
prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 2925.041 or a violation of this chapter,
R.C. Chapter 2925 or R.C. Chapter 3719 that is based on the possession of
chemicals sufficient to produce a compound, mixture, preparation or substance
included in Schedule I, Schedule II, Schedule III, Schedule IV or Schedule V, a
laboratory report from the Bureau or from any laboratory that is operated or
established as described in this division (a)(1) that is signed by the person
performing the analysis, stating that the substances that are the basis of the
alleged offense have been weighed and analyzed and stating the findings as to
the content, weight and identity of each of the substances, is prima facie
evidence of the content, identity and weight of the substances.
      (2)   Attached to that report shall be a copy of a notarized statement by
the signer of the report giving the name of the signer and stating that the
signer is an employee of the laboratory issuing the report and that performing
the analysis is a part of the signer’s regular duties, and giving an outline of
the signer’s education, training and experience for performing an analysis of
materials included under this section. The signer shall attest that
scientifically accepted tests were performed with due caution, and that the
evidence was handled in accordance with established and accepted procedures
while in the custody of the laboratory.
   (b)   The prosecuting attorney shall serve a copy of the report on the
attorney of record for the accused, or on the accused if the accused has no
attorney, prior to any proceeding in which the report is to be used against the
accused other than at a preliminary hearing or grand jury proceeding where the
report may be used without having been previously served upon the accused.
   (c)   The report shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents, identity
and weight or the existence and number of unit dosages of the substance if the
accused or the accused’s attorney demands the testimony of the person signing
the report, by serving the demand upon the prosecuting attorney, within seven
days from the accused or the accused’s attorney’s receipt of the report. The
time may be extended by a trial judge in the interests of justice.
   (d)   Any report issued for use under this section shall contain notice of
the right of the accused to demand, and the manner in which the accused shall
demand, the testimony of the person signing the report.
   (e)   Any person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or R.C.
Chapter 2925 or Chapter 3719 is entitled, upon written request made to the
prosecuting attorney, to have a portion of the substance that is, or of each of
the substances that are, the basis of the alleged violation preserved for the
benefit of independent analysis performed by a laboratory analyst employed by
the accused person, or, if the accused is indigent, by a qualified laboratory
analyst appointed by the court. The portion shall be a representative sample of
the entire substance that is, or of each of the substances that are, the basis
of the alleged violation and shall be of sufficient size, in the opinion of the
court, to permit the accused’s analyst to make a thorough scientific analysis
concerning the identity of the substance or substances. The prosecuting
attorney shall provide the accused’s analyst with the sample portion at least
14 days prior to trial, unless the trial is to be held in a court not of record
or unless the accused person is charged with a minor misdemeanor, in which case
the prosecuting attorney shall provide the accused’s analyst with the sample
portion at least three days prior to trial. If the prosecuting attorney
determines that such a sample portion cannot be preserved and given to the
accused’s analyst, the prosecuting attorney shall so inform the accused person,
or the accused’s attorney. In such a circumstance, the accused person is
entitled, upon written request made to the prosecuting attorney, to have the
accused’s privately employed or court appointed analyst present at an analysis
of the substance that is, or the substances that are, the basis of the alleged
violation, and, upon further written request, to receive copies of all recorded
scientific data that result from the analysis and that can be used by an
analyst in arriving at conclusions, findings or opinions concerning the
identity of the substance or substances subject to the analysis.
   (f)   In addition to the rights provided under division (e) of this section,
any person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2925
or Chapter 3719 that involves a bulk amount of a controlled substance, or any
multiple thereof, or who is accused of a violation of R.C. § 2925.11 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, other than a minor misdemeanor
violation, that involves marihuana, is entitled, upon written request made to
the prosecuting attorney, to have a laboratory analyst of the accused’s choice,
or, if the accused is indigent, a qualified laboratory analyst appointed by the
court, present at a measurement or weighing of the substance that is the basis
of the alleged violation. Also, the accused person is entitled, upon further
written request, to receive copies of all recorded scientific data that result
from the measurement or weighing and that can be used by an analyst in arriving
at conclusions, findings or opinions concerning the weight, volume or number of
unit doses of the substance subject to the measurement or weighing.
(R.C. § 2925.51)
   (g)   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required under
R.C. §§ 2929.18 and 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or required
under any provision of law, the court imposing sentence upon an offender who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a drug abuse offense may order the offender to
pay to the state, municipal or county law enforcement agencies that handled the
investigation and prosecution all of the costs that the state, municipal
corporation or county reasonably incurred in having tests performed under this
section or R.C. § 2925.51 or in any other manner on any substance that was the
basis of, or involved in, the offense to determine whether the substance
contained any amount of a controlled substance if the results of the tests
indicate that the substance tested contained any controlled substance. No court
shall order an offender under this section to pay the costs of tests performed
on a substance if the results of the tests do not indicate that the substance
tested contained any controlled substance. The court shall hold a hearing to
determine the amount of costs to be imposed under this section. The court may
hold the hearing as part of the sentencing hearing for the offender.
(R.C. § 2925.511)
§ 624.11 DOUBLE JEOPARDY.
   No person shall be prosecuted for a violation of this chapter if the person
has been acquitted or convicted under the federal drug abuse control laws of
the same act or omission which, it is alleged, constitutes a violation of this
chapter.
(R.C. §§ 2925.50, 3719.19)
§ 624.12 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE SCHEDULES.
   Controlled Substance Schedules I, II, III, IV and V, as established in R.C.
§ 3719.41 and amended by R.C. §§ 3719.43 and 3719.44, are hereby adopted by
reference, and shall be treated as if set forth in full herein.
§ 624.13 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE OR PRESCRIPTION LABELS.
   (a)   Whenever a manufacturer sells a controlled substance, and whenever a
wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility sells a controlled substance in
a package the wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility has prepared, the
manufacturer or the wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility, as the
case may be, shall securely affix to each package in which the controlled
substance is contained a label showing in legible English the name and address
of the vendor and the quantity, kind, and form of controlled substance
contained therein. No person, except a pharmacist for the purpose of dispensing
a controlled substance upon a prescription shall alter, deface, or remove any
label so affixed. As used in this division, "repackager" and "outsourcing
facility" have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   (b)   No person shall alter, deface or remove any label affixed pursuant to
R.C. § 3719.08 as long as any of the original contents remain.
(R.C. § 3719.08(A), (E))
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this
section, or R.C. § 3719.07 or § 3719.08, or a drug abuse offense, a violation
of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If
the violation involves the sale, offer to sell or possession of a Schedule I or
Schedule II controlled substance, with the exception of marihuana, and if the
offender, as a result of the violation, is a major drug offender, then R.C. §
3719.99(D) applies.
(R.C. § 3719.99(C))
§ 624.14 POSSESSION, MANUFACTURE AND SALE OF PARAPHERNALIA.
   (a)   As used in this section, DRUG PARAPHERNALIA means any equipment,
product or material of any kind that is used by the offender, intended by the
offender for use or designed for use in propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the
human body, a controlled substance in violation of this chapter. DRUG
PARAPHERNALIA includes but is not limited to any of the following equipment,
products or materials that are used by the offender, intended by the offender
for use or designed by the offender for use, in any of the following manners:
      (1)   A kit for propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting any
species of a plant that is a controlled substance or from which a controlled
substance can be derived;
      (2)   A kit for manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing or preparing a controlled substance;
      (3)   Any object, instrument or device for manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing or preparing methamphetamine;
      (4)   An isomerization device for increasing the potency of any species
of a plant that is a controlled substance;
      (5)   Testing equipment for identifying, or analyzing the strength,
effectiveness, or purity of, a controlled substance, except for those exempted
in division (d)(4) of this section;
      (6)   A scale or balance for weighing or measuring a controlled
substance;
      (7)   A diluent or adulterant, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose or lactose, for cutting a controlled substance;
      (8)   A separation gin or sifter for removing twigs and seeds from, or
otherwise cleaning or refining, marihuana;
      (9)   A blender, bowl, container, spoon or mixing device for compounding
a controlled substance;
      (10)   A capsule, balloon, envelope or container for packaging small
quantities of a controlled substance;
      (11)   A container or device for storing or concealing a controlled
substance;
      (12)   A hypodermic syringe, needle or instrument for parenterally
injecting a controlled substance into the human body; or
      (13)   An object, instrument or device for ingesting, inhaling or
otherwise introducing into the human body, marihuana, cocaine, hashish or
hashish oil, such as a metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic
pipe, with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head or punctured
metal bowl; water pipe; carburetion tube or device; smoking or carburetion
mask; roach clip or similar object used to hold burning material, such as a
marihuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the
hand; miniature cocaine spoon, or cocaine vial; chamber pipe; carburetor pipe;
electric pipe; air driver pipe; chillum; bong; or ice pipe or chiller.
   (b)   In determining if any equipment, product or material is drug
paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in addition
to other relevant factors, the following:
      (1)   Any statement by the owner or by anyone in control of the
equipment, product or material, concerning its use;
      (2)   The proximity in time or space of the equipment, product or
material, or of the act relating to the equipment, product or material, to a
violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2925;
      (3)   The proximity of the equipment, product or material to any
controlled substance;
      (4)   The existence of any residue of a controlled substance on the
equipment, product or material;
      (5)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of the owner, or of
anyone in control, of the equipment, product or material, to deliver it to any
person whom he or she knows intends to use the equipment, product or material
to facilitate a violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter
2925. A finding that the owner or anyone in control of the equipment, product
or material is not guilty of a violation of any other provision of this chapter
or R.C. Chapter 2925 does not prevent a finding that the equipment, product or
material was intended or designed by the offender for use as drug
paraphernalia;
      (6)   Any oral or written instruction provided with the equipment,
product or material concerning its use;
      (7)   Any descriptive material accompanying the equipment, product or
material and explaining or depicting its use;
      (8)   National or local advertising concerning the use of the equipment,
product or material;
      (9)   The manner and circumstances in which the equipment, product or
material is displayed for sale;
      (10)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of the sales of the
equipment, product or material to the total sales of the business enterprise;
      (11)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses of the equipment,
product or material in the community; and
      (12)   Expert testimony concerning the use of the equipment, product or
material.
   (c)   (1)   Subject to divisions (d)(2), (d)(3), and (d)(4) of this section,
no person shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, drug
paraphernalia.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly sell, or possess or manufacture with
purpose to sell, drug paraphernalia, if he or she knows or reasonably should
know that the equipment, product or material will be used as drug
paraphernalia.
      (3)   No person shall place an advertisement in any newspaper, magazine,
handbill or other publication that is published and printed and circulates
primarily within this state, if he or she knows that the purpose of the
advertisement is to promote the illegal sale in this municipality or in this
state of the equipment, product or material that the offender intended or
designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
   (d)   (1)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies
and other persons whose conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715,
4723, 4729, 4730, 4731 and 4741. This section shall not be construed to
prohibit the possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by R.C. §
3719.172.
      (2)   Division (c)(1) of this section does not apply to a person’s use,
or possession with purpose to use, any drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a
product, or material of any kind that is used by the person, intended by the
person for use, or designed for use in storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body
marihuana.
      (3)   Division (B)(2) of R.C. § 2925.11 applies with respect to a
violation of division (c)(1) of this section when a person seeks or obtains
medical assistance for another person who is experiencing a drug overdose, a
person experiences a drug overdose and seeks medical assistance for that
overdose, or a person is the subject of another person seeking or obtaining
medical assistance for that overdose.
      (4)   Division (c)(1) of this section does not apply to a person's use,
or possession with purpose to use, any drug testing strips to determine the
presence of fentanyl or a fentanyl-related compound.
   (e)   Notwithstanding R.C. Chapter 2981, any drug paraphernalia that was
used, possessed, sold or manufactured in violation of this section shall be
seized, after a conviction for that violation, shall be forfeited, and upon
forfeiture shall be disposed of pursuant to R.C. § 2981.12(B).
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates division (c)(1) of this section is guilty of
illegal use or possession of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (f)(3) of this section, whoever
violates division (c)(2) of this section is guilty of dealing in drug
paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (c)(2) of this section by selling drug
paraphernalia to a juvenile is guilty of selling drug paraphernalia to
juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (c)(3) of this section is guilty of
illegal advertising of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (g)   (1)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a
violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more than five years
the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit. However, if
the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or the law of another
state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the
violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit for not more than five years. If the offender is a
professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction imposed for a
violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply with R.C. §
2925.38.
      (2)   A.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         B.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (g)(2) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.14)
   (h)   Illegal use or possession of marihuana drug paraphernalia.
      (1)   As used in this division (h), DRUG PARAPHERNALIA has the same
meaning as in section division (a) of this section.
      (2)   In determining if any equipment, product or material is drug
paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in addition
to other relevant factors, all factors identified in division (b) of this
section.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, any
drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a product or material of any kind that is
used by the person, intended by the person for use, or designed for use in
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise
introducing into the human body marihuana.
      (4)   This division (h) does not apply to any person identified in
division (d)(1) of this section, and it shall not be construed to prohibit the
possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by R.C. § 3719.172.
      (5)   A.   Division (e) of this section applies with respect to any drug
paraphernalia that was used or possessed in violation of division (h) of this
section.
         B.   Division (B)(2) of R.C. § 2925.11 applies with respect to a
violation of this division (h) when a person seeks or obtains medical
assistance for another person who is experiencing a drug overdose, a person
experiences a drug overdose and seeks medical assistance for that overdose, or
a person is the subject of another person seeking or obtaining medical
assistance for that overdose.
      (6)   A.   Whoever violates division (h)(3) of this section is guilty of
illegal use or possession of marihuana drug paraphernalia, a minor misdemeanor.
         B.   Arrest or conviction for a violation of division (h)(3) of this
section does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the
person so arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person's
criminal record, including any inquiries contained in any application for
employment, license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with
the person's appearance as a witness.
      (7)   A.   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for
a violation of division (h) of this section, the court shall do the following,
if applicable:
            1.   If the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a
violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or
the law of another state or the United States arising out of the same set of
circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the offender's driver's
or commercial driver's license or permit for not more than five years.
            2.   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
         B.   1.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under division (h)
of this section prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the
sentencing court requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an
offender who pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another
state or the United States that arose out of the same set of circumstances as
the violation for which the offender’s license or permit was suspended under
division (h) of this section shall not file such a motion.
            2.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (h)(7)B. of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.141)
§ 624.15 COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly possess any counterfeit controlled
substance.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section shall be guilty of
possession of counterfeit controlled substances, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 2925.37(A), (G))
Statutory reference:
   Trafficking, other felony counterfeit controlled substance offenses, see
R.C. § 2925.37(H) - (M)
§ 624.16 PSEUDOEPHEDRINE SALES.
   (a)   Unlawful purchases.
      (1)   As used in divisions (a), (b), (c) and (d) of this section:
         A.   CONSUMER PRODUCT. Any food or drink that is consumed or used by
humans and any drug, including a drug that may be provided legally only
pursuant to a prescription, that is intended to be consumed or used by humans.
         B.   EPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or salts
of optical isomers.
         C.   EPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains ephedrine.
         D.   PSEUDOEPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation
that contains any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts, optical
isomers, or salts of optical isomers.
         E.   PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains
pseudoephedrine.
         F.   RETAILER. A place of business that offers consumer products for
sale to the general public.
         G.   SINGLE-INGREDIENT PREPARATION. A compound, mixture, preparation,
or substance that contains a single active ingredient.
         H.   TERMINAL DISTRIBUTOR OF DANGEROUS DRUGS. Has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 4729.01.
      (2)   A.   1.   No individual shall knowingly purchase, receive, or
otherwise acquire an amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
that is greater than either of the following unless the pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product is dispensed by a pharmacist pursuant to a valid
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs and the conduct of the pharmacist and the licensed health professional
authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715,
4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, or 4741:
               a.   Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single day;
               b.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
            2.   The limits specified in divisions (a)(2)A.1.a. and (a)
(2)A.1.b. of this section apply to the total amount of base pseudoephedrine or
base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product,
respectively. The limits do not apply to the product’s overall weight.
         B.   It is not a violation of division (b)(1) of this section for an
individual to receive or accept more than an amount of pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product specified in division (a)(2)A.1.a. or (a)(2)A.1.b. of this
section if the individual is an employee of a retailer or terminal distributor
of dangerous drugs, and the employee receives or accepts from the retailer or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs the pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product in a sealed container in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (3)   A.   No individual under 18 years of age shall knowingly purchase,
receive, or otherwise acquire a pseudoephedrine product, or ephedrine product
unless the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product is dispensed by a
pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs and the conduct of the pharmacist
and the licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs is in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, or 4741.
         B.   Division (a)(3)A. of this section does not apply to an individual
under 18 years of age who purchases, receives, or otherwise acquires a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product from any of the following:
            1.   A licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs
or pharmacist who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides the pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to that individual and whose conduct is in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, or 4741;
            2.   A parent or guardian of that individual who provides the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            3.   A person, as authorized by that individual’s parent or
guardian, who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides the pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            4.   A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs who
provides the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to that individual if
the individual is an employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs and the individual receives or accepts from the retailer or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs the pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product in a sealed container in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (4)   No individual under 18 years of age shall knowingly show or give
false information concerning the individual’s name, age, or other
identification for the purpose of purchasing, receiving, or otherwise acquiring
a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.
      (5)   No individual shall knowingly fail to comply with the requirements
of R.C. § 3715.051(B).
      (6)   Whoever violates division (a)(2)A. of this section is guilty of
unlawful purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (a)(3)A. of this section is guilty of
underage purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if it could be
committed by an adult.
      (8)   Whoever violates division (a)(4) of this section is guilty of using
false information to purchase a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the first degree if it could be
committed by an adult.
      (9)   Whoever violates division (a)(5) of this section is guilty of
improper purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2925.55)
   (b)   Unlawful retail sales.
      (1)   A.   1.   Except as provided in division (b)(1)B. of this section,
no retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or an employee of a
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall knowingly sell, offer
to sell, hold for sale, deliver, or otherwise provide to any individual an
amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product that is greater than
either of the following:
               a.   Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single day;
               b.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
            2.   The maximum amounts specified in divisions (b)(1)A.1.a. and
(b)(1)A.1.b. of this section apply to the total amount of base pseudoephedrine
or base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product,
respectively. The maximum amounts do not apply to the product’s overall weight.
         B.   1.   Division (b)(1)A. of this section does not apply to any
quantity of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product dispensed by a
pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs if the conduct of the pharmacist and
the licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, or 4741.
            2.   It is not a violation of division (b)(1)A. of this section for
a retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, or employee of either to
provide to an individual more than an amount of pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product specified in division (b)(1)A.1.a. or (b)(1)A.1.b. of this
section under either of the following circumstances:
               a.   The individual is an employee of the retailer or terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs, and the employee receives or accepts from the
retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, or employee the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product in a sealed container in
connection with manufacturing, warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging,
loading, or unloading of the product;
               b.   A stop-sale alert is generated after the submission of
information to the national precursor log exchange under the conditions
described in R.C. § 3715.052(A)(2).
      (2)   A.   Except as provided in division (b)(2)B. of this section, no
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or an employee of a
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall sell, offer to sell,
hold for sale, deliver, or otherwise provide a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product to an individual who is under 18 years of age.
         B.   Division (b)(2)A. of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
            1.   A licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs
or pharmacist who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides a pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to an individual under 18 years of age and whose
conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731,
or 4741;
            2.   A parent or guardian of an individual under 18 years of age
who provides a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            3.   A person who, as authorized by the individual’s parent or
guardian, dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product to an individual under 18 years of age;
            4.   The provision by a retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs, or employee of either of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
in a sealed container to an employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs who is under 18 years of age in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (3)   No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall fail
to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 3715.051(A) or R.C. § 3715.052(A)(2).
      (4)   No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall fail
to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 3715.052(A)(1).
      (5)   Whoever violates division (b)(1)A. of this section is guilty of
unlawfully selling a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (b)(2)A. of this section is guilty of
unlawfully selling a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to a minor, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (b)(3) of this section is guilty of
improper sale of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a misdemeanor
of the second degree.
      (8)   Whoever violates division (b)(4) of this section is guilty of
failing to submit information to the national precursor log exchange, a
misdemeanor for which the offender shall be fined not more than $1,000 per
violation.
(R.C. § 2925.56)
   (c)   Transaction scans.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division (c) and division (d) of this
section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   CARD HOLDER. Any person who presents a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card to a seller, or an agent or employee
of a seller, to purchase or receive any pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product from the seller, agent or employee.
         B.   IDENTIFICATION CARD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2927.021.
         C.   SELLER. A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs.
         D.   TRANSACTION SCAN. The process by which a seller or an agent or
employee of a seller checks by means of a transaction scan device the validity
of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card that is
presented as a condition for purchasing or receiving any pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product.
         E.   TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2927.021.
      (2)   A.   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may perform a
transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check the validity of
a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a
card holder as a condition for selling, giving away or otherwise distributing
to the card holder a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.
         B.   If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed
under division (c)(2)A. of this section fails to match the information printed
on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by the card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the information
so printed is false or fraudulent, neither the seller nor any agent or employee
of the seller shall sell, give away or otherwise distribute any pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to the card holder.
         C.   Division (c)(2)A. of this section does not preclude a seller or
an agent or employee of a seller as a condition for selling, giving away or
otherwise distributing a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the
person presenting the document from using a transaction scan device to check
the validity of a document other than a driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or an identification card if the document includes a bar code or magnetic strip
that may be scanned by the device.
      (3)   Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. §
4301.61(C) apply to the use of transaction scan devices for purposes of this
division (c) and division (d) of this section.
      (4)   A.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information derived from
a transaction scan, except the following:
            1.   The name, address, and date of birth of the person listed on
the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by
a card holder; and
            2.   The expiration date, identification number, and issuing agency
and identification number of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
identification card presented by a card holder.
         B.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use the
information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is permitted to be
recorded and maintained under division (c)(4)A. of this section except for
purposes of division (d) of this section, R.C. § 2925.58, or R.C. § 3715.052(A)
(1).
         C.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use a
transaction scan device for a purpose other than the purpose specified in
division (c)(2)A. of this section.
         D.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall sell or
otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan to any
third party, including but not limited to selling or otherwise disseminating
that information for any marketing, advertising or promotional activities, but
a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant
to a court order or as specifically authorized by division (d) of this section
or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (5)   Nothing in this division (c) or division (d) of this section
relieves a seller or an agent or employee of a seller of any responsibility to
comply with any other applicable state or federal laws or rules governing the
sale, giving away or other distribution of pseudoephedrine products or
ephedrine products.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (c)(2)B. or (c)(4) of this section is
guilty of engaging in an illegal pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
transaction scan, and the court may impose upon the offender a civil penalty of
up to $1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of the Court shall pay each
collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for deposit into the county
treasury.
(R.C. § 2925.57)
   (d)   Affirmative defenses.
      (1)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be found
guilty of a charge of a violation of division (b) of this section in which the
age of the purchaser or other recipient of a pseudoephedrine product is an
element of the alleged violation if the seller, agent or employee raises and
proves as an affirmative defense that all of the following occurred:
         A.   A card holder attempting to purchase or receive a pseudoephedrine
product presented a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card;
         B.   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or identification card that the card holder presented indicated that the
license or card was valid; and
         C.   The pseudoephedrine product was sold, given away or otherwise
distributed to the card holder in reasonable reliance upon the identification
presented and the completed transaction scan.
      (2)   In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee of a seller
has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (d)(1) of this section,
the trier of fact in the action for the alleged violation of division (b) of
this section shall consider any written policy that the seller has adopted and
implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of division (b) of this
section. For purposes of division (d)(1)C. of this section, the trier of fact
shall consider that reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and
the completed transaction scan may require a seller or an agent or employee of
a seller to exercise reasonable diligence to determine, and that the use of a
transaction scan device does not excuse a seller or an agent or employee of a
seller from exercising reasonable diligence to determine, the following:
         A.   Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or employee of a
seller sells, gives away or otherwise distributes a pseudoephedrine product is
18 years of age or older; and
         B.   Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a card holder
is that of the card holder.
      (3)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by
division (d)(1) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a
Deputy Registrar who issued an identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50
through 4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of
that issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with
the Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.
(R.C. § 2925.58)
   (e)   Retailer’s duties.
      (1)   As used in divisions (e) and (f) of this section:
         A.   CONSUMER PRODUCT. Any food or drink that is consumed or used by
humans and any drug, including a drug that may be provided legally only
pursuant to a prescription, that is intended to be consumed or used by humans.
         B.   DRUG. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         C.   EPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or salts
of optical isomers.
         D.   EPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains ephedrine.
         E.   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. An officer or employee of any agency or
authority of the United States, a state, a territory, a political subdivision
of a state or territory, or an Indian tribe, who is empowered by the law to
investigate or conduct an official inquiry into a potential violation of law or
prosecute or otherwise conduct a criminal, civil, or administrative proceeding
arising from an alleged violation of law.
         F.   LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS. Has
the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         G.   NATIONAL PRECURSOR LOG EXCHANGE or EXCHANGE. The electronic
system for tracking sales of pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products on
a national basis that is administered by the National Association of Drug
Diversion Investigators or a successor organization.
         H.   “PHARMACIST.” A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 to engage
in the practice of pharmacy.
         I.   “PHARMACY.” Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         J.   PRESCRIBER. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         K.   PRESCRIPTION. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         L.   PROOF OF AGE. A driver’s license, a commercial driver’s license,
a military identification card, a passport, or an identification card issued
under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows a person is 18 years of age or
older.
         M.   PSEUDOEPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation
that contains any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts, optical
isomers, or salts of optical isomers.
         N.   PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains
pseudoephedrine.
         O.   RETAILER. A place of business that offers consumer products for
sale to the general public.
         P.   SINGLE-INGREDIENT PREPARATION. A compound, mixture, preparation,
or substance that contains a single active ingredient.
         Q.   STOP-SALE ALERT. A notification sent from the national precursor
log exchange to a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs
indicating that the completion of a sale of a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product would result in a violation of R.C. § 2925.56(A)(1) or
federal law.
         R.   TERMINAL DISTRIBUTOR OF DANGEROUS DRUGS. Has the same meanings as
in R.C. § 4729.01.
         S.   WHOLESALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
      (2)   A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs that sells,
offers to sell, holds for sale, delivers, or otherwise provides a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the public shall do all of the
following:
         A.   Segregate pseudoephedrine products or ephedrine products from
other merchandise so that no member of the public may procure or purchase such
products without the direct assistance of a pharmacist or other authorized
employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs;
         B.   With regard to each time a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product is sold or otherwise provided without a valid prescription:
            1.   Determine, by examination of a valid proof of age, that the
purchaser or recipient is at least 18 years of age;
            2.   a.   Using any information available, including information
from the national precursor log exchange if the information is accessible, make
a reasonable attempt to ensure that no individual purchases or receives an
amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product that is greater than
either of the following:
                  i.   Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single
day;
                  ii.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
               b.   The maximum amounts specified in divisions (e)(2)B.2.a.i.
and (e)(2)B.2.a.ii. of this section apply to the total amount of base
pseudoephedrine or base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product, respectively. The maximum amounts do not apply to the product’s
overall weight.
         C.   Maintain a log book of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product purchases, in accordance with R.C. § 3715.051;
         D.   If required to comply with section R.C. § 3715.052, submit the
information specified in divisions (A)(1)(a) to (A)(1)(d) of that section to
the national precursor log exchange.
      (3)   Prescriptions, orders, and records maintained pursuant to this
section and stocks of pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products shall be
open for inspection to federal, state, county, and municipal officers, and
employees of the State Board of Pharmacy whose duty it is to enforce the laws
of this state or of the United States relating to controlled substances. Such
prescriptions, orders, records, and stocks shall be open for inspection by the
State Medical Board and its employees for purposes of enforcing R.C. Chapter
4731.
(R.C. § 3715.05)
   (f)   Theft or loss; reporting requirements.
      (1)   Each retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy,
prescriber or wholesaler that sells, offers to sell, holds for sale, delivers
or otherwise provides any pseudoephedrine product and that discovers the theft
or loss of any pseudoephedrine product in an amount of more than nine grams per
incident of theft or loss shall notify all of the following upon discovery of
the theft or loss:
         A.   The State Board of Pharmacy, by telephone immediately upon
discovery of the theft or loss; and
         B.   Law enforcement authorities. If the incident is a theft and the
theft constitutes a felony, the retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs, pharmacy, prescriber or wholesaler shall report the theft to the law
enforcement authorities in accordance with R.C. § 2921.22.
      (2)   Within 30 days after making a report by telephone to the State
Board of Pharmacy pursuant to division (f)(1)A. of this section, a retailer,
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy, prescriber or wholesaler
shall send a written report to the State Board of Pharmacy.
      (3)   The reports required under this section shall identify the product
that was stolen or lost, the amount of the product stolen or lost, and the date
and time of discovery of the theft or loss.
(R.C. § 3715.06)
§ 624.17 SALE OF PURE CAFFEINE PRODUCT.
   (a)   As used in this section, PURE CAFFEINE PRODUCT means:
      (1)   Subject to division (a)(2) of this section, a product that consists
solely or primarily of caffeine and is manufactured into a crystalline, liquid,
or powdered form.
      (2)   The phrase does not include any of the following that contains
caffeine and is formulated, manufactured, and labeled in accordance with the
laws and regulations enforced by the United States Food and Drug
Administration:
         A.   Coffee, tea, any soft drink, any energy drink, or any other
caffeine-containing beverage;
         B.   Any energy product.
   (b)   Except as provided in division (c) of this section, no person shall
knowingly sell or offer for sale a pure caffeine product.
   (c)   Division (b) of this section does not prohibit a person from selling
or offering for sale any product manufactured in a unit-dose form such as a
pill, tablet, or caplet, but only if each unit dose of the product contains not
more than 250 milligrams of caffeine.
   (d)   Nothing in this section prohibits either of the following:
      (1)   Possession of a product described in division (c) of this section;
      (2)   Possession of a pure caffeine product by any of the following:
         A.   A food processing establishment, as defined in R.C. § 3715.021;
         B.   A manufacturer of a drug that is available without a
prescription;
         C.   A laboratory that holds a current, valid category III terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs license issued by the state board of pharmacy
under R.C. § 4729.54;
         D.   A laboratory of any agency or department of this state that
performs testing, analysis, and other laboratory services on behalf of the
state;
         E.   A postal or delivery service that transports or delivers a pure
caffeine product to an entity specified in divisions (d)(2)A. to (d)(2)D. of
this section.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of illegal
sale of pure caffeine, a minor misdemeanor on a first offense and a misdemeanor
of the third degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 2925.34)
§ 624.18 SALE OF DEXTROMETHORPHAN.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   DEXTROMETHORPHAN. Means the dextrorotatory isomer of 3-methoxy-N-
methylmorphinan, including its salts, but not including its racemic or
levorotatory forms.
      (2)   EVIDENCE OF MAJORITY AND IDENTITY. Means a document issued by the
federal government or a state, county, or municipal government, or a
subdivision or agency of any of the foregoing, including a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, an identification card issued under R.C. §§
4507.50 to 4507.52, a military identification card, or any other form of
identification that bears the name, date of birth, description, and picture of
the person identified.
      (3)   RETAILER. Means a place of business that offers consumer products
for sale to the general public, including a terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs that is licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 and operated as a pharmacy.
   (b)   No retailer or employee of a retailer shall knowingly supply, deliver,
give, or otherwise provide a drug, material, compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance containing any quantity of dextromethorphan through the sale of any
product to a person under 18 years of age, unless the person has been issued a
prescription for the product being purchased.
   (c)   For purposes of division (b) of this section, the person making the
sale of a product containing dextromethorphan shall require and obtain evidence
of majority and identity from the purchaser, unless from the purchaser’s
outward appearance the person making the sale would reasonably presume the
purchaser to be 25 years of age or older. Proof that the person making the sale
demanded, was shown, and acted in reasonable reliance on the purchaser’s
evidence of majority and identity is a defense to any charge of a violation of
division (b) of this section.
   (d)   A retailer or employee of a retailer is not liable for damages in a
civil action for injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly
arises from an act or omission associated with a failure to prevent the sale of
a product containing dextromethorphan to a person under 18 years of age, unless
the act or omission constitutes willful or wanton misconduct.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of illegally
selling dextromethorphan, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2925.62)
CHAPTER 630: GAMBLING
Section
   
630.01   Definitions
   
630.02   Gambling in general
   
630.021   Charitable organization licensing procedures
   
630.022   Prohibitions and requirements of licensees
   
630.03   Operating a gambling house
   
630.04   Public gaming
   
630.05   Cheating
   
630.06   Responsibility of charitable organization conducting bingo game
   
630.07   Maintenance of records by charitable organizations
   
630.08   Qualifications of bingo game operator
   
630.09   Exemption for bingo games conducted for amusement
   
630.10   Prohibitions where instant bingo game is conducted
   
630.11   Raffle drawings
   
630.12   Instant bingo other than at bingo sessions
   
630.13   Restrictions on owner or lessor of location at instant bingo
   
630.14   Skill-based amusement machines; prohibited conduct
   
630.15   Electronic instant bingo; prohibited conduct
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Power to prohibit gambling, see R.C. § 715.49
   Power to destroy devices, see R.C. § 715.51
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police Department,
see §
606.24
§ 630.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   BET. The hazarding of anything of value upon the result of an event,
undertaking or contingency, but does not include a bona fide business risk.
   (b)   BINGO. Either of the following:
      (1)   A game with all of the following characteristics:
         A.   The participants use bingo cards or sheets, including paper
formats and electronic representation or image formats, that are divided into
25 spaces arranged in 5 horizontal and 5 vertical rows of spaces, with each
space, except the central space, being designated by a combination of a letter
and a number and with the central space being designated as a free space;
         B.   The participants cover the spaces on the bingo cards or sheets
that correspond to combinations of letters and numbers that are announced by a
bingo game operator;
         C.   A bingo game operator announces combinations of letters and
numbers that appear on objects that a bingo game operator selects by chance,
either manually or mechanically, from a receptacle that contains 75 objects at
the beginning of each game, each object marked by a different combination of a
letter and a number that corresponds to one of the 75 possible combinations of
a letter and a number that can appear on the bingo cards or sheets; and
         D.   The winner of the bingo game includes any participant who
properly announces during the interval between the announcements of letters and
numbers, as described in division (1)C. of this definition, that a
predetermined and pre-announced pattern of spaces has been covered on a bingo
card or sheet being used by the participant.
      (2)   Instant bingo, punch boards and raffles.
   (c)   BINGO GAME OPERATOR. Any person, except security personnel, who
performs work or labor at the site of bingo, including, but not limited to,
collecting money from participants, handing out bingo cards or sheets or
objects to cover spaces on bingo cards or sheets, selecting from a receptacle
the objects that contain the combination of letters and numbers that appear on
bingo cards or sheets, calling out the combinations of letters and numbers,
distributing prizes, selling or redeeming instant bingo tickets or cards,
supervising the operation of a punch board, selling raffle tickets, selecting
raffle tickets from a receptacle and announcing the winning numbers in a
raffle, and preparing, selling and serving food or beverages.
   (d)   BINGO SESSION. A period that includes both of the following:
      (1)   Not to exceed five continuous hours for the conduct of one or more
games described in division (1) of the definition of BINGO in this section,
instant bingo and seal cards; and
      (2)   A period for the conduct of instant bingo and seal cards for not
more than two hours before and not more than two hours after the period
described in division (1) of this definition.
   (e)   BINGO SUPPLIES. Bingo cards or sheets; instant bingo tickets or cards;
electronic bingo aids; raffle tickets; punch boards; seal cards; instant bingo
ticket dispensers; and devices for selecting or displaying the combination of
bingo letters and numbers or raffle tickets. Items that are BINGO SUPPLIES are
not gambling devices if sold or otherwise provided, and used, in accordance
with this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915. For purposes of this chapter, BINGO
SUPPLIES are not to be considered equipment used to conduct a bingo game.
   (f)   BOOKMAKING. The business of receiving or paying off bets.
   (g)   CHAMBER OF COMMERCE. Any organization of individuals, professionals
and businesses that has the purpose to advance the commercial, financial,
industrial and civic interests of the community and that is, and has received
from the Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that currently is in
effect stating that the organization is, exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(6).
   (h)   CHARITABLE BINGO GAME. Any bingo game described in divisions (1) or
(2) of the definition of BINGO in this section that is conducted by a
charitable organization that has obtained a license pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08
and the proceeds of which are used for a charitable purpose.
   (i)   CHARITABLE FUND RAISER or FUND RAISER. Any undertaking to raise funds
for a charitable organization, as described above, and authorized pursuant to
R.C. § 2915.02(D).
(Ord. 2005-202A, passed 11-7-2005)
   (j)   CHARITABLE INSTANT BINGO ORGANIZATION. An organization that is exempt
from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)
(3) and is a charitable organization as defined in this section. A CHARITABLE
INSTANT BINGO ORGANIZATION does not include a charitable organization that is
exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC §
501(c)(3) and that is created by a veteran’s organization, a fraternal
organization or a sporting organization in regards to bingo conducted or
assisted by a veteran’s organization, a fraternal organization or a sporting
organization pursuant to R.C. § 2915.13, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (k)   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, CHARITABLE
ORGANIZATION means either of the following:
         A.   An organization that is and has received from the Internal
Revenue Service a determination letter that is currently in effect, stating
that the organization is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a)
and described in IRC § 501(c)(3); or
         B.   A volunteer rescue service organization, volunteer firefighter’s
organization, veteran’s organization, fraternal organization or sporting
organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(c)(4),
501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10) or 501(c)(19).
      (2)   To qualify as a charitable organization, an organization shall have
been in continuous existence as such in this state for a period of two years
immediately preceding either the making of an application for a bingo license
under R.C. § 2915.08 or the conducting of any game of chance as provided in
R.C. § 2915.02(D), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (l)   CHARITABLE PURPOSE. The net profit of bingo, other than instant bingo,
is used by, or is given, donated or otherwise transferred to, any of the
following:
      (1)   Any organization that is described in IRC§§ 509(a)(1), (a)(2) or
(a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an organization that is tax exempt
under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3);
      (2)   A veteran’s organization that is a post, chapter or organization of
veterans, or an auxiliary unit or society of, or a trust or foundation for, any
such post, chapter or organization organized in the United States or any of its
possessions, at least 75% of the members of which are veterans and
substantially all of the other members of which are individuals who are
spouses, widows or widowers of veterans, or those individuals, provided that no
part of the net earnings of the post, chapter or organization inures to the
benefit of any private shareholder or individual, and further provided that the
net profit is used by the post, chapter or organization for the charitable
purposes set forth in R.C. § 5739.02(B)(12), is used for awarding scholarships
to or for attendance at an institution mentioned in that division of the
Revised Code, is donated to a governmental agency, or is used for nonprofit
youth activities, the purchase of United States or Ohio flags that are donated
to schools, youth groups or other bona fide nonprofit organizations, promotion
of patriotism or disaster relief;
      (3)   A fraternal organization that has been in continuous existence in
this state for 15 years and that uses the net profit exclusively for religious,
charitable, scientific, literary or educational purposes, or for the prevention
of cruelty to children or animals, if contributions for that use would qualify
as a deductible charitable contribution under IRC § 170; or
      (4)   A volunteer firefighter’s organization that uses the net profit for
the purposes set forth in the definition of VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER’S
ORGANIZATION in this section.
   (m)   COMMUNITY ACTION AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 122.66.
   (n)   CONDUCT. To back, promote, organize, manage, carry on, sponsor or
prepare for the operation of bingo or a game of chance, a scheme of chance, or
a sweepstakes.
   (o)   DEAL OF INSTANT BINGO TICKETS. A single game of instant bingo tickets
all with the same serial number.
   (p)   DISTRIBUTOR. Any person who purchases or obtains bingo supplies and
who does either of the following:
      (1)   Sells, offers for sale or otherwise provides or offers to provide
the bingo supplies to another person for use in this state; or
      (2)   Modifies, converts, adds to or removes parts from the bingo
supplies to further their promotion or sale for use in this state.
   (q)   ELECTRONIC BINGO AID.
      (1)   ELECTRONIC BINGO AID means an electronic device used by a
participant to monitor bingo cards or sheets purchased at the time and place of
a bingo session and that does all of the following:
         A.   It provides a means for a participant to input numbers and
letters announced by a bingo caller;
         B.   It compares the numbers and letters entered by the participant to
the bingo faces previously stored in the memory of the device; and
         C.   It identifies a winning bingo pattern.
      (2)   ELECTRONIC BINGO AID does not include any device into which a coin,
currency, token or an equivalent is inserted to activate play.
   (r)   EXPENSES. The reasonable amount of gross profit actually expended for
all of the following:
      (1)   The purchase or lease of bingo supplies;
      (2)   The annual license fee required under R.C. § 2915.08;
      (3)   Bank fees and service charges for a bingo session or game account
described in R.C. § 2915.10;
      (4)   Audits and accounting services;
      (5)   Safes;
      (6)   Cash registers;
      (7)   Hiring security personnel;
      (8)   Advertising bingo;
      (9)   Renting premises in which to conduct a bingo session;
      (10)   Tables and chairs;
      (11)   Expenses for maintaining and operating a charitable organization’s
facilities, including, but not limited to, a post home, club house, lounge,
tavern or canteen and any grounds attached to the post home, club house,
lounge, tavern or canteen;
      (12)   Payment of real property taxes and assessments that are levied on
a premises on which bingo is conducted; and
      (13)   Any other product or service directly related to the conduct of
bingo that is authorized in rules adopted by the Attorney General under R.C. §
2915.08(B)(1).
   (s)   FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION. Any society, order, state headquarters or
association within this state, except a college or high school fraternity, that
is not organized for profit, that is a branch, lodge or chapter of a national
or state organization, that exists exclusively for the common business or
sodality of its members.
   (t)   GAMBLING DEVICE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A book, totalizer or other equipment used for recording bets;
      (2)   A ticket, token or other device representing a chance, share or
interest in a scheme of chance or evidencing a bet;
      (3)   A deck of cards, dice, gaming table, roulette wheel, slot machine
or other apparatus designed for use in connection with a game of chance;
      (4)   Any equipment, device, apparatus or paraphernalia specially
designed for gambling purposes; or
      (5)   Bingo supplies sold or otherwise provided, or used, in violation of
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (u)   GAMBLING OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2915.02, 2915.03, 2915.04, 2915.05, 2915.06,
2915.07, 2915.08, 2915.081, 2915.082, 2915.09, 2915.091, 2915.092, 2915.10 or
2915.11;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States substantially equivalent to any
section listed in division (1) of this definition or a violation of R.C. §
2915.06 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law
of this or any other state or of the United States, of which gambling is an
element; or
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing, any
offense under division (1), (2) or (3) of this definition.
   (v)   GAME FLARE. The board or placard that accompanies each deal of instant
bingo tickets and that has printed on or affixed to it the following
information for the game:
      (1)   The name of the game;
      (2)   The manufacturer’s name or distinctive logo;
      (3)   The form number;
      (4)   The ticket count;
      (5)   The prize structure, including the number of winning instant bingo
tickets by denomination and the respective winning symbol or number
combinations for the winning instant bingo tickets;
      (6)   The cost per play; and
      (7)   The serial number of the game.
   (w)   GAME OF CHANCE. Poker, craps, roulette or other game in which a player
gives anything of value in the hope of gain, the outcome of which is determined
largely by chance, but does not include bingo.
   (x)   GAME OF CHANCE CONDUCTED FOR PROFIT. Any game of chance designed to
produce income for the person who conducts or operates the game of chance, but
does not include bingo.
   (y)   GROSS ANNUAL REVENUES. The annual gross receipts derived from the
conduct of bingo described in division (1) of the definition of BINGO in this
section plus the annual net profit derived from the conduct of bingo described
in division (2) of the definition of BINGO in this section.
   (z)   GROSS PROFIT. Gross receipts minus the amount actually expended for
the payment of prize awards.
   (aa)   GROSS RECEIPTS. All money or assets, including admission fees, that a
person receives from bingo without the deduction of any amounts for prizes paid
out or for the expenses of conducting bingo. GROSS RECEIPTS does not include
any money directly taken in from the sale of food or beverages by a charitable
organization conducting bingo, or by a bona fide auxiliary unit or society of a
charitable organization conducting bingo, provided all of the following apply:
      (1)   The auxiliary unit or society has been in existence as a bona fide
auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization for at least two years
prior to conducting bingo;
      (2)   The person who purchases the food or beverage receives nothing of
value except the food or beverage and items customarily received with the
purchase of that food or beverage; and
      (3)   The food and beverages are sold at customary and reasonable prices.
   (bb)   HISTORIC RAILROAD. All or a portion of the tracks and right-of-way of
a railroad that was owned and operated by a for-profit common carrier in this
state at any time prior to January 1, 1950.
   (cc)   INSTANT BINGO. A form of bingo that shall use folded or banded
tickets or paper cards with perforated break-open tabs, a face of which is
covered or otherwise hidden from view to conceal a number, letter or symbol, or
set of numbers, letters or symbols, some of which have been designated in
advance as prize winners, and may also include games in which some winners are
determined by the random selection of one or more bingo numbers by the use of a
seal card or bingo blower. In all INSTANT BINGO the prize amount and structure
shall be predetermined. The term does not include any device that is activated
by the insertion of a coin, currency, token or an equivalent, and that contains
as one of its components a video display monitor that is capable of displaying
numbers, letters, symbols or characters in winning or losing combinations.
   (dd)   INSTANT BINGO TICKET DISPENSER. A mechanical device that dispenses an
instant bingo ticket or card as the sole item of value dispensed and that has
the following characteristics:
      (1)   It is activated upon the insertion of United States currency;
      (2)   It performs no gaming functions;
      (3)   It does not contain a video display monitor or generate noise;
      (4)   It is not capable of displaying any numbers, letters, symbols or
characters in winning or losing combinations;
      (5)   It does not simulate or display rolling or spinning reels;
      (6)   It is incapable of determining whether a dispensed bingo ticket or
card is a winning or non-winning ticket or card and requires a winning ticket
or card to be paid by a bingo game operator;
      (7)   It may provide accounting and security features to aid in
accounting for the instant bingo tickets or cards it dispenses; and
      (8)   It is not part of an electronic network and is not interactive.
   (ee)   IRC or INTERNAL REVENUE CODE. The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 100
Stat. 2085, 26 U.S.C. §§ 1 et seq., as now or hereafter amended.
   (ff)   MANUFACTURER. Any person who assembles completed bingo supplies from
raw materials, other items or subparts or who modifies, converts, adds to or
removes parts from bingo supplies to further their promotion or sale.
   (gg)   MERCHANDISE PRIZE. Any item of value, but shall not include any of
the following:
      (1)   Cash, gift cards or any equivalent thereof;
      (2)   Plays on games of chance, state lottery tickets, bingo or instant
bingo;
      (3)   Firearms, tobacco or alcoholic beverages; or
      (4)   A redeemable voucher that is redeemable for any of the items listed
in division (1), (2) or (3) of this definition.
   (hh)   NET PROFIT. Gross profit minus expenses.
   (ii)   NET PROFIT FROM THE PROCEEDS OF THE SALE OF INSTANT BINGO. Gross
profit minus the ordinary, necessary and reasonable expense expended for the
purchase of instant bingo supplies, and, in the case of instant bingo conducted
by a veteran’s, fraternal or sporting organization, minus the payment by that
organization of real property taxes and assessments levied on a premises on
which instant bingo is conducted.
   (jj)   PARTICIPANT. Any person who plays bingo.
   (kk)   PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1.59 and includes any firm
or any other legal entity, however organized.
   (ll)   POOL NOT CONDUCTED FOR PROFIT. A scheme in which a participant gives
a valuable consideration for a chance to win a prize and the total amount of
consideration wagered is distributed to a participant or participants.
   (mm)   PUNCH BOARD. A board containing a number of holes or receptacles of
uniform size in which are placed, mechanically and randomly, serially numbered
slips of paper that may be punched or drawn from the hole or receptacle when
used in conjunction with instant bingo. A player may punch or draw the numbered
slips of paper from the holes or receptacles and obtain the prize established
for the game if the number drawn corresponds to a winning number or, if the
PUNCH BOARD includes the use of a seal card, a potential winning number.
   (nn)   RAFFLE. A form of bingo in which the one or more prizes are won by
one or more persons who have purchased a raffle ticket. The one or more winners
of the raffle are determined by drawing a ticket stub or other detachable
section from a receptacle containing ticket stubs or detachable sections
corresponding to all tickets sold for the raffle. The term does not include the
drawing of a ticket stub or other detachable section of a ticket purchased to
attend a professional sporting event if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The ticket stub or other detachable section is used to select the
winner of a free prize given away at the professional sporting event; and
      (2)   The cost of the ticket is the same as the cost of a ticket to the
professional sporting event on days when no free prize is given away.
   (oo)   REDEEMABLE VOUCHER. Any ticket, token, coupon, receipt or other
noncash representation of value.
   (pp)   RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION. Any church, body of communicants or group
that is not organized or operated for profit and that gathers in common
membership for regular worship and religious observances.
   (qq)   REVOKE. To void permanently all rights and privileges of the holder
of a license issued under R.C. § 2915.08, 2915.081 or 2915.082 or a charitable
gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
   (rr)   SCHEME OF CHANCE.
      (1)   A slot machine unless authorized under R.C. Chapter 3772, lottery
unless authorized under R.C. Chapter 3770, numbers game, pool conducted for
profit, or other scheme in which a participant gives a valuable consideration
for a chance to win a prize, but does not include bingo, a skill-based
amusement machine, or a pool not conducted for profit. “Scheme of chance”
includes the use of an electronic device to reveal the results of a game entry
if valuable consideration is paid, directly or indirectly, for a chance to win
a prize. Valuable consideration is deemed to be paid for a chance to win a
prize in the following instances:
         A.   Less than 50% of the goods or services sold by a scheme of chance
operator in exchange for game entries are used or redeemed by participants at
any one location;
         B.   Less than 50% of participants who purchase goods or services at
any one location do not accept, use, or redeem the goods or services sold or
purportedly sold;
         C.   More than 50% of prizes at any one location are revealed to
participants through an electronic device simulating a game of chance or a
“casino game” as defined in R.C. § 3772.01;
         D.   The good or service sold by a scheme of chance operator in
exchange for a game entry cannot be used or redeemed in the manner advertised;
         E.   A participant pays more than fair market value for goods or
services offered by a scheme of chance operator in order to receive one or more
game entries;
         F.   A participant may use the electronic device to purchase
additional game entries;
         G.   A participant may purchase additional game entries by using
points or credits won as prizes while using the electronic device;
         H.   A scheme of chance operator pays out in prize money more than 20%
of the gross revenue received at one location; or
         I.   A participant makes a purchase or exchange in order to obtain any
good or service that may be used to facilitate play on the electronic device.
      (2)   As used in this division, “electronic device” means a mechanical,
video, digital, or electronic machine or device that is capable of displaying
information on a screen or other mechanism and that is owned, leased, or
otherwise possessed by any person conducting a scheme of chance, or by that
person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or contractors.
   (ss)   SEAL CARD. A form of instant bingo that uses instant bingo tickets in
conjunction with a board or placard that contains one or more seals that, when
removed or opened, reveal predesignated winning numbers, letters or symbols.
   (tt)   SECURITY PERSONNEL. Any person who either is a Sheriff, Deputy
Sheriff, Marshal, Deputy Marshal, township constable or member of an organized
police department of a municipal corporation or has successfully completed a
peace officer’s training course pursuant to R.C. §§ 109.71 to 109.79 and who is
hired to provide security for the premises on which bingo is conducted.
   (uu)   SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINE.
      (1)   A.   A mechanical, video, digital or electronic device that rewards
the player or players, if at all, only with merchandise prizes or with
redeemable vouchers redeemable only for merchandise prizes, provided that with
respect to rewards for playing the game all of the following apply:
            1.   The wholesale value of a merchandise prize awarded as a result
of the single play of a machine does not exceed $10;
            2.   Redeemable vouchers awarded for any single play of a machine
are not redeemable for a merchandise prize with a wholesale value of more than
$10;
            3.   Redeemable vouchers are not redeemable for a merchandise prize
that has a wholesale value of more than $10 times the fewest number of single
plays necessary to accrue the redeemable vouchers required to obtain that
prize; and
            4.   Any redeemable vouchers or merchandise prizes are distributed
at the site of the skill-based amusement machine at the time of play.
         B.   A card for the purchase of gasoline is a redeemable voucher for
purposes of division (1) of this definition even if the skill-based amusement
machine for the play of which the card is awarded is located at a place where
gasoline may not be legally distributed to the public or the card is not
redeemable at the location of, or at the time of playing, the skill-based
amusement machine.
      (2)   A device shall not be considered a skill-based amusement machine
and shall be considered a slot machine if it pays cash or one or more of the
following apply:
         A.   The ability of a player to succeed at the game is impacted by the
number or ratio of prior wins to prior losses of players playing the game;
         B.   Any reward of redeemable vouchers is not based solely on the
player achieving the object of the game or the player’s score;
         C.   The outcome of the game, or the value of the redeemable voucher
or merchandise prize awarded for winning the game, can be controlled by a
source other than any player playing the game;
         D.   The success of any player is or may be determined by a chance
event that cannot be altered by player actions;
         E.   The ability of any player to succeed at the game is determined by
game features not visible or known to the player; and/or
         F.   The ability of the player to succeed at the game is impacted by
the exercise of a skill that no reasonable player could exercise.
      (3)   All of the following apply to any machine that is operated as
described in division (1) of this definition:
         A.   As used in this definition of SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINE, GAME
AND PLAY mean one event from the initial activation of the machine until the
results of play are determined without payment of additional consideration. An
individual utilizing a machine that involves a single game, play, contest,
competition or tournament may be awarded redeemable vouchers or merchandise
prizes based on the results of play;
         B.   Advance play for a single game, play, contest, competition or
tournament participation may be purchased. The cost of the contest, competition
or tournament participation may be greater than a single non-contest,
competition or tournament play; and
         C.   To the extent that the machine is used in a contest, competition
or tournament, that contest, competition or tournament has a defined starting
and ending date and is open to participants in competition for scoring and
ranking results toward the awarding of redeemable vouchers or merchandise
prizes that are stated prior to the start of the contest, competition or
tournament.
      (4)   For purposes of division (1) of this definition, the mere presence
of a device, such as a pin-setting, ball-releasing or scoring mechanism, that
does not contribute to or affect the outcome of the play of the game does not
make the device a skill-based amusement machine.
   (vv)   SLOT MACHINE.
      (1)   Either of the following:
         A.   Any mechanical, electronic, video or digital device that is
capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on
behalf of a player who gives the thing of value in the hope of gain; or
         B.   Any mechanical, electronic, video or digital device that is
capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on
behalf of a player to conduct bingo or a scheme or game of chance.
      (2)   SLOT MACHINE does not include a skill-based amusement machine or an
instant bingo ticket dispenser.
   (ww)   SPORTING ORGANIZATION. A hunting, fishing or trapping organization,
other than a college or high school fraternity or sorority, that is not
organized for profit, that is affiliated with a state or national sporting
organization, including but not limited to the League of Ohio Sportsmen, and
that has been in continuous existence in this state for a period of three
years.
   (xx)   SUSPEND. To interrupt temporarily all rights and privileges of the
holder of a license issued under R.C. § 2915.08, 2915.081 or 2915.082 or a
charitable gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
   (yy)   SWEEPSTAKES. Any game, contest, advertising scheme or plan, or other
promotion where consideration is not required for a person to enter to win or
become eligible to receive any prize, the determination of which is based upon
chance. “Sweepstakes” does not include bingo as authorized under R.C. Chapter
2915, pari-mutuel wagering as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3769, lotteries
conducted by the State Lottery Commission as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3770,
and casino gaming as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3772.
   (zz)   SWEEPSTAKES TERMINAL DEVICE.
      (1)   A mechanical, video, digital, or electronic machine or device that
is owned, leased, or otherwise possessed by any person conducting a
sweepstakes, or by that person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or
contractors, that is intended to be used by a sweepstakes participant, and that
is capable of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism. A device
is a sweepstakes terminal device if any of the following apply:
         A.   The device uses a simulated game terminal as a representation of
the prizes associated with the results of the sweepstakes entries.
         B.   The device utilizes software such that the simulated game
influences or determines the winning of or value of the prize.
         C.   The device selects prizes from a predetermined finite pool of
entries.
         D.   The device utilizes a mechanism that reveals the content of a
predetermined sweepstakes entry.
         E.   The device predetermines the prize results and stores those
results for delivery at the time the sweepstakes entry results are revealed.
         F.   The device utilizes software to create a game result.
         G.   The device reveals the prize incrementally, even though the
device does not influence the awarding of the prize or the value of any prize
awarded.
         H.   The device determines and associates the prize with an entry or
entries at the time the sweepstakes is entered.
      (2)   As used in this definition and in §
630.02:
         A.   “Enter.” The act by which a person becomes eligible to receive
any prize offered in a sweepstakes.
         B.   “Entry.” One event from the initial activation of the sweepstakes
terminal device until all the sweepstakes prize results from that activation
are revealed.
         C.   “Prize.” Any gift, award, gratuity, good, service, credit,
reward, or any other thing of value that may be transferred to a person,
whether possession of the prize is actually transferred, or placed on an
account or other record as evidence of the intent to transfer the prize.
         D.   “Sweepstakes terminal device facility.” Any location in this
state where a sweepstakes terminal device is provided to a sweepstakes
participant, except as provided in §
630.02(g) and R.C. § 2915.02(G).
   (aaa)   VETERAN’S ORGANIZATION. Any individual post or state headquarters of
a national veteran’s association or an auxiliary unit of any individual post of
a national veteran’s association, which post, state headquarters or auxiliary
unit is incorporated as a nonprofit corporation and either has received a
letter from the state headquarters of the national veteran’s association
indicating that the individual post or auxiliary unit is in good standing with
the national veteran’s association or has received a letter from the national
veteran’s association indicating that the state headquarters is in good
standing with the national veteran’s association. As used in this division
(aaa), NATIONAL VETERAN’S ASSOCIATION means any veteran’s association that has
been in continuous existence as such for a period of at least five years and
either is incorporated by an act of the United States Congress or has a
national dues-paying membership of at least 5,000 persons.
   (bbb)   VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER’S ORGANIZATION. Any organization of volunteer
firefighters, as defined in R.C. § 146.01, that is organized and operated
exclusively to provide financial support for a volunteer fire department or a
volunteer fire company and that is recognized or ratified by a county,
municipal corporation or township.
   (ccc)   VOLUNTEER RESCUE SERVICE ORGANIZATION. Any organization of
volunteers organized to function as an emergency medical service organization,
as defined in R.C. § 4765.01.
   (ddd)   YOUTH ATHLETIC ORGANIZATION. Any organization, not organized for
profit, that is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial support
to, or to operate, athletic activities for persons who are 21 years of age or
younger by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating or contributing to the
support of an athletic team, club, league or association.
   (eee)   YOUTH ATHLETIC PARK ORGANIZATION. Any organization, not organized
for profit, that satisfies both of the following:
      (1)   It owns, operates and maintains playing fields that satisfy both of
the following:
         A.   The playing fields are used at least 100 days per year for
athletic activities by one or more organizations, not organized for profit,
each of which is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial
support to, or to operate, athletic activities for persons who are 18 years of
age or younger by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating or contributing to
the support of an athletic team, club, league or association; and
         B.   The playing fields are not used for any profit-making activity at
any time during the year.
      (2)   It uses the proceeds of bingo it conducts exclusively for the
operation, maintenance, and improvement of its playing fields of the type
described in division (1) of this definition.
Statutory reference:
   Gambling definitions, see R.C. § 2915.01
§ 630.02 GAMBLING IN GENERAL.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Engage in bookmaking, or knowingly engage in conduct that
facilitates bookmaking;
      (2)   Establish, promote or operate or knowingly engage in conduct that
facilitates any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance;
      (3)   Knowingly procure, transmit, exchange or engage in conduct that
facilitates the procurement, transmission or exchange of information for use in
establishing odds or determining winners in connection with bookmaking or with
any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance;
      (4)   Engage in betting or in playing any scheme or game of chance as a
substantial source of income or livelihood; or
      (5)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the
use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility
and either:
         A.   Give to another person any item described in R.C. § 2915.01(VV)
(1), (VV)(2), (VV)(3), or (VV)(4) as a prize for playing or participating in a
sweepstakes; or
         B.   Give to another person any merchandise prize, or a redeemable
voucher for a merchandise prize, the wholesale value of which is in excess of
$10 and which is awarded as a single entry for playing or participating in a
sweepstakes. Redeemable vouchers shall not be redeemable for a merchandise
prize that has a wholesale value of more than $10.
      (6)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the
use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility
without first obtaining a current annual “certificate of registration” from the
Attorney General as required by R.C. § 2915.02(F).
      (7)   With purpose to violate division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4),
(a)(5), or (a)(6) of this section, acquire, possess, control or operate any
gambling device.
   (b)   For purposes of division (a)(1) of this section, a person facilitates
bookmaking if the person in any way knowingly aids an illegal bookmaking
operation, including without limitation placing a bet with a person engaged in
or facilitating illegal bookmaking. For purposes of division (a)(2) of this
section, a person facilitates a game of chance conducted for profit or a scheme
of chance if the person in any way knowingly aids in the conduct or operation
of any such game or scheme, including without limitation playing any such game
or scheme.
   (c)   This section does not prohibit conduct in connection with gambling
expressly permitted by law.
   (d)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   Games of chance, if all of the following apply:
         A.   The games of chance are not craps for money or roulette for
money;
         B.   The games of chance are conducted by a charitable organization
that is and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a determination
letter that is currently in effect, stating that the organization is exempt
from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)
(3);
         C.   The games of chance are conducted at festivals of the charitable
organization that are conducted not more than a total of five days a calendar
year, and are conducted on premises owned by the charitable organization for a
period of no less than one year immediately preceding the conducting of the
games of chance, on premises leased from a governmental unit, or on premises
that are leased from a veteran’s or fraternal organization and that have been
owned by the lessor veteran’s or fraternal organization for a period of no less
than one year immediately preceding the conducting of the games of chance. A
charitable organization shall not lease premises from a veteran’s or fraternal
organization to conduct a festival described in this division (d)(1)C., if the
veteran’s or fraternal organization already has leased the premises 12 times
during the preceding year to charitable organizations for that purpose. If a
charitable organization leases premises from a veteran’s or fraternal
organization to conduct a festival described in this division (d)(1)C., the
charitable organization shall not pay a rental rate for the premises per day of
the festival that exceeds the rental rate per bingo session that a charitable
organization may pay under R.C. § 2915.09(B)(1) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance when it leases premises from another charitable
organization to conduct bingo games;
         D.   All of the money or assets received from the games of chance
after deduction only of prizes paid out during the conduct of the games of
chance are used by, given, donated or otherwise transferred to any organization
that is described in IRC § 509(a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) and is either a
governmental unit or an organization that is tax exempt under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c)(3); and
         E.   The games of chance are not conducted during or within ten hours
of a bingo game conducted for amusement purposes only pursuant to R.C. §
2915.12 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance. No person shall
receive any commission, wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity or other
form of compensation, directly or indirectly, for operating or assisting in the
operation of any game of chance.
      (2)   Any tag fishing tournament, as defined in R.C. § 1531.01, operated
under a permit issued under R.C. § 1533.92; and
      (3)   Bingo conducted by a charitable organization that holds a license
issued under R.C. § 2915.08.
   (e)   Division (d) of this section shall not be construed to authorize the
sale, lease or other temporary or permanent transfer of the right to conduct
games of chance, as granted by that division, by any charitable organization
that is granted that right.
   (f)   Any person desiring to conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a
sweepstakes with the use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes
terminal device facility shall first register with the Office of the Attorney
General and obtain an annual certificate of registration by providing a filing
fee of $200 and all information as required by rule adopted under R.C. §
2915.02(H). Not later than the tenth day of each month, each sweepstakes
terminal device operator shall file a sweepstakes terminal device monthly
report with the Attorney General and provide a filing fee of $50 and all
information required by rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.02(H). All information
provided to the Attorney General under this division shall be available to law
enforcement upon request.
   (g)   (1)   A person may apply to the Attorney General, on a form prescribed
by the Attorney General, for a certificate of compliance that the person is not
operating a sweepstakes terminal device facility. The form shall require the
person to include the address of the business location where sweepstakes
terminal devices will be used and to make the following certifications:
         A.   That the person will not use more than two sweepstakes terminal
devices at the business location;
         B.   That the retail value of sweepstakes prizes to be awarded at the
business location using sweepstakes terminal devices during a reporting period
will be less than 3% of the gross revenue received at the business location
during the reporting period;
         C.   That no other form of gaming except lottery ticket sales as
authorized under R.C. Chapter 3770 will be conducted at the business location
or in an adjoining area of the business location;
         D.   That any sweepstakes terminal device at the business location
will not allow any deposit of any money, coin, or token, or the use of any
credit card, debit card, prepaid card, or any other method of similar payment
to be used, directly or indirectly, to participate in a sweepstakes;
         E.   That notification of any prize will not take place on the same
day as a participant’s sweepstakes entry; and
         F.   That the person consents to provide any other information to the
Attorney General as required by rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.02(H).
      (2)   The filing fee for a certificate of compliance is $250. The
Attorney General may charge up to an additional $250 for reasonable expenses
resulting from any investigation related to an application for a certificate of
compliance.
      (3)   A certificate of compliance is effective for one year. The
certificate holder may reapply for a certificate of compliance. A person issued
a certificate of compliance shall file semiannual reports with the Attorney
General stating the number of sweepstakes terminal devices at the business
location and that the retail value of prizes awarded at the business location
using sweepstakes terminal devices is less than 3% of the gross revenue
received at the business location.
   (h)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of gambling, a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling
offense, gambling is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
Notwithstanding this division, failing to file a sweepstakes terminal device
monthly report as required by division (f) of this section or the semiannual
report required by division (g) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 2915.02(A) - (G), (K))
§ 630.021 CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION LICENSING PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Every charitable organization desiring to raise funds as permitted by
both §
630.02(d) and R.C. § 2915.02(D), at a location within the city, shall be
required to secure a license to do so and assure the event is conducted in
compliance with this section and R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (b)   Application for the license shall be made to the Police Chief, upon a
form to be supplied by the Police Department, for that purpose, at least 21
days in advance of the date of the fund raiser, along with a copy of the IRC §
501(c)(3) tax exemption status, the location of the event, a copy of the
pertinent lease agreement, and a copy of a criminal record verification from
the Ohio Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation for each volunteer
indicated in the application.
   (c)   The application for the license shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   The hours and dates of the proposed fund raiser;
      (2)   The name, address and telephone number of the charity and a contact
number for a representative of such charity;
      (3)   The name, address, Social Security number, telephone number and a
photocopy of the current driver’s license or valid state identification card
for the individual or individuals who will have direct supervisory
responsibility for the conduct of the fund raiser;
      (4)   The names, addresses, telephone numbers and photocopies of current
driver’s licenses or valid state identification cards of all volunteers who
will be working the fund raiser;
      (5)   The names, addresses, telephone numbers and photocopy of current
driver’s licenses or valid state identification card of all security personnel,
to include security for parking area as well as at the principal location of
the fund raiser;
      (6)   An itemization of all equipment to be used, to include leasing
agreements;
      (7)   A projected indication as to the purpose for which the revenue will
be used, together with allocation of planned expenses, or known expenses,
including, but not limited to, lease of property, rental equipment, costs of
food and security;
      (8)   Evidence of insurance in an amount not less than $250,000 assuring
against any injuries to persons or property arising out of the conduct of the
fund raiser, whether the insurance by naming the organization as an additional
insurer of the landlord, or by direct insurance for the fund raising activity
itself; and
      (9)   A list of any and all fund raising events the charity has conducted
in the previous 12 months; and a list of any and all fund raising events
conducted at the proposed location in the previous 12 months.
   (d)   Nothing herein shall permit profit activities except as set forth
herein or in R.C. § 2915.02(D)
   (e)   The Police Chief shall be authorized to deny a license or to limit the
participation of any director or individual as a fund raiser, volunteer of
event, or volunteer for security purposes. Such denials or limitations may be,
but are not limited to, prior convictions for any felony, or conviction for a
misdemeanor involving a crime of gambling. Such denials may also be, but are
not limited to failure to fully comply with this section.
   (f)   A non-refundable application fee in the amount of $50 shall be paid to
the city upon submitting said application.
   (g)   A license shall not be transferable from person to person or place to
place, and shall be usable only at the place and by the person designated in
the license. A license is only valid for one event.
   (h)   A member listed in the license as having direct supervisory
responsibility of the event shall be present at all times during the event. If
the aforementioned individual is not present, all event operations shall
immediately cease until such time as an approved supervisor, as indicated on
the license, is present.
   (i)   In the event that a license is approved by the city, the license must
be noticeably and conspicuously posted within the location of the event. No
volunteer is authorized to work, assist, aid or perform any function in the
furtherance of said event if his or her name is excluded from the license.
   (j)   Every license issued under this section is subject to the right of
being revoked should the licensee directly or indirectly permit a violation of
the provisions set forth in this section, the ordinances of the city, or a
statute of the state. The right of revocation is expressly reserved.
   (k)   The Police Department is authorized to enter the premises of any
organization holding an event for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this
section and equipped with the authority to revoke or suspend all operations on
the premises.
   (l)   Within 30 days after the completion of the charitable fund raiser, the
applicant shall provide to the city, by affidavit or by a certified public
accountant, certification of income and disbursements of the fund raiser,
together with affidavits that the net proceeds thereof have been placed on
deposit with the charitable organization by depositing them in a bank account,
for instance a passbook, or by providing other suitable evidence acceptable to
the Police Department.
   (m)   The Police Chief, or his or her designee, shall provide a written
explanation and justification for a rendered decision upon request. Applicants
may appeal said decision with the Law Department.
   (n)   The Police Chief, or his or her designees, shall exempt a charitable
organization from the license requirement if the following conditions are met
and adequate evidence thereof is supplied to the Police Department upon notice
to conduct such event.
      (1)   The charitable organization hosting the event has held a IRC § 501
(c)(3) tax exempt status with the Internal Revenue Service prior to, and
continually since, December 31, 2003;
      (2)   The charitable organization that is hosting the event shall provide
evidence that it is to retain all proceeds. No monies, or any other object of
value, shall be paid to any person, director or volunteer. Reasonable payment
made for rental equipment and security may be permitted upon the approval of
the Police Department;
      (3)   All persons, directors, individuals or volunteers working at the
event have been members of the organization for at least 18 days proceeding the
event; and
      (4)   The event is sponsored by the city or the Solon School System, or
is the bingo program held by St. Rita’s Church which pre-existed the effective
date of this section.
   (o)   Any person or persons who violate any provisions of this section shall
be guilty of gambling, a misdemeanor of the first degree, for each offense. If
the offender has previously been convicted of any gambling offense, gambling is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(Ord. 2005-202A, passed 11-7-2005)
§ 630.022 PROHIBITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS OF LICENSEES.
   (a)   No licensee shall:
      (1)   Conduct games which include craps for money or slot machines;
      (2)   Conduct a fund raiser within ten hours of a bingo game conducted
for amusement;
      (3)   Receive any commission, wage, salary, reward, tip, donation,
gratuity or other form of compensation, directly or indirectly, for operating,
assisting or volunteering in the operation of any fund raiser;
      (4)   Have direct supervisory responsibility, file applications for or
receive licenses on behalf of more than one charitable organization in any
calendar year, nor conduct or participate in the conduct of more than two
charitable fund raisers in any calendar year;
      (5)   Permit admission of any person under the age of 18 years to any
fund raiser under §
630.021;
      (6)   Permit any person under the age of 18 years to serve as a game
operator or volunteer; or
      (7)   Conduct a charitable game of chance between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 10:00 a.m. on Mondays through Fridays, and no licensee shall
conduct a charitable game of chance between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 10:00
a.m. on Saturdays and Sundays.
   (b)   No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to or be present
on the premises of any charity fund raiser licensed under this section.
   (c)   No person who has been convicted of a felony offense or a misdemeanor
gambling offense in any jurisdiction shall serve as a game operator or
volunteer.
   (d)   Any person or persons who violate any provisions of this section shall
be guilty of gambling, a misdemeanor of the first degree, for each offense. If
the offender has previously been convicted of any gambling offense, gambling is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(Ord. 2005-202A, passed 11-7-2005)
§ 630.03 OPERATING A GAMBLING HOUSE.
   (a)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control or
supervision of premises, shall:
      (1)   Use or occupy the premises for gambling in violation of R.C. §
2915.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance; or
      (2)   Recklessly permit the premises to be used or occupied for gambling
in violation of R.C. § 2915.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of operating a
gambling house, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously
has been convicted of a gambling offense, operating a gambling house is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (c)   Premises used or occupied in violation of this section constitute a
nuisance subject to abatement under R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2915.03)
§ 630.04 PUBLIC GAMING.
   (a)   No person, while at a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall or
other place of public accommodation, business, amusement or resort shall make a
bet or play any game of chance or scheme of chance.
   (b)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control or
supervision of a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall or other place
of public accommodation, business, amusement or resort shall recklessly permit
those premises to be used or occupied in violation of division (a) of this
section.
   (c)   Divisions (a) and (b) of this section do not prohibit conduct in
connection with gambling expressly permitted by law.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public gaming. Except as
otherwise provided in this division (d), public gaming is a minor misdemeanor.
If the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling offense, public
gaming is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (e)   Premises used or occupied in violation of division (b) of this section
constitute a nuisance subject to abatement under R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2915.04)
§ 630.05 CHEATING.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome
of any of the following:
      (1)   The subject of a bet;
      (2)   A contest of knowledge, skill or endurance that is not an athletic
or sporting event;
      (3)   A scheme or game of chance; and
      (4)   Bingo.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Offer, give, solicit or accept anything of value to corrupt the
outcome of an athletic or sporting event; and
      (2)   Engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome of an athletic or
sporting event.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
cheating. Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(1), cheating is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the potential gain from the cheating is
$1,000 or more or if the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling
offense or of any theft offense as defined in R.C. § 2913.01, cheating is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
corrupting sports. Corrupting sports is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.05)
§ 630.06 RESPONSIBILITY OF CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION CONDUCTING BINGO GAME.
   (a)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo shall fail to do any of
the following:
      (1)   Own all of the equipment used to conduct bingo or lease that
equipment from a charitable organization that is licensed to conduct bingo, or
from the landlord of a premises where bingo is conducted, for a rental rate
that is not more than is customary and reasonable for that equipment;
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(3) of this section,
use all of the gross receipts from bingo for paying prizes, for reimbursement
of expenses for or for renting premises in which to conduct bingo, for
reimbursement of expenses for or for purchasing or leasing bingo supplies used
in conducting bingo, for reimbursement of expenses for or for hiring security
personnel, for reimbursement of expenses for or for advertising bingo, or for
reimbursement of other expenses or for other expenses listed in the definition
for EXPENSES in R.C. § 2915.01, provided that the amount of the receipts so
spent is not more than is customary and reasonable for a similar purchase,
lease, hiring, advertising or expense. If the building in which bingo is
conducted is owned by the charitable organization conducting bingo and the
bingo conducted includes a form of bingo described in division (1) of the
definition of BINGO in R.C. § 2915.01, the charitable organization may deduct
from the total amount of the gross receipts from each session a sum equal to
the lesser of $600 or 45% of the gross receipts from the bingo described in
that division as consideration for the use of the premises; or
      (3)   Use, or give, donate, or otherwise transfer, all of the net profit
derived from bingo described in R.C. § 2915.01(O)(1) for a charitable purpose
listed in its license application and described in R.C. § 2915.01(V), or
distribute all of the net profit from the proceeds of the sale of instant bingo
or electronic instant bingo as stated in its license application and in
accordance with R.C. § 2915.101, as applicable.
   (b)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
division (1) of the definition of BINGO in R.C. § 2915.01 shall fail to do any
of the following:
      (1)   Conduct the bingo game on premises that are owned by the charitable
organization, on premises that are owned by another charitable organization and
leased from that charitable organization for a rental rate not in excess of the
lesser of $650 per bingo session or 45% of the gross receipts of the bingo
session, on premises that are leased from a person other than a charitable
organization for a rental rate that is not more than is customary and
reasonable for premises that are similar in location, size and quality but not
in excess of $450 per bingo session, or on premises that are owned by a person
other than a charitable organization, that are leased from that person by
another charitable organization, and that are subleased from that other
charitable organization by the charitable organization for a rental rate not in
excess of $450 per bingo session. No charitable organization is required to pay
property taxes or assessments on premises that the charitable organization
leases from another person to conduct bingo sessions. If the charitable
organization leases from a person other than a charitable organization the
premises on which it conducts bingo sessions, the lessor of the premises shall
provide only the premises to the organization and shall not provide the
organization with bingo game operators, security personnel, concessions or
concession operators, bingo supplies, or any other type of service. A
charitable organization shall not lease or sublease premises that it owns or
leases to more than three other charitable organizations per calendar week for
the purpose of conducting bingo sessions on the premises. A person that is not
a charitable organization shall not lease premises that it owns, leases or
otherwise is empowered to lease to more than three charitable organizations per
calendar week for conducting bingo sessions on the premises. In no case shall
more than nine bingo sessions be conducted on any premises in any calendar
week;
      (2)   Display its license conspicuously at the premises where the bingo
session is conducted; or
      (3)   Conduct the bingo session in accordance with division (1) of the
definition of BINGO in R.C. § 2915.01.
   (c)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
division (1) of the definition of BINGO in R.C. § 2915.01 shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for operating a bingo
session that is conducted by the charitable organization or for preparing,
selling or serving food or beverages at the site of the bingo session, permit
any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to pay
compensation to any bingo game operator who prepares, sells or serves food or
beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable organization, or
permit any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to prepare,
sell or serve food or beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable
organization, if the auxiliary unit or society pays any compensation to the
bingo game operators who prepare, sell or serve the food or beverages;
      (2)   Pay consulting fees to any person for any services performed in
relation to the bingo session;
      (3)   Pay concession fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in the bingo session;
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(4) of this section,
conduct more than three bingo sessions in any seven-day period. A volunteer
firefighter’s organization or a volunteer rescue service organization that
conducts not more than five bingo sessions in a calendar year may conduct more
than three bingo sessions in a seven-day period after notifying the Attorney
General when it will conduct the sessions;
      (5)   Pay out more than $6,000 in prizes for bingo games described in
R.C. § 2915.01(S)(1) during any bingo session that is conducted by the
charitable organization. “Prizes” does not include awards from the conduct of
instant bingo;
      (6)   Conduct a bingo session at any time during the eight-hour period
between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., at any time during, or within ten hours of, a
bingo game conducted for amusement only pursuant to R.C. § 2915.12 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, at any premises not specified on
its license, or on any day of the week or during any time period not specified
on its license. This division (c)(6) does not prohibit the sale of instant
bingo tickets beginning at 9:00 a.m. for a bingo session that begins at 10:00
a.m. If circumstances make it impractical for the charitable organization to
conduct a bingo session at the premises, or on the day of the week or at the
time specified on its license or if a charitable organization wants to conduct
bingo sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than the day or time
specified on its license, the charitable organization may apply in writing to
the Attorney General for an amended license pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08(J). A
charitable organization may apply twice in each calendar year for an amended
license to conduct bingo sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than
the day or time specified on its license. If the amended license is granted,
the organization may conduct bingo sessions at the premises, on the day of the
week, and at the time specified on its amended license;
      (7)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, is under the age of 18 to work as a bingo game operator;
      (8)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any
jurisdiction to be a bingo game operator;
      (9)   Permit the lessor of the premises on which the bingo session is
conducted, if the lessor is not a charitable organization, to provide the
charitable organization with bingo game operators, security personnel,
concessions, bingo supplies or any other type of service;
      (10)   Purchase or lease bingo supplies from any person except a
distributor issued a license under R.C. § 2915.081;
      (11)   A.   Use or permit the use of electronic bingo aids except under
the following circumstances:
            1.   For any single participant, not more than 90 bingo faces can
be played using an electronic bingo aid or aids;
            2.   The charitable organization shall provide a participant using
an electronic bingo aid with corresponding paper bingo cards or sheets;
            3.   The total price of bingo faces played with an electronic bingo
aid shall be equal to the total price of the same number of bingo faces played
with a paper bingo card or sheet sold at the same bingo session but without an
electronic bingo aid;
            4.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be part of an electronic
network other than a network that includes only bingo aids and devices that are
located on the premises at which the bingo is being conducted or be interactive
with any device not located on the premises at which the bingo is being
conducted;
            5.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to participate in bingo
that is conducted at a location other than the location at which the bingo
session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used; and
            6.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to provide for the
input of numbers and letters announced by a bingo caller other than the bingo
caller who physically calls the numbers and letters at the location at which
the bingo session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used.
         B.   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 119 that govern the use of electronic bingo aids. The rules may include
a requirement that an electronic bingo aid be capable of being audited by the
Attorney General to verify the number of bingo cards or sheets played during
each bingo session.
      (12)   Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, to be under 18 years of age to play bingo described in division (1)
of the definition of BINGO in R.C. § 2915.01.
   (d)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (d)(3) of this section,
no charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator, and no bingo
game operator shall receive or accept, any commission, wage, salary, reward,
tip, donation, gratuity or other form of compensation, directly or indirectly,
regardless of the source, for conducting bingo or providing other work or labor
at the site of bingo during a bingo session.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) of this section, no
charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator any commission,
wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation,
directly or indirectly regardless of the source, for conducting instant bingo,
electronic instant bingo, or both other than at a bingo session at the site of
instant bingo, electronic instant bingo, or both other than at a bingo session.
      (3)   Nothing in this division (d) of this section prohibits an employee
of a fraternal organization, veteran’s organization or sporting organization
from selling instant bingo tickets or cards to the organization’s members or
invited guests, as long as no portion of the employee’s compensation is paid
from any receipts of bingo.
   (e)   Notwithstanding division (b)(1) of this section, a charitable
organization that, prior to December 6, 1977, has entered into written
agreements for the lease of premises it owns to another charitable organization
or other charitable organizations for the conducting of bingo sessions so that
more than two bingo sessions are conducted per calendar week on the premises,
and a person that is not a charitable organization and that, prior to December
6, 1977, has entered into written agreements for the lease of premises it owns
to charitable organizations for the conducting of more than two bingo sessions
per calendar week on the premises, may continue to lease the premises to those
charitable organizations, provided that no more than four sessions are
conducted per calendar week, that the lessor organization or person has
notified the Attorney General in writing of the organizations that will conduct
the sessions and the days of the week and the times of the day on which the
sessions will be conducted, that the initial lease entered into with each
organization that will conduct the sessions was filed with the Attorney General
prior to December 6, 1977, and that each organization that will conduct the
sessions was issued a license to conduct bingo games by the Attorney General
prior to December 6, 1977.
   (f)   This section does not prohibit a bingo licensed charitable
organization or a game operator from giving any person an instant bingo ticket
as a prize.
   (g)   Whoever violates division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of
illegally conducting a bingo game, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. Except as otherwise provided in this division (g), whoever violates
division (a)(1), (a)(3), (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3), (c)(1) to (c)(11) or (d) of
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of division (a)(1), (a)(3), (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)
(3), (c)(1) to (c)(11) or (d) of this section, a violation of division (a)(1),
(a)(3), (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3), (c)(1) to (c)(11) or (d) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever violates division (c)(12) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of division (c)(12) of this
section, a violation of division (c)(12) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.09)
§ 630.07 MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS BY CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS.
   (a)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo or a game of chance
pursuant to R.C. § 2915.02(D), or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, shall fail to maintain the following records for at least three
years from the date on which the bingo or game of chance is conducted:
      (1)   An itemized list of the gross receipts of each bingo session, each
game of instant bingo by serial number, each electronic instant bingo game by
serial number, each raffle, each punch board game, and each game of chance, and
an itemized list of the gross profits of each game of instant bingo by serial
number and each electronic instant bingo game by serial number;
      (2)   An itemized list of all expenses, other than prizes, that are
incurred in conducting bingo, the name of each person to whom the expenses are
paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses;
      (3)   A list of all prizes awarded during each bingo session, each
raffle, each punch board game, and each game of chance conducted by the
charitable organization, the total prizes awarded from each game of instant
bingo by serial number and each electronic instant bingo game by serial number,
and the name, address, and social security number of all persons who are
winners of prizes of $600 or more in value;
      (4)   An itemized list of the recipients of the net profit of bingo or
game of chance, including the name and address of each recipient to whom the
money is distributed, and if the organization uses the net profit of bingo, or
the money or assets received from a game of chance, for any charitable or other
purpose set forth in R.C. § 2915.01(V), 2915.02(D) or 2915.101, a list of each
purpose and an itemized list of each expenditure for each purpose;
      (5)   The number of persons who participate in any bingo session or game
of chance that is conducted by the charitable organization;
      (6)   A list of receipts from the sale of food and beverages by the
charitable organization or one of its auxiliary units or societies, if the
receipts were excluded from gross receipts under R.C. § 2915.01(T); and
      (7)   An itemized list of all expenses incurred at each bingo session,
each raffle, each punch board game, or each game of instant bingo or electronic
instant bingo conducted by the charitable organization in the sale of food and
beverages by the charitable organization or by an auxiliary unit or society of
the charitable organization, the name of each person to whom the expenses are
paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses.
   (b)   A charitable organization shall keep the records that it is required
to maintain pursuant to division (a) of this section at its principal place of
business in this state or at its headquarters in this state and shall notify
the Attorney General of the location at which those records are kept.
   (c)   The gross profit from each bingo session or game described in division
(1) or (2) of the definition of BINGO in R.C. § 2915.01 shall be deposited into
a checking account devoted exclusively to the bingo session or game. Payments
for allowable expenses incurred in conducting the bingo session or game and
payments to recipients of some or all of the net profit of the bingo session or
game shall be made only by checks or electronic fund transfers drawn on the
bingo session or game account.
   (d)   Each charitable organization shall conduct and record an inventory of
all of its bingo supplies as of the first day of November of each year.
   (e)   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with R.C. Chapter
119 that establish standards of accounting, record keeping and reporting to
ensure that gross receipts from bingo or games of chance are properly accounted
for.
   (f)   A distributor shall maintain, for a period of three years after the
date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling
or otherwise providing to another person bingo supplies for use in this state.
The record shall include all of the following for each instance:
      (1)   The name of the manufacturer from which the distributor purchased
the bingo supplies and the date of the purchase;
      (2)   The name and address of the charitable organization or other
distributor to which the bingo supplies were sold or otherwise provided;
      (3)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies; and
      (4)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of all paper
bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided
to each charitable organization.
   (g)   A manufacturer shall maintain, for a period of three years after the
date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling
or otherwise providing bingo supplies for use in this state. The record shall
include all of the following for each instance:
      (1)   The name and address of the distributor to whom the bingo supplies
were sold or otherwise provided;
      (2)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies, including
serial numbers; and
      (3)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of all paper
bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided
to each distributor.
   (h)   (1)   The Attorney General or any law enforcement agency may do all of
the following:
         (a)   Investigate any charitable organization, distributor, or
manufacturer or any officer, agent, trustee, member, or employee of the
organization, distributor, or manufacturer;
         (b)   Examine the accounts and records of the charitable organization,
distributor, or manufacturer or of any officer, agent, trustee, member, or
employee of the organization, distributor, or manufacturer;
         (c)   Conduct inspections, audits, and observations of bingo or games
of chance;
         (d)   Conduct inspections of the premises where bingo or games of
chance are conducted or where bingo supplies are manufactured or distributed;
         (e)   Take any other necessary and reasonable action to determine if a
violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 has occurred
and to determine whether R.C. § 2915.11, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, has been complied with.
      (2)   If any law enforcement agency has reasonable grounds to believe
that a charitable organization, distributor, or manufacturer or an officer,
agent, trustee, member, or employee of the organization, distributor, or
manufacturer has violated any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915,
the law enforcement agency may proceed by action in the proper court to enforce
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915, provided that the law enforcement agency
shall give written notice to the Attorney General when commencing an action as
described in this division.
   (i)   No person shall destroy, alter, conceal, withhold, or deny access to
any accounts or records of a charitable organization, distributor, or
manufacturer that have been requested for examination, or obstruct, impede, or
interfere with any inspection, audit, or observation of bingo or a game of
chance, of premises where bingo or a game of chance is conducted, or of
premises where bingo supplies are manufactured or distributed, or refuse to
comply with any reasonable request of, or obstruct, impede, or interfere with
any other reasonable action undertaken by, the Attorney General or a law
enforcement agency pursuant to division (H) of this section.
   (j)   Whoever violates division (a) or (i) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2915.10)
§ 630.08 QUALIFICATIONS OF BINGO GAME OPERATOR.
   (a)   No person shall be a bingo game operator unless the person is 18 years
of age or older.
   (b)   No person who has been convicted of a felony or a gambling offense in
any jurisdiction shall be a bingo game operator.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. Whoever violates division (b) of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2915.11)
§ 630.09 EXEMPTION FOR BINGO GAMES CONDUCTED FOR AMUSEMENT.
   (a)   Sections
630.06 through
630.13 and
630.15 do not apply to bingo games that are conducted for the purpose of
amusement only. A bingo game is conducted for the purpose of amusement only if
it complies with all of the requirements specified in either division (a)(1) or
(a)(2) of this section.
      (1)   A.   The participants do not pay any money or any other thing of
value, including an admission fee or any fee, for bingo cards or sheets,
objects to cover the spaces, or other devices used in playing bingo, for the
privilege of participating in the bingo game, or to defray any costs of the
game, or pay tips or make donations during or immediately before or after the
bingo game.
         B.   All prizes awarded during the course of the game are non-
monetary, and in the form of merchandise, goods or entitlement to goods or
services only, and the total value of all prizes awarded during the game is
less than $100.
         C.   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity or
other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of
the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at
the site of the bingo game.
         D.   The bingo game is not conducted either during or within ten hours
of any of the following:
            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is
conducted pursuant to R.C. §§ 2915.07 through 2915.11 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance; or
            2.   A scheme or game of chance, or bingo described in R.C. §
2915.01(O)(2).
         E.   The number of players participating in the bingo game does not
exceed 50.
      (2)   A.   The participants do not pay money or any other thing of value
as an admission fee, and no participant is charged more than $0.25 to purchase
a bingo card or sheet, objects to cover the spaces or other devices used in
playing bingo.
         B.   The total amount of money paid by all of the participants for
bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover the spaces or other devices used in
playing bingo does not exceed $100.
         C.   All of the money paid for bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover
spaces or other devices used in playing bingo is used only to pay winners
monetary and nonmonetary prizes and to provide refreshments.
         D.   The total value of all prizes awarded during the game does not
exceed $100.
         E.   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity or
other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of
the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at
the site of the bingo game.
         F.   The bingo game is not conducted during or within ten hours of
either of the following:
            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is
conducted pursuant to R.C. §§ 2915.07 through 2915.15 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance;
            2.   A scheme of chance or a game of chance, or bingo described in
R.C. § 2915.01(O)(2).
         G.   All of the participants reside at the premises where the bingo
game is conducted.
         H.   The bingo games are conducted on different days of the week and
not more than twice in a calendar week.
   (b)   The Attorney General or any local law enforcement agency may
investigate the conduct of a bingo game that purportedly is conducted for
purposes of amusement only if there is reason to believe that the purported
amusement bingo game does not comply with the requirements of either division
(a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section. A local law enforcement agency may proceed by
action in the proper court to enforce this section if the local law enforcement
agency gives written notice to the Attorney General when commencing the action.
(R.C. § 2915.12)
§ 630.10 PROHIBITIONS WHERE INSTANT BINGO GAME IS CONDUCTED.
   (a)   No charitable organization that conducts instant bingo shall do any of
the following:
      (1)   Fail to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 2915.09(A)(1), (A)
(2) and (A)(3), or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (2)   Conduct instant bingo unless either of the following applies:
         A.   That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the
organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a), is
described in IRC § 501(c)(3), is a charitable organization as defined in R.C. §
2915.01, is in good standing in the state pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08, and is in
compliance with R.C. Chapter 1716; or
         B.   That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the
organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a), is
described in IRC § 501(c)(7), (c)(8), (c)(10) or (c)(19) or is a veteran’s
organization described in IRC § 501(c)(4), and conducts instant bingo under
R.C. § 2915.13.
      (3)   Conduct instant bingo on any day, at any time, or at any premises
not specified on the organization’s license issued pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08;
      (4)   Permit any person whom the organization knows or should have known
has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any jurisdiction to be a
bingo game operator in the conduct of instant bingo;
      (5)   Purchase or lease supplies used to conduct instant bingo or punch
board games from any person except a distributor licensed under R.C. §
2915.081;
      (6)   Sell or provide any instant bingo ticket or card for a price
different from the price printed on it by the manufacturer on either the
instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare;
      (7)   Sell an instant bingo ticket or card to a person under 18 years of
age;
      (8)   Fail to keep unsold instant bingo tickets or cards for less than
three years;
      (9)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for conducting
instant bingo that is conducted by the organization or for preparing, selling
or serving food or beverages at the site of the instant bingo game, permit any
auxiliary unit or society of the organization to pay compensation to any bingo
game operator who prepares, sells or serves food or beverages at an instant
bingo game conducted by the organization, or permit any auxiliary unit or
society of the organization to prepare, sell or serve food or beverages at an
instant bingo game conducted by the organization, if the auxiliary unit or
society pays any compensation to the bingo game operators who prepare, sell or
serve the food or beverages;
      (10)   Pay fees to any person for any services performed in relation to
an instant bingo game, except as provided in R.C. § 2915.093(D);
      (11)   Pay fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in an instant bingo game;
      (12)   A.   Allow instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold to bingo game
operators at a premises at which the organization sells instant bingo tickets
or cards or to be sold to employees of a D permit holder who are working at a
premises at which instant bingo tickets or cards are sold; and
         B.   Division (a)(12)A. of this section does not prohibit a licensed
charitable organization or a bingo game operator from giving any person an
instant bingo ticket as a prize in place of a cash prize won by a participant
in an instant bingo game. In no case shall an instant bingo ticket or card be
sold or provided for a price different from the price printed on it by the
manufacturer on either the instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare.
      (13)   Fail to display its bingo license, and the serial numbers of the
deal of instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold, conspicuously at each
premises at which it sells instant bingo tickets or cards;
      (14)   Possess a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards that was not
purchased from a distributor licensed under R.C. § 2915.081 as reflected on an
invoice issued by the distributor that contains all of the information required
by R.C. § 2915.10(E);
      (15)   Fail, once it opens a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards, to
continue to sell the tickets or cards in that deal until the tickets or cards
with the top two highest tiers of prizes in that deal are sold; and
      (16)   Possess bingo supplies that were not obtained in accordance with
R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (b)   A charitable organization may purchase, lease or use instant bingo
ticket dispensers to sell instant bingo tickets or cards.
   (c)   Pursuant to R.C. § 2915.091(C), the Attorney General may adopt rules
in accordance with R.C. Chapter 119 that govern the conduct of instant bingo by
charitable organizations.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section or a rule adopted under
division (c) of this section is guilty of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except
as otherwise provided in this division (d), illegal instant bingo conduct is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of a violation of division (a) of this section or of such a rule adopted under
division (c) of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.091)
§ 630.11 RAFFLE DRAWINGS.
   (a)   (1)   Subject to division (a)(2) of this section, a person or entity
may conduct a raffle to raise money for the person or entity and does not need
a license to conduct bingo in order to conduct a raffle drawing that is not for
profit if the person or entity is any of the following:
         A.   Exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c)(3);
         B.   A school district, community school established under R.C.
Chapter 3314, STEM school established under R.C. Chapter 3326, college-
preparatory boarding school established under R.C. Chapter 3328, or chartered
nonpublic school;
         C.   Exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c)(4), 501(c)(6), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), or
501(c)(19).
      (2)   If a person or entity that is described in division (a)(1)C. of
this section conducts a raffle, the person or entity shall distribute at least
50% of the net profit from the raffle to a charitable purpose described in R.C.
§ 2915.01(V) or to a department or agency of the federal government, the state,
or any political subdivision.
   (b)   Except as provided in division (a) of this section, no person shall
conduct a raffle drawing that is for profit or a raffle drawing that is not for
profit.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of illegal
conduct of a raffle. Except as otherwise provided in this division, illegal
conduct of a raffle is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of division (b) of this section,
illegal conduct of a raffle is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2915.092)
§ 630.12 INSTANT BINGO OTHER THAN AT BINGO SESSIONS.
   (a)   As used in this section, RETAIL INCOME FROM ALL COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY
means the income that a person receives from the provision of goods, services
or activities that are provided at the location where instant bingo other than
at a bingo session is conducted, including the sale of instant bingo tickets. A
religious organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC §
501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3), at not more than one location at which
it conducts its charitable programs, may include donations from its members and
guests as retail income.
   (b)   (1)   If a charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant
bingo other than at a bingo session under a type III license issued under R.C.
§ 2915.08, the charitable instant bingo organization shall enter into a written
contract with the owner or lessor of the location at which the instant bingo is
conducted to allow the owner or lessor to assist in the conduct of instant
bingo other than at a bingo session, identify each location where the instant
bingo other than at a bingo session is being conducted, and identify the owner
or lessor of each location.
      (2)   A charitable instant bingo organization that conducts instant bingo
other than at a bingo session under a type III license issued under R.C. §
2915.08 is not required to enter into a written contract with the owner or
lessor of the location at which the instant bingo is conducted provided that
the owner or lessor is not assisting in the conduct of the instant bingo other
than at a bingo session and provided that the conduct of the instant bingo
other than at a bingo session at that location is not more than five days per
calendar year and not more than ten hours per day.
   (c)   Except as provided in division (f) of this section, no charitable
instant bingo organization shall conduct instant bingo other than at a bingo
session at a location where the primary source of retail income from all
commercial activity at that location is the sale of instant bingo tickets.
   (d)   (1)   The owner or lessor of a location that enters into a contract
pursuant to division (b) of this section shall pay the full gross profit to the
charitable instant bingo organization, in return for the deal of instant bingo
tickets. The owner or lessor may retain the money that the owner or lessor
receives for selling the instant bingo tickets, provided, however, that after
the deal has been sold, the owner or lessor shall pay to the charitable instant
bingo organization the value of any unredeemed instant bingo prizes remaining
in the deal of instant bingo tickets. As used in this division (d)(1), FULL
GROSS PROFIT means the amount by which the total receipts of all instant bingo
tickets, if the deal has been sold in full, exceeds the amount that would be
paid out if all prizes were redeemed.
      (2)   The charitable instant bingo organization shall pay 6% of the total
gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets for the purpose of
reimbursing the owner or lessor for expenses described in this division (d)(2).
      (3)   As used in this division (d)(3), EXPENSES means those items
provided for in R.C. § 2915.01(GG)(4), (GG)(5), (GG)(6), (GG)(7), (GG)(8), (GG)
(12) and (GG)(13) and that percentage of the owner’s or lessor’s rent for the
location where instant bingo is conducted. Expenses, in the aggregate, shall
not exceed 6% of the total gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets.
   (e)   A charitable instant bingo organization shall provide the Attorney
General with all of the following information:
      (1)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has terminated a
contract entered into pursuant to division (b) of this section with an owner or
lessor of a location;
      (2)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has entered into a
written contract pursuant to division (b) of this section with a new owner or
lessor of a location; and
      (3)   That the charitable instant bingo organization is aware of conduct
by the owner or lessor of a location at which instant bingo is conducted that
is in violation of R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (f)   Division (c) of this section does not apply to a volunteer
firefighter’s organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under
IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3), that conducts instant bingo
other than at a bingo session on the premises where the organization conducts
firefighter training, that has conducted instant bingo continuously for at
least five years prior to July 1, 2003, and that, during each of those five
years, had gross receipts of at least $1,500,000.
(R.C. § 2915.093)
   (g)   (1)   Subject to the requirements of R.C. §§ 2915.14 and 2915.15
concerning electronic instant bingo, a veteran’s organization, a fraternal
organization, or a sporting organization authorized to conduct a bingo session
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2915 may conduct instant bingo, electronic instant
bingo, or both other than at a bingo session under a type III license issued
under R.C. § 2915.08 if all of the following apply:
         A.   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization limits the sale of instant bingo or electronic instant bingo to 12
hours during any day, provided that the sale does not begin earlier than 10:00
a.m. and ends not later than 2:00 a.m.
         B.   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization limits the sale of instant bingo or electronic instant bingo to
its own premises and to its own members and invited guests.
         C.   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization is raising money for an organization that is described in IRC §
509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an
organization that maintains its principal place of business in this state, that
is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC
§ 501(c)(3), and that is in good standing in this state and executes a written
contract with that organization as required in division (g)(2) of this section.
      (2)   If a veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization authorized to conduct instant bingo or electronic instant bingo
pursuant to division (g)(1) of this section is raising money for another
organization that is described in IRC § 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is
either a governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal
place of business in this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c), and that is in good standing
in this state, the veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization shall execute a written contract with the organization that is
described in IRC § 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a governmental
unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of business in this
state, that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c), and that is in good standing in this state in order
to conduct instant bingo or electronic instant bingo. That contract shall
include a statement of the percentage of the net proceeds that the veteran’s,
fraternal, or sporting organization will be distributing to the organization
that is described in IRC § 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a
governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of
business in this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC §
501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3), and that is in good standing in this
state.
      (3)   A.   If a veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or
sporting organization authorized to conduct instant bingo or electronic instant
bingo pursuant to division (g)(1) of this section has been issued a liquor
permit under R.C. Chapter 4303, that permit may be subject to suspension,
revocation, or cancellation if the veteran’s organization, fraternal
organization, or sporting organization violates a provision of this chapter or
R.C. Chapter 2915.
         B.   No veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization that enters into a written contract pursuant to division (g)(2) of
this section shall violate any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915,
or permit, aid, or abet any other person in violating any provision of this
chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.
      (4)   A veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization shall give all required proceeds earned from the conduct of
instant bingo or electronic instant bingo to the organization with which the
veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting organization has
entered into a written contract.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (g) of this section is guilty of illegal
instant bingo or electronic instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided
in this division, illegal instant bingo or electronic instant bingo conduct is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of division (g) of this section, illegal instant bingo
or electronic instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.13)
§ 630.13 RESTRICTIONS ON OWNER OR LESSOR OF LOCATION AT INSTANT BINGO.
   (a)   No owner or lessor of a location shall assist a charitable instant
bingo organization in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo
session at that location unless the owner or lessor has entered into a written
contract, as described in R.C. § 2915.093, with the charitable instant bingo
organization to assist in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo
session.
   (b)   The location of the lessor or owner shall be designated as a location
where the charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant bingo other
than at a bingo session.
   (c)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract
as prescribed in division (a) of this section shall violate any provision of
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915, or permit, aid or abet any other person in
violating any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (d)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract
as prescribed in division (a) of this section shall violate the terms of the
contract.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates division (c) or (d) of this section is guilty
of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided in this division
(e), illegal instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of a violation of division (c) or (d) of
this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   If an owner or lessor of a location knowingly, intentionally or
recklessly violates division (c) or (d) of this section, any license that the
owner or lessor holds for the retail sale of any goods on the owner’s or
lessor’s premises that is issued by the state or a political subdivision is
subject to suspension, revocation or payment of a monetary penalty at the
request of the Attorney General.
(R.C. § 2915.094)
§ 630.14 SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINES; PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (a)   No person shall give to another person any item described in division
(uu)(1), (uu)(2), (uu)(3) or (uu)(4) of §
630.01 in exchange for a noncash prize, toy or novelty received as a reward for
playing or operating a skill-based amusement machine or for a free or reduced-
price game won on a skill-based amusement machine.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of skill-based
amusement machine prohibited conduct. A violation of division (a) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree for each redemption of a prize
that is involved in the violation. If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of division (a) of this section, a violation of that
division is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.06)
§ 630.15 ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO; PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (a)   No charitable organization shall conduct electronic instant bingo
unless all of the following are true:
      (1)   The organization is a veteran’s organization described in R.C. §
2915.01(J), or is a fraternal organization described in R.C. § 2915.01(L), and
the organization qualified as a veteran’s organization or fraternal
organization, as applicable, on or before June 30, 2021.
      (2)   The organization is a veteran’s organization described in IRC § 501
(c)(4) or is, and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a
determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the organization
is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a), and is described in
IRC § 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), or 501(c)(19).
      (3)   The organization has not conducted a raffle in violation of R.C. §
2915.092(B) using an electronic raffle machine, as described in Ohio Veterans
and Fraternal Charitable Coalition v. DeWine, Case No. 13-CV-13610 (C.P.
Franklin Co. February 23, 2018), at any time on or after January 1, 2022.
   (b)   No charitable organization that conducts electronic instant bingo
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Possess an electronic instant bingo system that was not obtained in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 2915 or with any rule adopted under R.C. Chapter
2915;
      (2)   Conduct electronic instant bingo on any day, at any time, or on any
premises not specified on the organization’s type II or type III license issued
under R.C. § 2915.08;
      (3)   Hold more than one valid license to conduct electronic instant
bingo at any one time;
      (4)   Conduct electronic instant bingo on more than one premises or on
any premises other than the charitable organization’s principal place of
business;
      (5)   Operate more than ten electronic bingo systems at the premises on
which the charitable organization conducts electronic instant bingo under its
license;
      (6)   Fail to display both of the following conspicuously at the premises
on which the charitable organization conducts electronic instant bingo:
         A.   The charitable organization’s bingo license;
         B.   The serial number of each deal of electronic instant bingo
tickets being sold.
      (7)   Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or should have
known, to be under 18 years of age to play electronic instant bingo;
      (8)   Sell or provide to any person an electronic instant bingo ticket
for a price different from the price displayed on the game flare for that deal,
except that the charitable organization may give a participant who wins an
electronic instant bingo game an electronic instant bingo ticket as a prize in
place of a cash prize;
      (9)   Fail, once an electronic instant bingo deal is begun, to continue
to sell tickets in that deal until all prizes have been awarded;
      (10)   Permit any person whom the organization knows, or should have
known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any jurisdiction
to be a bingo game operator in the conduct of electronic instant bingo;
      (11)   Permit a bingo game operator to play electronic instant bingo;
      (12)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(12)(b) of this
section, pay compensation to a bingo game operator for conducting electronic
instant bingo.
         B.   Division (b)(12)A. of this section does not prohibit an employee
of a veteran’s organization or fraternal organization from redeeming electronic
instant bingo tickets or vouchers for the organization’s members or invited
guests, so long as no portion of the employee’s compensation is paid from any
bingo receipts.
      (13)   Pay consulting fees to any person in relation to electronic
instant bingo.
   (c)   No person shall sell, offer to sell, or otherwise provide or offer to
provide an electronic instant bingo system to any person for use in this
municipality unless the electronic instant bingo system has been approved under
R.C. § 2915.15.
   (d)   Whoever knowingly violates division (a), (b), or (c) of this section
or a rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.14(D) is guilty of illegal electronic
instant bingo conduct. Illegal electronic instant bingo conduct is a
misdemeanor of the first degree, except that if the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of division (a) or (b) of this section, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or state law, or of a rule adopted
under R.C. § 2915.14(D), illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.14)
CHAPTER 634: NOISE CONTROL
Section
   
634.01   Definitions
   
634.02   Musical instruments
   
634.03   Steam whistles
   
634.04   Radios, phonographs and the like
   
634.05   Loudspeakers; amplifiers
   
634.06   Exhausts
   
634.07   Building or property use restrictions
   
634.08   Restricted use of power equipment, tools and machinery in non-
residentially zoned areas and in commercial construction projects within
residentially zoned areas
   
634.09   Motor vehicle limits
   
634.10   Restricted use of power equipment, construction tools and machinery in
residentially zoned area
   
634.11   Permitting noise pollution
   
634.12   Noise in Residential Districts or affecting residential or
institutional property
   
634.13   Noise in Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts
   
634.14   Noise from mobile noise sources
   
634.15   Noise in places used for entertainment
   
634.16   Quiet zones
   
634.17   Compliance with zoning district performance standards
   
634.18   Noise level measurements
   
634.19   Zoning district restrictions; construction site exceptions
   
634.20   Motor vehicle horns and signal devices
   
634.21   Test procedures for power equipment and hand tools
   
634.22   Test procedures for motor vehicles and zoning districts
   
634.23   Nuisance abatement; legal proceedings
   
634.24   Common-law nuisance remedy unimpaired
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Barking or howling dogs, see §
618.07
   Light motor vehicle noise control, see
Ch. 446
   Noise control in loading zones, see §
452.09
   Noisy mufflers, see §
438.21
   Peace disturbances, see
Ch. 648
   “Peeling;” cracking exhaust noises, see §
432.35
   Regulation of noise near state institutions, see R.C. § 3767.19
§ 634.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this chapter, whenever any of the following words,
terms or definitions are used herein, they shall have the meaning ascribed to
them in this section.
   (b)   All acoustical terminology shall be that contained in ANSI S1.1
Acoustical Terminology.
      (1)   AMBIENT. The all-encompassing sound associated with a given
environment without the noise source of interest.
      (2)   ANSI. The American National Standards Institute or its successor
bodies.
      (3)   ARI. The Air-Conditioning and Refrigeration Institute or its
successor bodies.
      (4)   ASHRAE. The American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-
Conditioning Engineers or its successor bodies.
      (5)   A.S.T.M. The American Society for Testing Materials or its
successor bodies.
      (6)   dBA. The A-weighted sound-pressure level in decibels, as measured
by a sound-level meter complying with the provisions of American Standard for
General Purpose Sound Level Meters, American National Standards Institute,
properly calibrated, and operated on the “A” weighting network.
      (7)   DECIBEL. A unit for measuring the volume of a sound, equal to the
logarithm of the ratio of the intensity of the sound to the intensity of an
arbitrarily chosen standard sound dB.
      (8)   DIRECTOR. The Director of Public Safety.
      (9)   DISCRETE TONE. A sound wave whose instantaneous sound pressure
varies essentially as a simple sinusoidal function of the time.
      (10)   FLUCTUATING NOISE. A noise whose sound pressure level varies
significantly but does not equal the ambient environmental level more than once
during the period of observation.
      (11)   INTERMITTENT NOISE. A noise whose sound pressure level equals the
ambient environmental level two or more times during the period of observation.
The period of time during which the level of the noise remains at an
essentially constant value different from that of the ambient is on the order
of one second or more.
      (12)   IEC. The International Electrotechnical Commission or its
successor bodies.
      (13)   ISO. The International Organization for Standardization or its
successor bodies.
      (14)   LIGHT MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle as defined in §
446.03 of these Codified Ordinances.
      (15)   MOBILE NOISE SOURCE. Any source (other than an individual) of
acoustic energy in motion relative to a fixed position.
      (16)   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any passenger vehicle, truck, truck-trailer,
trailer or semitrailer propelled or drawn by mechanical power, excluding a
light motor vehicle as defined in §
446.03 of these Codified Ordinances.
      (17)   NOISE LEVEL OR SOUND-PRESSURE LEVEL. In decibels, means ten times
the common logarithm of the ratio of the time-mean-square pressure of the sound
to the reference mean-square sound pressure. The reference mean-square sound
pressure shall be 4 x 10- microbars squared (20 micropascal squared).
      (18)   NOISE POLLUTION. The presence of that amount of acoustic energy
for that period of time necessary:
         A.   To cause temporary or permanent hearing loss in persons exposed;
         B.   To be otherwise injurious, or tend to be injurious, on the basis
of current information, to the public health or welfare;
         C.   To cause a nuisance; or
         D.   To interfere with domestic tranquility, that is, the comfortable
enjoyment of life and property or the conduct of business.
      (19)   NOISE SOURCE. Any person or animal, or mechanical, electrical or
thermal device, which radiates acoustic energy. In those instances where
federal noise emission standards are established for any noise source, then
those noise emission standards shall also be applicable to the same or similar
noise sources existing under conditions, such as noninterstate commerce, where
the federal standards would not otherwise apply.
      (20)   NONSTEADY NOISE. A noise whose level shifts significantly during
the period of observation.
      (21)   PERIOD OF OBSERVATION. The time interval during which acoustical
data are obtained. The PERIOD OF OBSERVATION is determined by the
characteristics of the noise being measured and should also be at least ten
times as long as the response time of the instrumentation. The greater the
variance in indicated sound level, the longer shall be the observation time for
a given expected accuracy of the measurement.
      (22)   PERSON. Includes all natural and artificial persons, including,
but not limited to, partners, servants, principals, agents, employees, public
or private officials, associations, societies, clubs, firms, partnerships and
all bodies politic or corporate.
      (23)   SAE. The Society of Automotive Engineers or its successor bodies.
      (24)   SOUND LEVEL (NOISE LEVEL). For air-borne sound, means a weighted
sound pressure level, obtained by the use of metering characteristics and the
A-weighting as specified in the reference standards (ANSI). When the A-
weighting is employed, it shall be indicated.
      (25)   SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL. In decibels, of a sound, is 20 times the
logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the sound to the
reference sound pressure. Unless otherwise specified, the effective (rms)
pressure is to be understood. The reference sound pressure is 20 uN/m2.
      (26)   STATIONARY NOISE SOURCE. Any source (other than an individual) of
acoustic energy in a fixed position.
      (27)   STEADY NOISE. A noise whose level remains essentially constant and
whose fluctuations are negligibly small during the period of observation.
      (28)   ZONING DISTRICT. Those districts established by the Solon Zoning
Code.
(1964 Code, § 510.01) (Ord. 1981-88, passed 8-3-1981)
§ 634.02 MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS.
   (a)   No person shall use or perform any hand organ or other musical
instrument or device, for pay or in expectation of payment, in any public way
or outdoors public place of the city before 9:00 a.m. or after 11:00 p.m. of
any day.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Ord. 1981-88, passed 8-3-1981)
§ 634.03 STEAM WHISTLES.
   (a)   No person shall blow, or cause to be blown, outdoors within the city,
the steam whistle or equivalent, of any stationary plant as a signal for
commencing or suspending work, or for any other purpose. This section shall not
be construed as forbidding the use of steam whistles, or their equivalent, as
alarm signals in case of fire, collision or other imminent danger.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Ord. 1981-88, passed 8-3-1981)
§ 634.04 RADIOS, PHONOGRAPHS AND THE LIKE.
   (a)   No person shall use, operate or play any radio, music player, such as
a “boom box,” tape cassette, disc player, television, audio system or musical
instrument, or any other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of
sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the
neighboring inhabitants, or at any time with louder volume than is necessary
for the convenient hearing of the person or persons who are in the room,
vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who are
voluntary listeners thereto. Such operation between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. of the following day in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a
distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is
located shall be prima-facie evidence of a violation of this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. In addition, the sound device used during the commission of the offense
shall be subject to seizure and payment of a judgment.
(Ord. 1991-193, passed 11-4-1991)
§ 634.05 LOUDSPEAKERS; AMPLIFIERS.
   (a)   No person shall use any radio receiving set, musical instrument,
phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the
producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the
purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public.
(1964 Code, § 510.02)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Ord. 1981-88, passed 8-3-1981)
§ 634.06 EXHAUSTS.
   (a)   No person shall discharge into the open air the exhaust of any steam
engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat or motor vehicle
except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or
explosive noises therefrom.
(1964 Code, § 510.02)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree and shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(Ord. 1981-88, passed 8-3-1981)
§ 634.07 BUILDING OR PROPERTY USE RESTRICTIONS.
   (a)   No person owning or in possession or control of any building or
premises shall use the same, permit the use of the same or rent the same to be
used for any business, employment or residential use, or for any purpose of
pleasure or recreation, if such use shall, by its boisterous nature,
substantially raise the ambient noise level of the neighborhood in which such
building or premises is situated, or would be dangerous or detrimental to
health.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Ord. 1981-88, passed 8-3-1981)
§ 634.08 RESTRICTED USE OF POWER EQUIPMENT, TOOLS AND MACHINERY IN NON-
RESIDENTIALLY ZONED AREAS AND IN COMMERCIAL CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS WITHIN
RESIDENTIALLY ZONED AREAS.
   (a)   No person shall operate power equipment, construction tools, machinery
and/or perform any construction related activity on any non-residentially zoned
property, or as part of any commercial construction project in any residential
zoned area, between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time on
Sundays, except for emergency situations or by approval of the City Safety
Director with the specific authorization of Council.
      Power equipment, construction tools, and machinery that are subject to
this section shall include tractors, dozers, rotary drills, augers, loaders,
earth movers, power shovels, back hoes, cranes, derricks, paving machines, dump
trucks, mixers, ditchers, trenchers, compactors, scrapers, jack hammers,
pavement breakers, compressors, hammers, axes, mauls, pneumatic powered
equipment, pile drivers, chain saws, log splitters, log chippers, powered hand
tools, lawn tractors and mowers, leaf blowers, trimmers and/or any other
equipment, tool or machinery that is substantially similar to the foregoing.
      This section shall not apply to the use of snow blowers, snow plowing, or
the use of any other tool or equipment used in the mitigating of an immediate
health, safety, welfare related emergency, as determined by the City of Solon
Police Department.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(Ord. 2021-74, passed 4-19-2021)
§ 634.09 MOTOR VEHICLE LIMITS.
   (a)   No person shall operate any motor of a motor vehicle of a weight in
excess of four tons (8,000 pounds) for a consecutive period longer than two
minutes which operation shall raise the noise level above the ambient noise
level of the neighborhood by more than six decibels, between the hours of 9:30
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day or on Sundays or holidays. This section
shall not apply to buses operated for the transportation of passengers while
standing in established bus turnarounds, bus terminals, bus parking lots and
bus storage yards.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Ord. 1981-88, passed 8-3-1981)
§ 634.10 RESTRICTED USE OF POWER EQUIPMENT, CONSTRUCTION TOOLS AND MACHINERY IN
RESIDENTIALLY ZONED AREA.
   (a)   Except as otherwise required under §
634.08, no person shall operate or utilize power equipment, construction tools
or machinery and/or perform any construction related activity on any
residentially zoned property between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
      Power equipment, construction tools, and machinery that are subject to
this section shall include tractors, dozers, rotary drills, augers, loaders,
earth movers, power shovels, back hoes, cranes, derricks, paving machines, dump
trucks, mixers, ditchers, trenchers, compactors, scrapers, jack hammers,
pavement breakers, compressors, hammers, axes, mauls, pneumatic powered
equipment, pile drivers, chain saws, log splitters, log chippers, powered hand
tools, lawn tractors and mowers, leaf blowers, trimmers and/or any other
equipment, tool or machinery that is substantially similar to the foregoing.
      This section shall not apply to the use of snow blowers, snow plowing, or
the use of any other tool or equipment used in the mitigating of an immediate
health, safety, welfare related emergency, as determined by the City of Solon
Police Department.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(Ord. 2021-74, passed 4-19-2021)
§ 634.11 PERMITTING NOISE POLLUTION.
   (a)   In addition to the prohibitions contained in §§
634.02 through
634.10, no person owning, leasing or controlling the operation of any source or
sources of noise, including an animal or animals, shall willfully, negligently
or through failure to take necessary precautions, permit the establishment or
continuation of a condition of noise pollution.
(1964 Code, § 510.02)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Ord. 1981-88, passed 8-3-1981)
§ 634.12 NOISE IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS OR AFFECTING RESIDENTIAL OR
INSTITUTIONAL PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall create or cause to be emitted from his or her person
or from any stationary noise source, any noise which causes or results in a
noise level equal to or exceeding 50 dBA measured at any lot line of any lot
located in any residential zoning district or in residential or institutional
use elsewhere.
(1964 Code, § 510.03)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Ord. 1981-88, passed 8-3-1981)
§ 634.13 NOISE IN COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (a)   No person shall create or cause to be emitted from his or her person
or from any stationary noise source, any noise which causes or results in a
noise level equal to or exceeding 60 dBA measured at any lot line of any lot
located in any commercial or industrial zoning district other than a lot in a
residential or institutional use.
(1964 Code, § 510.04)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Ord. 1981-88, passed 8-3-1981)
§ 634.14 NOISE FROM MOBILE NOISE SOURCES.
   (a)   No person shall create or cause to be emitted from any mobile noise
source, other than his or her person, any noise which causes or results in a
maximum noise level equal to or exceeding 85 dBA at a distance equal to or
greater than 50 feet from the closest point of the source, except for trucks
exceeding 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight, for which the maximum allowable
noise level shall be 90 dBA at a distance equal to or greater than 50 feet from
the closest point of the source.
   (b)   For other measurement distances, the following table shall apply:
 
Measurement distance in feet           50 40 30 20
Maximum permissible noise level in dBA 85 87 90 93
 
   (c)   For trucks exceeding 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight, permissible
noise levels in the preceding table shall be increased by five dBA.
(1964 Code, § 510.05)
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree and shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(Ord. 1981-88, passed 8-3-1981)
§ 634.15 NOISE IN PLACES USED FOR ENTERTAINMENT.
   (a)   No person or persons owning, leasing or controlling the operation of
any place used for entertainment shall willfully, negligently or through
failure to take necessary precautions, permit the imposition or continuation of
a sound pressure (noise) level exceeding 85 dBA on any member of the audience
by said person or by any person engaged or employed by said person.
(1964 Code, § 510.07)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Ord. 1981-88, passed 8-3-1981)
§ 634.16 QUIET ZONES.
   (a)   No person, by himself or herself or by the operation of any
instrument, device, agency or vehicle, shall make any unnecessary or unseemly
noise within 150 feet of any portion of the grounds and premises on which is
located a hospital or other institution reserved for the sick, aged or infirm,
or within 150 feet of any school, court house, church or building in which
religious services are held, during school hours, hours of public worship, or
hours of holding court. The area within 150 feet of a hospital, school, court
house or church shall be officially known as a ZONE OF QUIET and the Director
of Service shall place signs within such zones of quiet calling attention to
the prohibition against unnecessary noises.
(1964 Code, § 510.08)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Ord. 1981-88, passed 8-3-1981)
§ 634.17 COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (a)   Any property use established in a zoning district, as defined and
designated under the provisions of the Zoning Code, shall be so operated as to
comply with the performance standards governing noise set forth hereinafter for
the district in which such use shall be located.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Ord. 1981-88, passed 8-3-1981)
§ 634.18 NOISE LEVEL MEASUREMENTS.
   Noise levels shall be measured in terms of the sound pressure level in
octave-frequency bands using equipment which meets the requirements established
by this chapter. Noises such as those of an irregular and intermittent nature
shall be restricted as provided for hereinafter.
(Ord. 1981-88, passed 8-3-1981)
§ 634.19 ZONING DISTRICT RESTRICTIONS; CONSTRUCTION SITE EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   In manufacturing zoning districts, inclusive, at no point on the
boundary of a residential, retail or commercial zoning district shall the sound
pressure level of any individual operation or plant, or the combined operations
of any person, firm or corporation, exceed the decibel levels in the designated
octave bands shown below for the zoning districts indicated as measured under
the test procedures established by §
634.22.
                                 Maximum Sound Pressure Levels (dB) along
Octave Ban Center Frequency (Hz) District Boundaries
                                 Residence Retail and Commercial
                                Daytime
                                 Maximum Sound Pressure Levels (dB) along
Octave Ban Center Frequency (Hz) District Boundaries
                                 Residence Retail and Commercial
                                Daytime
31.5                             77        84
1,000                            50        57
2,000                            44        51
4,000                            39        46
8,000                            37        44
A-scale levels (for monitoring   60 dBA    67 dBA
purposes)
                                 Nighttime
31.5                             67        74
1,000                            40        47
2,000                            34        41
4,000                            29        36
8,000                            27        34
A-scale levels (for monitoring   50 dBA    57 dBA
purposes)
 
   (b)   In retail and commercial zoning districts, all activities involving
the production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing or repair of
materials, goods or products, or any property use, shall conform with the
performance standards stated in division (a) hereof, provided that performance
standards shall in every case be applied at the boundaries of the lot on which
any such activities take place.
   (c)   In residential zoning districts, any property use shall conform with
the performance standards stated above for residential district boundaries,
provided that performance standards shall in every case be applied at the
boundaries of the lot on which such use is established.
   (d)   The maximum sound pressure levels established in this section to be
applied to the boundaries of a lot shall not apply to construction sites.
Construction site noise level shall be regulated by §§
634.08 and
634.10.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Ord. 1981-88, passed 8-3-1981)
§ 634.20 MOTOR VEHICLE HORNS AND SIGNAL DEVICES.
   (a)   No person shall sound any horn or audible signal device of any motor
vehicle or light motor vehicle of any kind while not in motion, nor shall such
horn or signal device be sounded under any circumstances except as required by
law, nor shall it be sounded for any unnecessary or unreasonable period of
time.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Ord. 1981-88, passed 8-3-1981)
§ 634.21 TEST PROCEDURES FOR POWER EQUIPMENT AND HAND TOOLS.
   Test procedures to determine whether maximum noise emitted by equipment or
powered hand tools, used, operated, sold or leased, or offered for sale or
lease, meet the noise limits stated in §
634.10 shall be in substantial conformity with Standards and Recommended
Practice established by the Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc., including
SAE Standard J952, SAE Recommended Practice J184 and such other and further
standards as may be propounded in the Code of Recommended Practices of the
Department of Environmental Control.
(Ord. 1981-88, passed 8-3-1981)
§ 634.22 TEST PROCEDURES FOR MOTOR VEHICLES AND ZONING DISTRICTS.
   Test procedures to determine whether maximum noise levels emitted by motor
vehicles, as stated in §
634.09, or whether noises along property lines and zoning district boundaries,
meet the noise limits stated in §
634.19, shall be in substantial conformity with ANSI Standard S1.4-1961 or IEC
Standard 123-1961; ANSI Standard S1-12-1967; ANSI Standard S1.11-1966; IEC
Standard 179-1965; IEC Standard 225-1966; SAE Recommended Practice J184; and
such other and further standards as may be propounded in the Code of
Recommended Practices of the Department of Environmental Control.
(Ord. 1981-88, passed 8-3-1981)
§ 634.23 NUISANCE ABATEMENT; LEGAL PROCEEDINGS.
   Any emission of noise from any source in excess of the limitations
established in or pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed and is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance, and may be subject to summary abatement
procedures. Such abatement may be in addition to the administrative
proceedings, fines and penalties herein provided. The Director of Public Safety
is empowered to secure the institution of legal proceedings for the abatement
or prosecution of emissions or noises which cause injury, detriment, nuisance
or annoyance to the public, or endanger the health, comfort, safety or welfare
of the public, or cause or have a natural tendency to cause injury or damage to
the public or property. Such legal proceedings may be in addition to the
administrative proceedings, fines and penalties herein provided.
(Ord. 1981-88, passed 8-3-1981)
§ 634.24 COMMON-LAW NUISANCE REMEDY UNIMPAIRED.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impair any cause of action, or
legal remedy therefor, of any person or the public for injury or damage arising
from the emission or release into the atmosphere from any source whatever of
noise in such place or manner, or at such levels, so as to constitute a common
law nuisance.
(Ord. 1981-88, passed 8-3-1981)
CHAPTER 636: OFFENSES RELATING TO PERSONS
Section
   
636.001   Definitions
   
636.01   Negligent homicide
   
636.02   Assault
   
636.03   Negligent assault
   
636.04   Aggravated menacing
   
636.045   Menacing by stalking
   
636.05   Menacing
   
636.06   Unlawful restraint
   
636.07   Child stealing (Repealed)
   
636.08   (Reserved)
   
636.09   Coercion
   
636.10   Nonsupport of dependents
   
636.11   Endangering children
   
636.12   Interference with custody
   
636.13   Contributing to the unruliness or delinquency of a child
   
636.14   Party lines to be yielded in emergencies (Repealed)
   
636.15   Threatening or harassing telecommunications
   
636.16   Placing harmful substance or objects in food or confection
   
636.17   Domestic violence
   
636.18   Safety of crowds attending live entertainment performances
   
636.19   Hazing
   
636.20   Illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products; transaction scans
   
636.203   Possession of cigarettes and the like, by minors; evidence of
illegality
   
636.207   Posting tobacco age warning signs
   
636.21   Ethnic intimidation
   
636.22   Intimidation in connection with housing
   
636.23   Failing to provide for a functionally impaired person
   
636.24   Abuse of a corpse
   
636.25   (Reserved)
   
636.26   Unlawful collection of bodily substances
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Disorderly conduct, see §
648.04
   Drugs, see
Ch. 624
   False report of child abuse or neglect, see §
606.105
   Juvenile Court, see R.C. Ch. 2151
   Parents’ liability for destructive acts of their children, see R.C. §
3109.09
   Personal accountability for organizational conduct, see §
606.09
   “Physical harm to persons” defined, see §
606.01
   Sales of alcohol to underage persons; prohibitions and misrepresentations,
see §§
612.02,
612.16
   “Serious physical harm to persons” defined, see §
606.01
   Sex related offenses, see
Ch. 666
   Shelters for victims of domestic violence, see R.C. §§ 3113.33 et seq.
   Vehicular homicide and vehicular manslaughter, see §
434.08
§ 636.001 DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this chapter and any other provision of these
Codified Ordinances, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   ANOTHER’S UNBORN or OTHER PERSON’S UNBORN. A member of the species
homo sapiens who is or was carried in the womb of another during a period that
begins with fertilization and that continues unless and until live birth
occurs.
      (2)   UNLAWFUL TERMINATION OF ANOTHER’S PREGNANCY. Causing the death of
an unborn member of the species homo sapiens who is or was carried in the womb
of another, as a result of injuries inflicted during the period that begins
with fertilization and that continues unless and until live birth occurs.
   (b)   Notwithstanding division (a) of this section, in no case shall the
definitions of the terms ANOTHER’S UNBORN, OTHER PERSON’S UNBORN and UNLAWFUL
TERMINATION OF ANOTHER’S PREGNANCY that are set forth in division (a) of this
section be applied or construed in any of the following manners:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(1) of this section, in
a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as prohibiting any
pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion with the consent of
the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant woman implied by law in a
medical emergency, or with the approval of one otherwise authorized by law to
consent to medical treatment on behalf of the pregnant woman. An abortion that
violates the conditions described in the immediately preceding sentence may be
punished as any violation of R.C. § 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04,
2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.14, 2903.21 or
2903.22, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, as applicable. An
abortion that does not violate the conditions described in the second
immediately preceding sentence but that does violate R.C. § 2919.12, 2919.13
(B), 2919.15, 2919.151, 2919.17 or 2919.18, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, may be punished as a violation of the section, as
applicable.
      (2)   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as
applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman that occurs while
she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the following:
         A.   Her delivery of a stillborn baby;
         B.   Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a viable,
unborn human that she is carrying;
         C.   Her causing the death of her child who is born alive but who dies
from one or more injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable,
unborn human;
         D.   Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more
injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human; and
         E.   Her causing, threatening to cause or attempting to cause, in any
other manner, an injury, illness or other psychological illness or condition,
regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable, unborn human that she is
carrying.
(R.C. § 2903.09)
§ 636.01 NEGLIGENT HOMICIDE.
   (a)   No person shall negligently cause the death of another or the unlawful
termination of another’s pregnancy by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance, as defined in R.C. § 2923.11.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent homicide, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2903.05)
Statutory reference:
   Reckless homicide, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.041
§ 636.02 ASSAULT.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm to
another or to another’s unborn.
   (b)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to another or
to another’s unborn.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of
assault. Except as provided in R.C. § 2903.13(C), assault is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
   (d)   If an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to assault when it
is a misdemeanor also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a specification as
described in R.C. § 2941.1423 (victim of the offense was a woman whom the
defendant knew was pregnant at the time of the offense) that was included in
the indictment, count in the indictment or information charging the offense,
the court shall sentence the offender to a mandatory jail term as provided in
R.C. § 2929.24(F).
   (e)   A prosecution for a violation of division (a) or (b) of this section
does not preclude a prosecution of a violation of any other section of the Ohio
Revised Code. One or more acts, a series of acts, or a course of behavior that
can be prosecuted under division (a) or (b) of this section or any other
section of the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under division (a) or (b) of
this section, the other section of the Ohio Revised Code, the municipal
ordinance, or both sections. However, if an offender is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of division (a) or (b) of this section and also is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of R.C. § 2903.22, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, based on the same conduct
involving the same victim that was the basis of the violation of division (a)
or (b) of this section, the offenses are allied offenses of similar import
under R.C. § 2941.25.
(R.C. § 2903.13)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated and felonious assault, see R.C. §§ 2903.11 and 2903.12
   Aggravated vehicular assault, felony, see R.C. § 2903.08
   Felony assault offenses, see R.C. § 2903.13(C)
   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.15
   Persons who may seek relief under anti-stalking protection order; ex parte
orders, see R.C. § 2903.214
   Protection order as pretrial condition of release, see R.C. § 2903.213
   Strangulation, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.18
   Vehicular assault and aggravated vehicular assault, felony offenses, see
R.C. § 2903.08
§ 636.03 NEGLIGENT ASSAULT.
   (a)   No person shall negligently, by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance as defined in R.C. § 2923.11, cause physical harm to another or to
another’s unborn.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent assault, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 2903.14)
§ 636.04 AGGRAVATED MENACING.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the offender
will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of the other person,
such other person’s unborn or a member of that other person’s immediate family.
In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief that the offender
will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of the other person,
the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other person’s immediate family,
the other person’s belief may be based on words or conduct of the offender that
are directed at or identify a corporation, association, or other organization
that employs the other person or to which the other person belongs.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated menacing. Except
as otherwise provided in this division (b), aggravated menacing is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the victim of the offense is an officer or
employee of a public children services agency or a private child placing agency
and the offense relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or
anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties, aggravated
menacing is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law or, if the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to an offense of
violence, the victim of that prior offense was an officer or employee of a
public children services agency or private child placing agency, and that prior
offense related to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated
performance of official responsibilities or duties, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
   (c)   As used in this section, ORGANIZATION includes an entity that is a
governmental employer.
(R.C. § 2903.21)
§ 636.045 MENACING BY STALKING.
   (a)   Prohibited conduct.
      (1)   A.   No person by engaging in a pattern of conduct shall knowingly
cause another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to
the other person or a family or household member of the other person or cause
mental distress to the other person or a family or household member of the
other person. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief that
the offender will cause physical harm to the other person or the other person’s
family or household member or mental distress to the other person or the other
person’s family or household member, the other person’s belief or mental
distress may be based on words or conduct of the offender that are directed at
or identify a corporation, association, or other organization that employs the
other person or to which the other person belongs.
         B.   No person, through the use of any form of written communication
or any electronic method of remotely transferring information, including but
not limited to any computer, computer network, computer program, computer
system, or telecommunication device, shall post a message or use any
intentionally written or verbal graphic gesture with purpose to do either of
the following:
            1.   Violate division (a)(1)A. of this section;
            2.   Urge or incite another to commit a violation of division (a)
(1)A. of this section.
         C.   No person, with a sexual motivation, shall violate division (a)
(1)A. or (a)(1)B. of this section.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) of this section is guilty of
menacing by stalking.
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(2)B. of this
section, menacing by stalking is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   Menacing by stalking is a felony, to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law, if any of the following applies:
            1.   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of R.C. § 2903.211 or a violation of R.C. § 2911.211, or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to either of these offenses;
            2.   In committing the offense under division (a)(1)A., (a)(1)B. or
(a)(1)C. of this section, the offender made a threat of physical harm to or
against the victim, or as a result of an offense committed under division (a)
(1)B. or (a)(1)C. of this section, a third person induced by the offender’s
posted message made a threat of physical harm to or against the victim;
            3.   In committing the offense under division (a)(1)A., (a)(1)B. or
(a)(1)C. of this section, the offender trespassed on the land or premises where
the victim lives, is employed or attends school, or as a result of an offense
committed under division (a)(1)B. or (a)(1)C. of this section, a third person
induced by the offender’s posted message trespassed on the land or premises
where the victim lives, is employed or attends school;
            4.   The victim of the offense is a minor;
            5.   The offender has a history of violence towards the victim or
any other person or a history of other violent acts towards the victim or any
other person;
            6.   While committing the offense under division (a)(1)A. of this
section or a violation of division (a)(1)C. of this section based on conduct in
violation of division (a)(1)A. of this section, the offender had a deadly
weapon on or about the offender’s person or under the offender’s control.
Division (a)(2)B.6. of this section does not apply in determining the penalty
for a violation of division (a)(1)B. of this section or a violation of division
(a)(1)C. of this section based on conduct in violation of division (a)(1)B. of
this section;
            7.   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
the subject of a protection order issued under R.C. § 2903.213 or 2903.214,
regardless of whether or not the person to be protected under the order is the
victim of the offense or another person;
            8.   In committing the offense under division (a)(1)A., (a)(1)B. or
(a)(1)C. of this section, the offender caused serious physical harm to the
premises at which the victim resides, to the real property on which that
premises is located, or to any personal property located on that premises, or
as a result of an offense committed under division (a)(1)B. of this section or
an offense committed under division (a)(1)C. of this section based on a
violation of division (a)(1)B. of this section, a third person induced by the
offender’s posted message caused serious physical harm to that premises, that
real property or any personal property on that premises;
            9.   Prior to committing the offense, the offender had been
determined to represent a substantial risk of physical harm to others as
manifested by evidence of then-recent homicidal or other violent behavior,
evidence of then-recent threats that placed another in reasonable fear of
violent behavior and serious harm, or other evidence of then-present
dangerousness;
            10.   The victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a
public children services agency or a private child placing agency and the
offense relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated
performance of official responsibilities or duties; and
            11.   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an
officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child
placing agency, and that prior offense related to the officer’s or employee’s
performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties.
      (3)   R.C. § 2919.271 applies in relation to a defendant charged with a
violation of this section.
      (4)   For the purpose of division (a) of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         A.   COMPUTER, COMPUTER NETWORK, COMPUTER PROGRAM, COMPUTER SYSTEM and
TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
         B.   EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. The singular of EMERGENCY FACILITY
PERSONNEL as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.
         C.   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. The singular of EMERGENCY
MEDICAL SERVICES PERSONNEL as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.
         D.   FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Means any of the following:
            1.   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
person against whom the act prohibited in division (a)(1) of this section is
committed:
               a.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a former spouse
of the person;
               b.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the person, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the person;
               c.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse,
or former spouse of the person, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
person.
            2.   The natural parent of any child of whom the person against
whom the act prohibited in division (a)(1) of this section is committed is the
other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.
         E.   MENTAL DISTRESS. Any of the following:
            1.   Any mental illness or condition that involves some temporary
substantial incapacity; or
            2.   Any mental illness or condition that would normally require
psychiatric treatment, psychological treatment or other mental health services,
whether or not any person requested or received psychiatric treatment,
psychological treatment or other mental health services.
         F.   ORGANIZATION. Includes an entity that is a governmental employer.
         G.   PATTERN OF CONDUCT. Two or more actions or incidents closely
related in time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based on any
of those actions or incidents, or two or more actions or incidents closely
related in time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based on any
of those actions or incidents, directed at one or more persons employed by or
belonging to the same corporation, association, or other organization. Actions
or incidents that prevent, obstruct or delay the performance by a public
official, firefighter, rescuer, emergency medical services person or emergency
facility person of any authorized act within the public official’s,
firefighter’s, rescuer’s, emergency medical services person’s or emergency
facility person’s official capacity, or the posting of messages, use of
intentionally written or verbal graphic gestures, or receipt of information or
data through the use of any form of written communication or an electronic
method of remotely transferring information, including but not limited to a
computer, computer network, computer program, computer system or
telecommunications device, may constitute a PATTERN OF CONDUCT.
         H.   PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. Means a person who is living or has
lived with the person against whom the act prohibited in division (a)(1) of
this section is committed in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise
is cohabiting with that person, or who otherwise has cohabited with the person
within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in
question.
         I.   POST A MESSAGE. Transferring, sending, posting, publishing,
disseminating or otherwise communicating, or attempting to transfer, send,
post, publish, disseminate or otherwise communicate, any message or
information, whether truthful or untruthful, about an individual, and whether
done under one’s own name, under the name of another or while impersonating
another.
         J.   PUBLIC OFFICIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.01.
         K.   SEXUAL MOTIVATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2971.01.
         L.   THIRD PERSON. In relation to conduct as described in division (a)
(1)B. of this section, an individual who is neither the offender nor the victim
of the conduct.
      (5)   The prosecution does not need to prove in a prosecution under
division (a) of this section that a person requested or received psychiatric
treatment, psychological treatment or other mental health services in order to
show that the person was caused mental distress as described in division (a)
(4)D.2. of this section.
      (6)   A.   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a person solely
because the person provided access or connection to or from an electronic
method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control,
including having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing access
or connection to or from the electronic method of remotely transferring the
information, and that do not include the creation of the content of the
material that is the subject of the access or connection. In addition, any
person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control shall not be
liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the receipt or
transmission through its service of any information that it believes is or will
be sent in violation of division (a) of this section.
         B.   Division (a)(6)A. of this section does not create an affirmative
duty for any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic
method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control to
block the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that
it believes is or will be sent in violation of division (a) of this section
except as otherwise provided by law.
         C.   Division (a)(6)A. of this section does not apply to a person who
conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of division (a) of this section or who
knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.
(R.C. § 2903.211)
   (b)   Protection order. Consult R.C. § 2903.213 for current provisions
regarding protection orders, consent agreements, anti-stalking protection
orders and orders issued by a court of another state.
   (c)   Violating a protection order, consent agreement, anti-stalking
protection order or order issued by a court of another state.
      (1)   No person shall recklessly violate the terms of any of the
following:
         A.   A protection order issued or consent agreement approved pursuant
to R.C. § 2919.26 or 3113.31;
         B.   A protection order issued pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34, 2903.213 or
2903.214; or
         C.   A protection order issued by a court of another state.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of
violating a protection order.
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(2)C. or (c)(2)D. of
this section, violating a protection order is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
         C.   Violating a protection order is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the offender previously has been convicted of, pleaded
guilty to, or been adjudicated a delinquent child for any of the following:
            1.   A violation of a protection order issued or consent agreement
approved pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34, 2903.213, 2903.214, 2919.26, or 3113.31,
or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance;
            2.   Two or more violations of R.C. § 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22,
or 2911.211, or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
or any combination of those offenses, that involved the same person who is the
subject of the protection order or consent agreement;
            3.   One or more violations of this section, or any substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance.
         D.   If the offender violates a protection order or consent agreement
while committing a felony offense, violating a protection order is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         E.   If the protection order violated by the offender was an order
issued pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34 or 2903.214 that required electronic
monitoring of the offender pursuant to that section, the court may require in
addition to any other sentence imposed upon the offender that the offender be
electronically monitored for a period not exceeding five years by a law
enforcement agency designated by the court. If the court requires under this
division that the offender be electronically monitored, unless the court
determines that the offender is indigent, the court shall order that the
offender pay the costs of the installation of the electronic monitoring device
and the cost of monitoring the electronic monitoring device.
      (3)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (c)(1)C. of
this section that the protection order issued by a court of another state does
not comply with the requirements specified in 18 U.S.C. § 2265(b) for a
protection order that must be accorded full faith a credit by a court of this
state or that it is not entitled to full faith and credit under 18 U.S.C. §
2265(c).
      (4)   In a prosecution for a violation of this section, it is not
necessary for the prosecution to prove that the protection order or consent
agreement was served on the defendant if the prosecution proves that the
defendant was shown the protection order or consent agreement or a copy of
either or a judge, magistrate, or law enforcement officer informed the
defendant that a protection order or consent agreement had been issued, and
proves that the defendant recklessly violated the terms of the order or
agreement.
      (5)   As used in this section, PROTECTION ORDER ISSUED BY A COURT OF
ANOTHER STATE means an injunction or another order issued by a criminal court
of another state for the purpose of preventing violent or threatening acts or
harassment against, contact or communication with, or physical proximity to
another person including a temporary order, and means an injunction or order of
that nature issued by a civil court of another state, including a temporary
order and a final order issued in an independent action or as a pendente lite
order in a proceeding for other relief, if the court issued it in response to a
complaint, petition or motion filed by or on behalf of a person seeking
protection. The term does not include an order for support or for custody of a
child issued pursuant to the divorce and child custody laws of another state,
except to the extent that the order for support or for custody of a child is
entitled to full faith and credit under the laws of the United States.
(R.C. § 2919.27)
§ 636.05 MENACING.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the
offender will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other
person, the other person's unborn, or a member of the other person's immediate
family. In addition to any other basis for the other person's belief that the
offender will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other
person, the other person's unborn, or a member of the other person's immediate
family, the other person's belief may be based on words or conduct of the
offender that are directed at or identify a corporation, association, or other
organization that employs the other person or to which the other person
belongs.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly place or attempt to place another in
reasonable fear of physical harm or death by displaying a deadly weapon,
regardless of whether the deadly weapon displayed is operable or inoperable, if
either of the following applies:
         A.   The other person is an emergency service responder, the person
knows or reasonably should know that the other person is an emergency service
responder, and it is the person's specific purpose to engage in the specified
conduct against an emergency service responder.
         B.   The other person is a family or household member or co-worker of
an emergency service responder, the person knows or reasonably should know that
the other person is a family or household member or co-worker of an emergency
service responder, and it is the person's specific purpose to engage in the
specified conduct against a family or household member or co-worker of an
emergency service responder.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of menacing. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, menacing is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If the victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a public
children services agency or a private child placing agency and the offense
relates to the officer's or employee's performance or anticipated performance
of official responsibilities or duties or if the victim of the offense is an
emergency service responder in the performance of the responder's official
duties, menacing is one of the following:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(2) of this section, a
misdemeanor of the first degree;
      (2)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an officer or
employee of a public children services agency or private child placing agency
or an emergency service responder, and that prior offense related to the
officer's or employee's performance or anticipated performance of official
responsibilities or duties or to the responder's performance of the responder's
official duties, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (c)   A prosecution for a violation of this section does not preclude a
prosecution of a violation of any other section of the Ohio Revised Code. One
or more acts, a series of acts, or a course of behavior that can be prosecuted
under this section or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code may be
prosecuted under this section, the other section of the Ohio Revised Code, or
both sections. However, if an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of this section and also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of R.C. § 2903.13, or any substantially similar municipal ordinance,
based on the same conduct involving the same victim that was the basis of the
violation of this section, the offenses are allied offenses of similar import
under R.C. § 2941.25.
   (d)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Co-worker." Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 2903.13.
      (2)   "Emergency service responder." Has the same meanings as in R.C. §
2903.13.
      (3)   "Family or household member." Has the same meanings as in R.C. §
2903.13.
      (4)   "Organization." Includes an entity that is a governmental employer.
(R.C. § 2903.22)
§ 636.06 UNLAWFUL RESTRAINT.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly restrain
another of the other person’s liberty.
   (b)   No person, without privilege to do so and with a sexual motivation,
shall knowingly restrain another of the other person’s liberty.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful restraint, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   As used in this section, SEXUAL MOTIVATION has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2971.01.
(R.C. § 2905.03)
§ 636.07 CHILD STEALING (REPEALED).
Editor’s note:
   Section 636.07 was repealed as part of the 1998 updating and revision of the
Codified Ordinances because substantially equivalent state law (R.C. § 2905.04)
was repealed by the Ohio General Assembly by Am. S.B. No. 2, effective July 1,
1996.   
§ 636.08 RESERVED.
Editor’s note: 
   This section was formerly based on R.C. § 2905.05, Criminal Child
Enticement. The Ohio Supreme Court held that R.C. § 2905.05(A) was
unconstitutionally overbroad in violation of the First Amendment. See State v.
Romage, 138 Ohio St. 3d. 390 (2014).
§ 636.09 COERCION.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to coerce another into taking or refraining
from action concerning which he or she has a legal freedom of choice, shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Threaten to commit any offense;
      (2)   Utter or threaten any slander against any person;
      (3)   Expose or threaten to expose any matter tending to subject any
person to hatred, contempt or ridicule, or to damage his or her personal or
business repute, or to impair his or her credit;
      (4)   Institute or threaten criminal proceedings against any person; and
      (5)   Take or withhold, or threaten to take or withhold official action,
or cause or threaten to cause official action to be taken or withheld.
   (b)   Divisions (a)(4) and (a)(5) of this section shall not be construed to
prohibit a prosecutor or court from doing any of the following in good faith
and in the interests of justice:
      (1)   Offering or agreeing to grant, or granting immunity from
prosecution pursuant to R.C. § 2945.44;
      (2)   In return for a plea of guilty to one or more offenses charged or
to one or more other or lesser offenses, or in return for the testimony of the
accused in a case to which he or she is not a party, offering or agreeing to
dismiss, or dismissing one or more charges pending against an accused, or
offering or agreeing to impose, or imposing a certain sentence or modification
of sentence; or
      (3)   Imposing probation on certain conditions, including without
limitation requiring the offender to make restitution or redress to the victim
of his or her offense.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (a)(3), (a)(4)
or (a)(5) of this section that the actor’s conduct was a reasonable response to
the circumstances which occasioned it, and that his or her purpose was limited
to:
      (1)   Compelling another to refrain from misconduct or to desist from
further misconduct;
      (2)   Preventing or redressing a wrong or injustice;
      (3)   Preventing another from taking action for which the actor
reasonably believed the other person to be disqualified; and
      (4)   Compelling another to take action which the actor reasonably
believed the other person to be under a duty to take.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of coercion, a misdemeanor of
the second degree.
   (e)   As used in this section, THREAT includes a direct threat and a threat
by innuendo.
(R.C. § 2905.12)
§ 636.10 NONSUPPORT OF DEPENDENTS.
   (a)   No person shall abandon, or fail to provide adequate support to:
      (1)   The person’s spouse, as required by law;
      (2)   The person’s child who is under age 18, or the persons’s child with
a mental or physical disability who is under age 21;
      (3)   The person’s aged or infirm parent or adoptive parent, who from
lack of ability and means is unable to provide adequately for the parent’s own
support.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall abandon, or fail to provide support as
established by a court order to, another person whom, by court order or decree,
the person:
         A.   Is legally obligated to support; or
         B.   Was legally obligated to support, and an amount for support:
            1.   Was due and owing prior to the date the person's duty to pay
current support terminated; and
            2.   Remains unpaid.
      (2)   The period of limitation under R.C. § 2901.13 applicable to
division (b)(1)B. of this section shall begin to run on the date the person's
duty to pay current support terminates.
   (c)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage or contribute to a
child or a ward of the juvenile court becoming a dependent child, as defined in
R.C. § 2151.04, or a neglected child, as defined in R.C. § 2151.03.
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of failure to provide
adequate support under division (a) of this section or a charge of failure to
provide support established by a court order under division (b) of this section
that the accused was unable to provide adequate support or the established
support, but did provide the support that was within his or her ability and
means.
   (e)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(3) of this
section that the parent abandoned the accused o r failed to support the accused
as required by law, while the accused was under age 18, or had a mental or
physical disability and was under age 21.
   (f)   It is not a defense to a charge under division (b) of this section
that the person whom a court has ordered the accused to support is being
adequately supported by someone other than the accused.
   (g)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (g), whoever
violates division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of nonsupport of
dependents, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (a)(2) or (b) of
this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or
if the offender has failed to provide support under division (a)(2) or (b) of
this section for a total accumulated period of 26 weeks out of 104 consecutive
weeks, whether or not the 26 weeks were consecutive, then a violation of
division (a)(2) or (b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a felony violation of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (a)(2) or
(b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the offender is guilty of nonsupport of dependents by reason of
failing to provide support to his or her child as required by a child support
order issued on or after April 15, 1985, pursuant to R.C. § 2151.23, 2151.231,
2151.232, 2151.33, 3105.21, 3109.05, 3111.13, 3113.04, 3113.31, 3115.401, or
former R.C. § 3115.31, the court, in addition to any other sentence imposed,
shall assess all court costs arising out of the charge against the person and
require the person to pay any reasonable attorney’s fees of any adverse party
other than the state, as determined by the court, that arose in relation to the
charge.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of
contributing to the nonsupport of dependents, a misdemeanor of the first
degree. Each day of a violation of division (c) of this section is a separate
offense.
(R.C. § 2919.21)
§ 636.11 ENDANGERING CHILDREN.
   (a)   No person, who is the parent, guardian, custodian, person having
custody or control, or person in loco parentis of a child under 18 years of age
or a child with a mental or physical disability under 21 years of age, shall
create a substantial risk to the health or safety of the child by violating a
duty of care, protection, or support. It is not a violation of a duty of care,
protection, or support under this division when the parent, guardian,
custodian, or person having custody or control of a child treats the physical
or mental illness or disability of the child by spiritual means through prayer
alone, in accordance with the tenets of a recognized religious body.
   (b)   No person shall do any of the following to a child under 18 years of
age or a child with a mental or physical disability under 21 years of age:
      (1)   Abuse the child;
      (2)   Torture or cruelly abuse the child;
      (3)   Administer corporal punishment or other physical disciplinary
measure, or physically restrain the child in a cruel manner or for a prolonged
period, which punishment, discipline or restraint is excessive under the
circumstances and creates a substantial risk of serious physical harm to the
child;
      (4)   Repeatedly administer unwarranted disciplinary measures to a child
when there is a substantial risk that this conduct, if continued, will
seriously impair or retard the child’s mental health or development;
      (5)   Entice, coerce, permit, encourage, compel, hire, employ, use or
allow the child to act, model or in any other way participate in, or be
photographed for, the production, presentation, dissemination or advertisement
of any material or performance that the offender knows or reasonably should
know is obscene, is sexually oriented matter or is nudity-oriented matter; or
      (6)   Allow the child to be on the same parcel of real property and
within 100 feet of, or, in the case of more than one housing unit on the same
parcel of real property, in the same housing unit and within 100 feet of, any
act in violation of R.C. § 2925.04 or 2925.041 when the person knows that the
act is occurring, whether or not any person is prosecuted for or convicted of
the violation of R.C. § 2925.04 or 2925.041 that is the basis of the violation
of this division (b).
   (c)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle, as defined by R.C. § 4511.01,
within the municipality and in violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, when one or more children under
18 years of age are in the vehicle. Notwithstanding any other provision of law,
a person may be convicted at the same trial or proceeding of a violation of
this division (c) and a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that constitutes the basis of the charge of the
violation of this division (c). For purposes of R.C. §§ 4511.191 to 4511.197
and all related provisions of law, a person arrested for a violation of this
division (c) shall be considered to be under arrest for operating a vehicle
while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, a combination of them or
for operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a
controlled substance or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine.
      (2)   For the purpose of division (c)(1) of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:
         A.   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
         B.   VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   (d)   (1)   Division (b)(5) of this section does not apply to any material
or performance that is produced, presented or disseminated for a bona fide
medical, scientific, educational, religious, governmental, judicial or other
proper purpose, by or to a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist,
teacher, person pursing bona fide studies for research, librarian, member of
the clergy, prosecutor, judge or other person having a proper interest in the
material or performance.
      (2)   Mistake of age is not a defense to a charge under division (b)(5)
of this section.
      (3)   In a prosecution under division (b)(5) of this section, the trier
of fact may infer that an actor, model or participant in the material or
performance involved is a juvenile if the material or performance, through its
title, text, visual representation or otherwise, represents or depicts the
actor, model or participant as a juvenile.
      (4)   For the purpose of this division (d) and division (b)(5) of this
section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   MATERIAL, PERFORMANCE, OBSCENE and SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 2907.01.
         B.   NUDITY-ORIENTED MATTER. Any material or performance that shows a
minor in a state of nudity and that, taken as a whole by the average person
applying contemporary community standards, appeals to the prurient interest.
         C.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED MATTER. Any material or performance that shows
a minor participating or engaging in sexual activity, masturbation or
bestiality.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of endangering children.
      (1)   If the offender violates division (a) or (b)(1) of this section,
endangering children is one of the following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (e)(1)B., (e)(1)C. or
(e)(1)D., a misdemeanor of the first degree;
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of an offense under
this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or
of any offense involving neglect, abandonment or contributing to the
delinquency of or physical abuse of a child, except as otherwise provided in
division (e)(1)C. or (e)(1)D. of this section, endangering children is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law;
         C.   If the violation is a violation of division (a) of this section
and results in serious physical harm to the child involved, endangering
children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law; and
         D.   If the violation is a violation of division (b)(1) of this
section and results in serious physical harm to the child involved, endangering
children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the offender violates division (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(5) or
(b)(6) of this section, endangering children is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the offender violates division (c) of this section, the offender
shall be punished as follows:
         A.   Except as provided in (e)(3)B. or (e)(3)C., endangering children
in violation of division (c) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree;
         B.   If the violation results in serious physical harm to the child or
if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this section or
a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any offense
involving neglect, abandonment or contributing to the delinquency of or
physical abuse of a child, except as otherwise provided in division (e)(3)C. of
this section, endangering children in violation of division (c) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law;
         C.   If the violation results in serious physical harm to the child
and if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this
section, R.C. § 2903.06, 2903.08, 2919.22(C) or former R.C. § 2903.07 as it
existed prior to March 23, 2000, or R.C. § 2903.04, in a case in which the
offender was subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that
section, endangering children in violation of division (c) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law;
         D.   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine or other sentence,
penalty or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to divisions (e)
(3)A., (e)(3)B. or (e)(3)C. of this section or pursuant to any other provision
of law and in addition to any suspension of the offender’s driver’s license or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege under
R.C. Chapter 4506, Chapter 4509, Chapter 4510 or Chapter 4511, or any other
provision of law, the court also may impose upon the offender a class seven
suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit
or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02
(A)(7); and
         E.   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine, or other sentence,
penalty or sanction imposed upon the offender pursuant to division (e)(3)A.,
(e)(3)B., (e)(3)C. or (e)(3)D. of this section or pursuant to any other
provision of law for the violation of division (c) of this section, if as a
part of the same trial or proceeding the offender also is convicted of or
pleads guilty to a separate charge charging the violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A),
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the
charge of the violation of division (c) of this section, the offender also
shall be sentenced in accordance with R.C. § 4511.19, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, for that violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (f)   (1)   If a person violates division (c) of this section and if, at the
time of the violation, there were two or more children under 18 years of age in
the motor vehicle involved in the violation, the offender may be convicted of a
violation of division (c) of this section for each of the children, but the
court may sentence the offender for only one of the violations.
      (2)   A.   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (c) of this section but the person is not also convicted of and does
not also plead guilty to a separate charge of violating R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the charge
of the violation of division (c) of this section, both the following apply:
            1.   For purposes of the provisions of R.C. § 4511.19, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that set forth the penalties and
sanctions for a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the violation of
division (c) of this section shall not constitute a violation of R.C. § 4511.19
(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance; and
            2.   For purposes of the provisions of law that refers to a
conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and that is not described in
division (f)(2)A.1. of this section, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the
violation of division (c) of this section shall constitute a conviction or plea
of guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
         B.   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (c) of this section and the person also is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a separate charge of violating R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the charge of the
violation of division (c) of this section, the conviction of or plea of guilty
to the violation of division (c) of this section shall not constitute, for the
purposes of any provision of law that refers to a conviction of or a plea of
guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, a conviction of or a plea of guilty to a violation of R.C.
§ 4511.19(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 2919.22(A) - (E), (H))
Statutory reference:
   Community service, requirements, see R.C. § 2919.22(F)
   License suspension, requirements, see R.C. § 2919.22(G)
   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.15
§ 636.12 INTERFERENCE WITH CUSTODY.
   (a)   No person, knowing that he or she is without privilege to do so or
being reckless in that regard, shall entice, take, keep or harbor a person
identified in division (a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section from the
parent, guardian or custodian of the person identified in division (a)(1), (a)
(2) or (a)(3) of this section:
      (1)   A child under the age of 18, or a child with a mental or physical
disability under the age of 21;
      (2)   A person committed by law to an institution for delinquent, unruly,
neglected, abused or dependent children; and
      (3)   A person committed by law to an institution for persons with mental
illnesses or an institution for persons with intellectual disabilities.
   (b)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause or encourage a child or a
ward of the juvenile court who has been committed to the custody of any person,
department or public or private institution to leave the custody of that
person, department or institution without legal consent.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of enticing or taking under
division (a)(1) of this section that the actor reasonably believed that his or
her conduct was necessary to preserve the child’s health or safety. It is an
affirmative defense to a charge of keeping or harboring under division (a) of
this section that the actor in good faith gave notice to law enforcement or
judicial authorities within a reasonable time after the child or committed
person came under his or her shelter, protection or influence.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with custody.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (d), a violation of
division (a)(1) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the child who is
the subject of a violation of division (a)(1) above is removed from the state
or if the offender previously has been convicted of an offense under this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (a)(1) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If the child who is the subject of a violation of
division (a)(1) suffers physical harm as a result of the violation, a violation
of division (a)(1) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   A violation of division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. Each day of a violation of division (b) is a separate offense.
(R.C. § 2919.23)
§ 636.13 CONTRIBUTING TO THE UNRULINESS OR DELINQUENCY OF A CHILD.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   DELINQUENT CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2152.02.
      (2)   UNRULY CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.022.
   (b)   No person, including a parent, guardian, or other custodian of a
child, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage, or contribute to a child or a
ward of the juvenile court becoming an unruly child or a delinquent child;
      (2)   Act in a way tending to cause a child or a ward of the juvenile
court to become an unruly child or a delinquent child;
      (3)   Act in a way that contributes to an adjudication of the child as a
delinquent child based on the child’s violation of a court order adjudicating
the child an unruly child for being an habitual truant;
      (4)   If the person is the parent, guardian, or custodian of a child who
has the duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950 to register, register a new
residence address, and periodically verify a residence address, and, if
applicable, to send a notice of intent to reside, and if the child is not
emancipated, as defined in R.C. § 2919.121, fail to ensure that the child
complies with those duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of contributing to the
unruliness or delinquency of a child, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each
day of violation of this section is a separate offense.
(R.C. § 2919.24)
§ 636.14 PARTY LINES TO BE YIELDED IN EMERGENCIES (REPEALED).
Editor’s note:
   Section 636.14, based on R.C. § 4931.30, is obsolete and has been removed as
part of the 2007 updating and revision of these Codified Ordinances.
§ 636.15 THREATENING OR HARASSING TELECOMMUNICATIONS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a
telecommunication, or knowingly permit a telecommunication to be made from a
telecommunications device under the person’s control, to another, if the caller
does any of the following:
      (1)   Makes the telecommunication with purpose to harass, intimidate, or
abuse any person at the premises to which the telecommunication is made,
whether or not actual communication takes place between the caller and a
recipient;
      (2)   Describes, suggests, requests or proposes that the caller, the
recipient of the telecommunication, or any other person engage in sexual
activity, and the recipient or another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made has requested, in a previous telecommunication or in
the immediate telecommunication, that the caller not make a telecommunication
to the recipient or to the premises to which the telecommunication is made;
      (3)   During the telecommunication, violates R.C. § 2903.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (4)   Knowingly states to the recipient of the telecommunication that the
caller intends to cause damage to or destroy public or private property, and
the recipient, any member of the recipient’s family or any other person who
resides at the premises to which the telecommunication is made owns, leases,
resides or works in, will at the time of the destruction or damaging be near or
in, has the responsibility of protecting, or insures the property that will be
destroyed or damaged;
      (5)   Knowingly makes the telecommunication to the recipient of the
telecommunication, to another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made, or to those premises, and the recipient or another
person at those premises previously has told the caller not to make a
telecommunication to those premises or to any persons at those premises;
      (6)   Knowingly makes any comment, request, suggestion, or proposal to
the recipient of the telecommunication that is threatening, intimidating,
menacing, coercive, or obscene with the intent to abuse, threaten, or harass
the recipient;
      (7)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly interrupts the
telecommunication service of any person;
      (8)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly transmits to any
person, regardless of whether the telecommunication is heard in its entirety,
any file, document, or other communication that prevents that person from using
the person’s telephone service or electronic communication device;
      (9)   Knowingly makes any false statement concerning the death, injury,
illness, disfigurement, reputation, indecent conduct, or criminal conduct of
the recipient of the telecommunication or family or household member of the
recipient with purpose to abuse, threaten, intimidate, or harass the recipient;
      (10)   Knowingly incites another person through a telecommunication or
other means to harass or participate in the harassment of a person;
      (11)   Knowingly alarms the recipient by making a telecommunication
without a lawful purpose at an hour or hours known to be inconvenient to the
recipient and in an offensive or repetitive manner.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall make or cause to be made a telecommunication or
permit a telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under
the person’s control, with purpose to abuse, threaten or harass another person.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly post a text or audio statement or an
image on an internet web site or web page for the purpose of abusing,
threatening, or harassing another person.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of telecommunications
harassment.
      (2)   A violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(5), (a)(6), (a)
(7), (a)(8), (a)(9), (a)(10), or (a)(11) or (b) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a felony on each
subsequent offense, which shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(3), a violation
of division (a)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree on a
first offense and a felony on each subsequent offense, to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If a violation of division (a)(4) of this section
results in economic harm of $1,000 or more, telecommunications harassment is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (d)   No cause of action may be asserted in any court of this municipality
against any provider of a telecommunications service, interactive computer
service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, or against any
officer, employee or agent of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, for any
injury, death or loss to person or property that allegedly arises out of the
provider’s, officer’s, employee’s or agent’s provision of information,
facilities or assistance in accordance with the terms of a court order that is
issued in relation to the investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation
of this section. A provider of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, or an
officer, employee or agent of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, is
immune from any civil or criminal liability for injury, death or loss to person
or property that allegedly arises out of the provider’s, officer’s, employee’s
or agent’s provision of information, facilities or assistance in accordance
with the terms of a court order that is issued in relation to the investigation
or prosecution of an alleged violation of this section.
   (e)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person solely because the
person provided access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control, including
having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing access or
connection to or from the electronic method of remotely transferring the
information, and that do not include the creation of the content of the
material that is the subject of the access or connection. In addition, any
person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control shall not be
liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the receipt or
transmission through its service of any information that the person believes
is, or will be sent, in violation of this section.
      (2)   Division (e)(1) of this section does not create an affirmative duty
for any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method
of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control to block
the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that it
believes is, or will be sent, in violation of this section except as otherwise
provided by law.
      (3)   Division (e)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of this section or who knowingly
advertises the availability of material of that nature.
      (4)   A provider or user of an interactive computer service, as defined
in 47 U.S.C. § 230, shall neither be treated as the publisher or speaker of any
information provided by another information content provider, as defined in 47
U.S.C. § 230, nor held civilly or criminally liable for the creation or
development of information provided by another information content provider, as
defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230. Nothing in this division shall be construed to
protect a person from liability to the extent that the person developed or
created any content in violation of this section.
   (f)   Divisions (a)(5) to (a)(11) and (b)(2) of this section do not apply to
a person who, while employed or contracted by a newspaper, magazine, press
association, news agency, news wire service, cable channel or cable operator,
or radio or television station, is gathering, processing, transmitting,
compiling, editing, or disseminating information for the general public within
the scope of the person’s employment in that capacity or the person’s
contractual authority in that capacity.
   (g)   For the purpose of divisions (a) through (d) of this section, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CABLE OPERATOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
      (2)   CALLER. The person described in division (a) of this section who
makes or causes to be made a telecommunication or who permits a
telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under that
person’s control.
      (3)   ECONOMIC HARM. All direct, incidental and consequential pecuniary
harm suffered by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct. The term
includes but is not limited to all of the following:
         A.   All wages, salaries or other compensation lost as a result of the
criminal conduct;
         B.   The cost of all wages, salaries or other compensation paid to
employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of
the criminal conduct;
         C.   The overhead costs incurred from the time that a business is shut
down as a result of the criminal conduct; and
         D.   The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was
damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.
      (4)   FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Means any of the following:
         A.   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in division
(a)(9) of this section is committed:
            1.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a former spouse of
the recipient;
            2.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the recipient, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the recipient;
            3.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse, or
former spouse of the recipient, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
recipient.
         B.   The natural parent of any child of whom the recipient of the
telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in division (a)(9) of this
section is committed is the other natural parent or is the putative other
natural parent.
      (5)   PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. Means a person who is living or has
lived with the recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act
prohibited in division (a)(9) of this section is committed in a common law
marital relationship, who otherwise is cohabiting with the recipient, or who
otherwise has cohabited with the recipient within five years prior to the date
of the alleged commission of the act in question.
      (6)   SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
      (7)   TELECOMMUNICATION and TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   (h)   Nothing in this section prohibits a person from making a
telecommunication to a debtor that is in compliance with the Fair Debt
Collection Practices Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1692, as amended, or the Telephone
Consumer Protection Act, 47 U.S.C. § 227, as amended.
(R.C. § 2917.21)
§ 636.16 PLACING HARMFUL SUBSTANCE OR OBJECTS IN FOOD OR CONFECTION.
   (a)   No person shall do either of the following, knowing or having
reasonable cause to believe that any person may suffer physical harm or be
seriously inconvenienced or annoyed thereby:
      (1)   Place a pin, razor blade, glass, laxative, drug of abuse or other
harmful or hazardous object or substance in any food or confection; and
      (2)   Furnish to any person any food or confection which has been
adulterated in violation of division (a)(1) of this section.
(R.C. § 3716.11)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 3716.99(C))
§ 636.17 DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.
   (a)   Prohibited conduct.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm
to a family or household member.
      (2)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to a family
or household member.
      (3)   No person, by threat of force, shall knowingly cause a family or
household member to believe that the offender will cause imminent physical harm
to the family or household member.
      (4)   A.   Whoever violates this section is guilty of domestic violence,
and the court shall sentence the offender as provided in divisions (a)(4)B. to
(a)(4)E. of this section.
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(4)C., (a)(4)D. or
(a)(4)E. of this section, a violation of division (a)(3) is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree and a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
         C.   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(4)D. of this
section, if the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of
domestic violence, a violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or
law of this or any other state or the United States that is substantially
equivalent to domestic violence, a violation of R.C. § 2903.14, 2909.06,
2909.07, 2911.12, 2911.211 or 2919.22 if the victim of the violation was a
family or household member at the time of the violation, a violation of an
existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the
United States that is substantially equivalent to any of those sections if the
victim of the violation was a family or household member at the time of the
commission of the violation, or any offense of violence if the victim of the
offense was a family or household member at the time of the commission of the
offense, a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law, and a violation of division (a)(3) is a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
         D.   If the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been
convicted of two or more offenses of domestic violence or two or more
violations or offenses of the type described in division (a)(4)C. of this
section involving a person who was a family or household member at the time of
the violations or offenses, a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a
violation of division (a)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
         E.   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(4)C. or (a)(4)D. of
this section, if the offender knew that the victim of the violation was
pregnant at the time of the violation, a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2)
of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a
violation of division (a)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
      (5)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no court or
unit of state or local government shall charge any fee, cost, deposit or money
in connection with the filing of charges against a person alleging that the
person violated this section or a municipal ordinance substantially equivalent
to this section or in connection with the prosecution of any charges so filed.
      (6)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Any of the following:
            1.   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
offender:
               a.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse as defined below, or
a former spouse of the offender;
               b.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the offender, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the offender; and
               c.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse,
or former spouse of the offender, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
offender.
            2.   The natural parent of any child of whom the offender is the
other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.
         B.   PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. A person who is living or has lived
with the offender in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise is
cohabiting with the offender, or who otherwise has cohabited with the offender
within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in
question.
(R.C. § 2919.25)
   (b)   Temporary protection order. Consult R.C. § 2919.26 for current
provisions regarding protection orders.
   (c)   Violating a protection order, consent agreement, anti-stalking
protection order or order issued by a court of another state. See §
636.045(c) for current provisions.
§ 636.18 SAFETY OF CROWDS ATTENDING LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCES.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CONCERT. A musical performance of which the primary component is a
presentation by persons singing or playing musical instruments, that is
intended by its sponsors mainly, but not necessarily exclusively, for the
listening enjoyment of the audience, and that is held in a facility. A CONCERT
does not include any performance in which music is a part of the presentation
and the primary component of which is acting, dancing, a motion picture, a
demonstration of skills or talent other than singing or playing an instrument,
an athletic event, an exhibition or a speech.
      (2)   FACILITY. Any structure that has a roof or partial roof and that
has walls that wholly surround the area on all sides, including, but not
limited to, a stadium, hall, arena, armory, auditorium, ballroom, exhibition
hall, convention center or music hall.
      (3)   LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCE. Any live speech; any live musical
performance, including a concert; any live dramatic performance; any live
variety show; and any other live performance with respect to which the primary
intent of the audience can be construed to be viewing the performers. A LIVE
ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCE does not include any form of entertainment with
respect to which the person purchasing a ticket routinely participates in
amusements as well as views performers.
      (4)   PERSON. Includes, in addition to an individual or entity specified
in R.C. § 1.59(C), any governmental entity.
      (5)   RESTRICTED ENTERTAINMENT AREA. Any wholly or partially enclosed
area, whether indoors or outdoors, that has limited access through established
entrances or established turnstiles or similar devices.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall sell, offer to sell, or offer in return for a
donation, any ticket that is not numbered and that does not correspond to a
specific seat for admission to either of the following:
         A.   A live entertainment performance that is not exempted under
division (d) of this section, that is held in a restricted entertainment area,
and for which more than 8,000 tickets are offered to the public; and
         B.   A concert that is not exempted under division (d) of this section
and for which more than 3,000 tickets are offered to the public.
      (2)   No person shall advertise any live entertainment performance as
described in division (b)(1)A. of this section or any concert as described in
division (b)(1)B. of this section, unless the advertisement contains the words
“Reserved Seats Only.”
   (c)   Unless exempted by division (d)(1) of this section, no person who owns
or operates any restricted entertainment area shall fail to open, maintain and
properly staff at least the number of entrances designated under division (e)
of this section for a minimum of 90 minutes prior to the scheduled start of any
live entertainment performance that is held in the restricted entertainment
area and for which more than 3,000 tickets are sold, offered for sale or
offered in return for a donation.
   (d)   (1)   A live entertainment performance, other than a concert, is
exempted from the provisions of divisions (b) and (c) of this section if both
of the following apply:
         A.   The restricted entertainment area in which the performance is
held has at least eight entrances or, if both entrances and separate admission
turnstiles or similar devices are used, has at least eight turnstiles or
similar devices; and
         B.   The eight entrances or, if applicable, the eight turnstiles or
similar devices, are opened, maintained and properly staffed at least one hour
prior to the scheduled start of the performance.
      (2)   A.   1.   The officer responsible for public safety in the
municipality may, upon application of the sponsor of a concert covered by
division (b) of this section, exempt the concert from the provisions of that
division if the officer finds that the health, safety and welfare of the
participants and spectators would not be substantially affected by failure to
comply with the provisions of that division. In determining whether to grant an
exemption, the officer shall consider the following factors:
               a.   The size and design of the facility in which the concert is
scheduled;
               b.   The size, age and anticipated conduct of the crowd expected
to attend the concert; and
               c.   The ability of the sponsor to manage and control the
expected crowd.
            2.   If the sponsor of any concert desires to obtain an exemption
under this division (d)(2)A.2., the sponsor shall apply to the appropriate
official on a form prescribed by that official. The official shall issue an
order that grants or denies the exemption within five days after receipt of the
application. The sponsor may appeal any order that denies an exemption to the
Court of Common Pleas of the county in which the facility is located.
         B.   If an official grants an exemption under division (d)(2)A. of
this section, the official shall designate an on-duty law enforcement officer
to be present at the concert. The designated officer has authority to issue
orders to all security personnel at the concert to protect the health, safety
and welfare of the participants and spectators.
      (3)   Notwithstanding division (d)(2) of this section, in the case of a
concert held in a facility located on the campus of an educational institution
covered by R.C. § 3345.04, a state university law enforcement officer appointed
pursuant to R.C. §§ 3345.04 and 3345.21 shall do both of the following:
         A.   Exercise the authority to grant exemptions provided by division
(d)(2)A. of this section in lieu of an official designated in that division;
and
         B.   If the officer grants an exemption under division (d)(3)A. of
this section, designate an on-duty state university law enforcement officer to
be present at the concert. The designated officer has authority to issue orders
to all security personnel at the concert to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the participants and spectators.
   (e)   (1)   Unless a live entertainment performance is exempted by division
(d)(1) of this section, the officer responsible for public safety within the
municipality shall designate, for purposes of division (c) of this section, the
minimum number of entrances required to be opened, maintained and staffed at
each live entertainment performance so as to permit crowd control and reduce
congestion at the entrances. The designation shall be based on such factors as
the size and nature of the crowd expected to attend the live entertainment
performance, the length of time prior to the live entertainment performance
that crowds are expected to congregate at the entrances and the amount of
security provided at the restricted entertainment area.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (e)(1) of this section, a state university
law enforcement officer appointed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3345.04 and 3345.21 shall
designate the number of entrances required to be opened, maintained and staffed
in the case of a live entertainment performance that is held at a restricted
entertainment area located on the campus of an educational institution covered
by R.C. § 3345.04.
   (f)   No person shall enter into any contract for a live entertainment
performance that does not permit or require compliance with this section.
   (g)   (1)   This section does not apply to a live entertainment performance
held in a restricted entertainment area if one admission ticket entitles the
holder to view or participate in three or more different games, rides,
activities or live entertainment performances occurring simultaneously at
different sites within the restricted entertainment area and if the initial
admittance entrance to the restricted entertainment area, for which the ticket
is required, is separate from the entrance to any specific live entertainment
performance and an additional ticket is not required for admission to the
particular live entertainment performance.
      (2)   This section does not apply to a symphony orchestra performance, a
ballet performance, horse races, dances or fairs.
   (h)   This section does not prohibit the Council from imposing additional
requirements, not in conflict with the section, for the promotion or holding of
live entertainment performances.
   (i)   Whoever violates division (b), (c) or (f) of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If any individual suffers physical harm to
his or her person as a result of a violation of this section, the sentencing
court shall consider this factor in favor of imposing a term of imprisonment
upon the offender.
(R.C. § 2917.40)
§ 636.19 HAZING.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   HAZING. Means doing any act or coercing another, including the
victim, to do any act of initiation into any student or other organization or
any act to continue or reinstate membership in or affiliation with any student
or other organization that causes or creates a substantial risk of causing
mental or physical harm to any person, including coercing another to consume
alcohol or a drug of abuse, as defined in R.C. § 3719.011.
      (2)   ORGANIZATION. Includes a national or international organization
with which a fraternity or sorority is affiliated.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall recklessly participate in the hazing of another.
      (2)   No administrator, employee, faculty member, teacher, consultant,
alumnus, or volunteer of any organization, including any primary, secondary, or
post-secondary school or any other educational institution, public or private,
shall recklessly permit the hazing of any person associated with the
organization.
   (c)   (1)   No person shall recklessly participate in the hazing of another
when the hazing includes coerced consumption of alcohol or drugs of abuse
resulting in serious physical harm to the other person.
      (2)   No administrator, employee, faculty member, teacher, consultant,
alumnus, or volunteer of any organization, including any primary, secondary, or
post-secondary school or any other educational institution, public or private,
shall recklessly permit the hazing of any person associated with the
organization when the hazing includes coerced consumption of alcohol or drugs
of abuse resulting in serious physical harm to that person.
   (d)   Whoever violates divisions (b) or (c) of this section is guilty of
hazing. A violation of division (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the second degree. A violation of division (c)(1) or (c)(2) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.31)
   (e)   Reckless failure to immediately report knowledge of hazing.
      (1)   No administrator, employee, faculty member, teacher, consultant,
alumnus, or volunteer of any organization, including any primary, secondary, or
post-secondary school or any other public or private educational institution,
who is acting in an official and professional capacity shall recklessly fail to
immediately report the knowledge of hazing to a law enforcement agency in the
county in which the victim of hazing resides or in which the hazing is
occurring or has occurred.
      (2)   A violation of division (e)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree, except that the violation is a misdemeanor of the first
degree if the hazing causes serious physical harm.
(R.C. § 2903.311(B), (C))
Statutory reference:
   Civil liability for hazing, see R.C. § 2307.44
§ 636.20 ILLEGAL DISTRIBUTION OF CIGARETTES, OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS, OR
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS; TRANSACTION SCANS.
   (a)   Illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products.
      (1)   As used in this section:
         A.   "Age verification." A service provided by an independent third
party (other than a manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or
retailer of cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products,
or papers used to roll cigarettes) that compares information available from a
commercially available database, or aggregate of databases, that regularly are
used by government and businesses for the purpose of age and identity
verification to personal information provided during an internet sale or other
remote method of sale to establish that the purchaser is 21 years of age or
older.
         B.   ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT.
            1.   Subject to division 2. of this definition, an electronic
smoking device, vapor product, or any other product or device that consists of
or contains nicotine that can be ingested into the body by any means,
including, but not limited to, chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, or
inhaling.
            2.   The phrase does not include any of the following:
               a.   Any cigarette or other tobacco product;
               b.   Any product that is a "drug" as that term is defined in 21
U.S.C. § 321(g)(1);
               c.   Any product that is a "device" as that term is defined in
21 U.S.C. § 321(h);
               d.   Any product that is a "combination product" as described in
21 U.S.C. § 353(g).
         C.   CIGARETTE. Includes clove cigarettes and hand-rolled cigarettes.
         D.   DISTRIBUTE. Means to furnish, give, or provide cigarettes, other
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes to the ultimate consumer of the cigarettes, other tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes.
         E.   ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE. Means any device that can be used to
deliver aerosolized or vaporized nicotine or any other substance to the person
inhaling from the device including an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic hookah, vaping pen, or electronic pipe. The phrase includes any
component, part, or accessory of such a device, whether or not sold separately,
and includes any substance intended to be aerosolized or vaporized during the
use of the device. The phrase does not include any product that is a drug,
device, or combination product, as those terms are defined or described in 21
U.S.C. §§ 321 and 353(g).
         F.   PROOF OF AGE. Means a driver's license, a commercial driver's
license, a military identification card, a passport, or an identification card
issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows that a person is 21 years of
age or older.
         G.   TOBACCO PRODUCT. Means any product that is made or derived from
tobacco or that contains any form of nicotine, if it is intended for human
consumption or is likely to be consumed, whether smoked, heated, chewed,
absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, or ingested by any other means, including, but
not limited to, a cigarette, an electronic smoking device, a cigar, pipe
tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff, or snus. The phrase also means any component
or accessory used in the consumption of a tobacco product, such as filters,
rolling papers, pipes, blunt or hemp wraps, and liquids used in electronic
smoking devices, whether or not they contain nicotine. The phrase does not
include any product that is a drug, device, or combination product, as those
terms are defined or described in 21 U.S.C. §§ 321 and 353(g).
         H.   VAPOR PRODUCT. Means a product, other than a cigarette or other
tobacco product as defined in R.C. Chapter 5743, that contains or is made or
derived from nicotine and that is intended and marketed for human consumption,
including by smoking, inhaling, snorting, or sniffing. The phrase includes any
component, part, or additive that is intended for use in an electronic smoking
device, a mechanical heating element, battery, or electronic circuit and is
used to deliver the product. The phrase does not include any product that is a
drug, device, or combination product, as those terms are defined or described
in 21 U.S.C. §§ 321 and 353(g). The phrase includes any product containing
nicotine, regardless of concentration.
         I.   VENDING MACHINE. Has the same meaning as COIN MACHINE in R.C. §
2913.01.
      (2)   No manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of
cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers
used to roll cigarettes, no agent, employee, or representative of a
manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of cigarettes,
other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes, and no other person shall do any of the following:
         A.   Give, sell, or otherwise distribute cigarettes, other tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes:
            1.   To any person under 21 years of age; or
            2.   Without first verifying proof of age.
         B.   Give away, sell, or distribute cigarettes, other tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes in
any place that does not have posted in a conspicuous place a legibly printed
sign in letters at least one-half inch high stating that giving, selling, or
otherwise distributing cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or papers used to roll cigarettes to a person under 21 years of age
is prohibited by law;
         C.   Knowingly furnish any false information regarding the name, age,
or other identification of any person under 21 years of age with purpose to
obtain cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or
papers used to roll cigarettes for that person;
         D.   Manufacture, sell, or distribute in this state any pack or other
container of cigarettes containing fewer than 20 cigarettes or any package of
roll-your-own tobacco containing less than six-tenths of one ounce of tobacco;
         E.   Sell cigarettes or alternative nicotine products in a smaller
quantity than that placed in the pack or other container by the manufacturer;
         F.   Give, sell, or otherwise distribute alternative nicotine
products, papers used to roll cigarettes, or tobacco products other than
cigarettes over the internet or through another remote method without age
verification.
         G.   Allow an employee under 18 years of age to sell any tobacco
product;
         H.   Give away or otherwise distribute free samples of cigarettes,
other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or coupons redeemable
for cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alterative tobacco products.
      (3)   No person shall sell or offer to sell cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products by or from a vending machine, except
in the following locations:
         A.   An area within a factory, business, office, or other place not
open to the general public;
         B.   An area to which persons under 21 years of age are not generally
permitted access;
         C.   Any other place not identified in division (a)(3)A. or (a)(3)B.
of this section, upon all of the following conditions:
            1.   The vending machine is located within the immediate vicinity,
plain view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place, or an
employee of that person, so that all cigarettes, other tobacco product, and
alternative nicotine product purchases from the vending machine will be readily
observed by the person who owns or operates the place or an employee of that
person.
For the purpose of this section, a vending machine located in any unmonitored
area, including an unmonitored coatroom, restroom, hallway, or outer waiting
area, shall not be considered located within the immediate vicinity, plain
view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place, or an employee
of that person.
            2.   The vending machine is inaccessible to the public when the
place is closed.
            3.   A clearly visible notice is posted in the area where the
vending machine is located that states the following in letters that are
legibly printed and at least one-half inch high: "It is illegal for any person
under the age of 21 to purchase tobacco or alternative nicotine products."
      (4)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under division
(a)(2)A. of this section:
         A.   The person under 21 years of age was accompanied by a parent,
spouse who is 21 years of age or older, or legal guardian of the person under
21 years of age.
         B.   The person who gave, sold, or distributed cigarettes, other
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes to a person under 21 years of age under division (a)(2)A. of this
section is a parent, spouse who is 21 years of age or older, or legal guardian
of the person under 21 years of age.
      (5)   A.   It is not a violation of division (a)(2)A. or (a)(2)B. of this
section for a person to give or otherwise distribute to a person under 21 years
of age cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or
papers used to roll cigarettes while the person under 21 years of age is
participating in a research protocol if all of the following apply:
            1.   The parent, guardian, or legal custodian of the person under
21 years of age has consented in writing to the person under 21 years of age
participating in the research protocol.
            2.   An institutional human subjects protection review board, or an
equivalent entity, has approved the research protocol.
            3.   The person under 21 years of age is participating in the
research protocol at the facility or location specified in the research
protocol.
         B.   It is not a violation of division (a)(2)A. or (a)(2)B. of this
section for an employer to permit an employee 18, 19, or 20 years of age to
sell a tobacco product.
      (6)   A.   No delivery service shall accept from, transport or deliver
to, or allow pick-up by, a person under 21 years of age with respect to any of
the following:
            1.   Alternative nicotine products;
            2.   Papers used to roll cigarettes;
            3.   Tobacco products other than cigarettes.
         B.   A delivery service shall require proof of age as a condition of
accepting, transporting, delivering, or allowing pickup of the items described
in divisions (a)(6)A.1. to 3. of this section.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (a)(2)A., (a)(2)B., (a)(2)D., (a)(2)E.,
(a)(2)F., (a)(2)G., (a)(2)H., (a)(3) or (a)(6) of this section is guilty of
illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative
nicotine products. Except as otherwise provided in this division, illegal
distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to illegal distribution of cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of
the third degree.
      (8)   Whoever violates division (a)(2)C. of this section is guilty of
permitting a person under 21 years of age to use cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, permitting a person under 21 years of age to use cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of division (a)(2)C. of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, permitting a person under 21 years of age to use
cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (9)   Any cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or papers used to roll cigarettes that are given, sold, or otherwise
distributed to a person under 21 years of age in violation of this section and
that are used, possessed, purchased, or received by a person under 21 years of
age in violation of R.C. § 2151.87 are subject to seizure and forfeiture as
contraband under R.C. Chapter 2981.
(R.C. § 2927.02)
   (b)   Transaction scan.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division (b) and division (c) of this
section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   CARD HOLDER. Any person who presents a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card to a seller, or an agent or employee
of a seller, to purchase or receive cigarettes other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products from a seller, agent or employee.
         B.   IDENTIFICATION CARD. An identification card issued under R.C. §§
4507.50 to 4507.52.
         C.   SELLER. A seller of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products and includes any person whose gift of or other
distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products is subject to the prohibitions of division (a) of this section.
         D.   TRANSACTION SCAN. The process by which a seller or an agent or
employee of a seller checks, by means of a transaction scan device, the
validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card
that is presented as a condition for purchasing or receiving cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products.
         E.   TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE. Any commercial device or combination of
devices used at a point of sale that is capable of deciphering in an
electronically readable format the information encoded on the magnetic strip or
bar code of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification
card.
      (2)   A.   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may perform a
transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check the validity of
a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a
card holder as a condition for selling, giving away or otherwise distributing
to the card holder cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products.
         B.   If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed
under division (b)(2)A. of this section fails to match the information printed
on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by the card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the information
so printed is false or fraudulent, neither the seller nor any agent or employee
of the seller shall sell, give away or otherwise distribute any cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products to the card holder.
         C.   Division (b)(2)A. of this section does not preclude a seller or
an agent or employee of a seller from using a transaction scan device to check
the validity of a document other than a driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or identification card, if the document includes a bar code or magnetic strip
that may be scanned by the device, as a condition for selling, giving away or
otherwise distributing cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative
nicotine products to the person presenting the document.
      (3)   Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. §
4301.61(C) apply to the use of transaction scan devices for purposes of this
division (b) and division (c) of this section.
      (4)   A.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information derived from
a transaction scan, except for the following:
            1.   The name and date of birth of the person listed on the
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the
card holder; and
            2.   The expiration date and identification number of the driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the card
holder.
         B.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use the
information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is permitted to be
recorded and maintained under division (b)(4)A. of this section, except for
purposes of division (c) of this section.
         C.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use a
transaction scan device for a purpose other than the purpose specified in
division (c)(2)A. of this section.
         D.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall sell or
otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan to any
third party, including, but not limited to, selling or otherwise disseminating
that information for any marketing, advertising or promotional activities, but
a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant
to a court order or as specifically authorized by division (c) of this section
or another section of these Codified Ordinances or the Ohio Revised Code.
      (5)   Nothing in this division (b) or division (c) of this section
relieves a seller or an agent or employee of a seller of any responsibility to
comply with any other applicable local, state or federal laws or rules
governing the sale, giving away or other distribution of cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (b)(2)B. or (b)(4) of this section is
guilty of engaging in an illegal tobacco product or alternative nicotine
product transaction scan, and the court may impose upon the offender a civil
penalty of up to $1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of the Court shall pay
each collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for deposit into the
county treasury.
(R.C. § 2927.021)
   (c)   Affirmative defenses.
      (1)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be found
guilty of a charge of a violation of division (a) of this section in which the
age of the purchaser or other recipient of cigarettes, other tobacco products,
or alternative nicotine products is an element of the alleged violation, if the
seller, agent or employee raises and proves as an affirmative defense that all
of the following occurred:
         A.   A card holder attempting to purchase or receive cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products presented a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or an identification card;
         B.   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or identification card that the card holder presented indicated that the
license or card was valid; and
         C.   The cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products were sold, given away or otherwise distributed to the card holder in
reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and the completed
transaction scan.
      (2)   In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee of a seller
has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (c)(1) of this section,
the trier of fact in the action for the alleged violation of division (a) of
this section shall consider any written policy that the seller has adopted and
implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of division (a) of this
section. For purposes of division (c)(1)C. of this section, the trier of fact
shall consider that reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and
the completed transaction scan may require a seller or an agent or employee of
a seller to exercise reasonable diligence to determine, and that the use of a
transaction scan device does not excuse a seller or an agent or employee of a
seller from exercising reasonable diligence to determine, the following:
         A.   Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or employee of a
seller sells, gives away or otherwise distributes cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products is 21 years of age or older;
         B.   Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a card holder
is that of the card holder.
      (3)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by
division (c)(1) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a
Deputy Registrar who issued an identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to
4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of that
issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with the
Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.
(R.C. § 2927.022)
   (d)   Shipment of tobacco products.
      (1)   As used in this division (d):
         A.   AUTHORIZED RECIPIENT OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS. Means:
            1.   In the case of cigarettes, a person who is:
               a.   Licensed as a cigarette wholesale dealer under R.C. §
5743.15;
               b.   Licensed as a retail dealer as long as the person purchases
cigarettes with the appropriate tax stamp affixed;
               c.   An export warehouse proprietor as defined in Internal
Revenue Code § 5702;
               d.   An operator of a customs bonded warehouse under 19 U.S.C. §
1311 or 19 U.S.C. § 1555;
               e.   An officer, employee, or agent of the federal government or
of this state acting in the person's official capacity;
               f.   A department, agency, instrumentality, or political
subdivision of the federal government or of this state;
               g.   A person having a consent for consumer shipment issued by
the Ohio Tax Commissioner under R.C. § 5743.71.
            2.   In the case of electronic smoking devices or vapor products, a
person who is:
               a.   Licensed as a distributor of tobacco or vapor products
under R.C. § 5743.61;
               b.   A retail dealer of vapor products, as defined in R.C. §
5741.01(C)(3), that is not licensed as a vapor distributor, as long as the tax
levied by R.C. § 5743.51, 5743.62, or 5743.63, as applicable, has been paid;
               c.   An operator of a customs bonded warehouse under 19 U.S.C. §
1311 or 19 U.S.C. § 1555;
               d.   An officer, employee, or agent of the federal government or
of this state acting in the person's official capacity;
               e.   A department, agency, instrumentality, or political
subdivision of the federal government or of this state.
         B.   MOTOR CARRIER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4923.01.
      (2)   The purpose of this section is to prevent the sale of cigarettes,
electronic smoking devices, and vapor products to minors and to ensure
compliance with the Master Settlement Agreement, as defined in R.C. § 1346.01.
      (3)   A.   No person shall cause to be shipped any cigarettes, electronic
smoking devices, and vapor products to any person in this municipality other
than an authorized recipient of tobacco products.
         B.   No motor carrier, or other person shall knowingly transport
cigarettes, electronic smoking devices, and vapor products to any person in
this municipality that the carrier or other person reasonably believes is not
an authorized recipient of tobacco products. If cigarettes, electronic smoking
devices, and vapor products are transported to a home or residence, it shall be
presumed that the motor carrier, or other person knew that the person to whom
the cigarettes, electronic smoking devices, and vapor products were delivered
was not an authorized recipient of tobacco products.
      (4)   No person engaged in the business of selling cigarettes, electronic
smoking devices, and vapor products who ships or causes to be shipped
cigarettes, electronic smoking devices, and vapor products to any person in
this municipality in any container or wrapping other than the original
container or wrapping shall fail to plainly and visibly mark the exterior of
the container or wrapping in which the cigarettes, electronic smoking devices,
and vapor products are shipped with the words "cigarettes", "electronic smoking
devices", or "vapor products", as applicable.
      (5)   A court shall impose a fine of up to $1,000 for each violation of
division (d)(3)A., (d)(3)B. or (d)(4) of this section.
(R.C. § 2927.023)
   (e)   Furnishing false information to obtain tobacco products.
      (1)   No person who is 18 years of age or older but younger than 21 years
of age shall knowingly furnish false information concerning that person’s name,
age, or other identification for the purpose of obtaining tobacco products.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (e)(1) of this section is guilty of
furnishing false information to obtain tobacco products. Except as otherwise
provided in this division, furnishing false information to obtain tobacco
products is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (e)(1) of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
furnishing false information to obtain tobacco products is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
(R.C. § 2927.024)
§ 636.203 POSSESSION OF CIGARETTES AND THE LIKE, BY MINORS; EVIDENCE OF
ILLEGALITY.
   (a)   No person under 21 years of age shall knowingly obtain, possess,
purchase or use cigarettes, cigars or tobacco.
   (b)   Possession of cigarettes, cigars or tobacco by a person under 21 years
of age in any public place or in any motor vehicle upon public streets shall be
considered prima facie evidence that such cigarettes, cigars or tobacco have
been illegally purchased or otherwise obtained.
   (c)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of
illegal possession of cigarettes, cigars or tobacco, a minor misdemeanor. If
the offender has previously been convicted of a violation of this section, then
illegal possession of cigarettes, cigars or tobacco is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(Ord. 1996-188, passed 9-16-1996; Ord. 2020-210, passed 12-21-2020)
§ 636.207 POSTING TOBACCO AGE WARNING SIGNS.
   (a)   Owners and/or occupants of all places in the city where cigarettes,
cigars or tobacco are sold shall display at all times, in a prominent place on
the premises thereof, a printed sign, which shall read substantially as
follows:
   WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER 21
   YEARS OF AGE
   Under the Codified Ordinances of the City of Solon, §
636.203, it is unlawful for a person under 21 years of age to purchase,
possess, procure, attempt to procure or use any cigarettes, cigars or tobacco,
and any person found violating this section shall be subject to punishment
according to law.
   (b)   The sign required in division (a) of this section shall be 18.5 inches
in width and 11.5 inches in length. The lettering shall be in bold-faced red
print on a white background, and the sign shall be made from any material which
is durable, sturdy and able to withstand constant handling.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the
offender has previously been convicted of a violation of this section, then
such person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(Ord. 1996-188, passed 9-16-1996; Ord. 2020-210, passed 12-21-2020)
§ 636.21 ETHNIC INTIMIDATION.
   (a)   No person shall violate R.C. § 2903.21, 2903.22, 2909.06 or 2909.07 or
2917.21(A)(3), (A)(4) or (A)(5), or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance to any of these sections, by reason of the race, color, religion or
national origin of another person or group of persons.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of ethnic intimidation. Ethnic
intimidation is an offense of the next higher degree than the offense the
commission of which is a necessary element of ethnic intimidation. In the case
of an offense that is a misdemeanor of the first degree, ethnic intimidation is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2927.12)
§ 636.22 INTIMIDATION IN CONNECTION WITH HOUSING.
   (a)   No person, whether or not acting under color of law, shall by force or
threat of force willfully injure, intimidate or interfere with, or attempt to
injure, intimidate or interfere with any of the following:
      (1)   Any person because of race, color, religion, sex, familial status,
as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, national origin, military status as defined in
that section, disability as defined in that section, or ancestry and because
that person is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying,
contracting or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or
occupation of any housing accommodations, or applying for or participating in
any service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or
renting housing accommodations;
      (2)   Any person because that person is or has been doing, or in order to
intimidate that person or any other person or any class of persons from doing
either of the following:
         A.   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, familial status, as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, national origin,
military status as defined in that section, disability as defined in that
section, or ancestry, in any of the activities, services, organizations or
facilities described in division (a)(1) of this section; or
         B.   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate.
      (3)   Any person because that person is or has been, or in order to
discourage that person or any other person from, lawfully aiding or encouraging
other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, familial status as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, national origin,
military status as defined in that section, disability as defined in that
section, or ancestry, in any of the activities, services, organizations or
facilities described in division (a)(1) of this section, or participating
lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity
to so participate.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2927.03)
§ 636.23 FAILING TO PROVIDE FOR A PERSON WITH A FUNCTIONAL IMPAIRMENT.
   (a)   No caretaker shall knowingly fail to provide a person with a
functional impairment under the caretaker’s care with any treatment, care,
goods, or service that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of the
person with a functional impairment when this failure results in physical harm
or serious physical harm to the person with a functional impairment.
   (b)   No caretaker shall recklessly fail to provide a person with a
functional impairment under the caretaker’s care with any treatment, care,
goods, or service that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of the
person with a functional impairment when this failure results in serious
physical harm to the person with a functional impairment.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
knowingly failing to provide for a person with a functional impairment, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the person with a functional impairment
under the offender’s care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the
violation of this section, a violation of division (a) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
recklessly failing to provide for a person with a functional impairment, a
misdemeanor of the second degree. If the person with a functional impairment
under the offender’s care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the
violation of this section, a violation of division (b) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.16)
   (d)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CARETAKER. A person who assumes the duty to provide for the care
and protection of a person with a functional impairment on a voluntary basis,
by contract, through receipt of payment for care and protection, as a result of
a family relationship, or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. The
term does not include a person who owns, operates, or administers, or who is an
agent or employee of, a care facility, as defined in R.C. § 2903.33.
      (2)   PERSON WITH A FUNCTIONAL IMPAIRMENT. Any person who has a physical
or mental impairment that prevents the person from providing for the person's
own care or protection or whose infirmities caused by aging prevent the person
from providing for the person's own care or protection.
(R.C. § 2903.10)
§ 636.24 ABUSE OF A CORPSE.
   (a)   No person, except as authorized by law, shall treat a human corpse in
a way that he or she knows would outrage reasonable family sensibilities.
   (b)   No person, except as authorized by law, shall treat a human corpse in
a way that would outrage reasonable community sensibilities.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of abuse of a
corpse, a misdemeanor of the second degree. Whoever violates division (b) of
this section is guilty of gross abuse of a corpse, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(1964 Code, § 537.22)
Statutory reference:
   Abuse of a corpse, see R.C. § 2927.01
§ 636.25 (Reserved)
§ 636.26 UNLAWFUL COLLECTION OF BODILY SUBSTANCES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly collect any blood, urine, tissue or other
bodily substance of another person without privilege or consent to do so.
   (b)   (1)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
         A.   The collection of any bodily substance of a person by a law
enforcement officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction or advice
of a law enforcement officer, for purposes of a chemical test or tests of the
substance under R.C. § 1547.111(A)(1) or 4511.191(A)(2) to determine the
alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination content of the bodily substance; and
         B.   The collection of any bodily substance of a person by a peace
officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction or advice of a peace
officer, for purposes of a test or tests of the substance as provided in R.C. §
4506.17(A) to determine the person’s alcohol concentration or the presence of
any controlled substance or metabolite of a controlled substance.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section shall not be construed as implying
that the persons identified in divisions (b)(1)A. and B. of this section do not
have privilege to collect the bodily substance of another person as described
in those divisions or as limiting the definition of PRIVILEGE set forth in R.C.
§ 2901.01.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of unlawful
collection of a bodily substance. Except as otherwise provided in this division
(c), unlawful collection of a bodily substance is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of division (a) of this section or a substantially equivalent state
law or municipal ordinance, unlawful collection of a bodily substance is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2927.15)
CHAPTER 642: OFFENSES RELATING TO PROPERTY
Section
   
642.01   Definitions
   
642.02   Theft
   
642.03   Degree of offense when certain property involved
   
642.035   Evidence of theft of rented property
   
642.04   Unauthorized use of a vehicle; vehicle trespass
   
642.05   Unauthorized use of property
   
642.06   Injuring vines, bushes, trees or crops
   
642.07   Desecration
   
642.08   Assaulting police dog or horse or assistance dog
   
642.09   Arson
   
642.10   Criminal damaging or endangering; vehicular vandalism
   
642.105   Criminal damaging through operation of a motor vehicle
   
642.11   Criminal mischief
   
642.12   Criminal trespass
   
642.125   Aggravated trespass
   
642.13   Tampering with coin machines
   
642.14   Passing bad checks
   
642.145   Forging or selling forged identification cards
   
642.15   Misuse of credit cards
   
642.155   Recording credit card, telephone or Social Security numbers
   
642.16   Making or using slugs
   
642.17   Prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud
   
642.18   Tampering with records
   
642.19   Securing writings by deception
   
642.20   Personating an officer
   
642.205   Diminishing or interfering with forfeitable property
   
642.21   Defrauding creditors
   
642.22   Receiving stolen property
   
642.23   Possession of municipal property
   
642.24   Determining property value in theft offense
   
642.25   Determining property value in arson
   
642.26   Prosecutions for theft of utilities
   
642.27   Food stamps (Repealed)
   
642.28   Distribution of handbills
   
642.29   Billposting and advertising
   
642.30   Misconduct involving a public transportation system
   
642.31   Library materials
   
642.32   Insurance fraud
   
642.33   Workers’ compensation fraud
   
642.34   Medicaid fraud
   
642.35   Motion picture piracy
   
642.36   Criminal simulation
   
642.37   Railroad vandalism; criminal trespass; interference with operation of
train; grade crossing device vandalism
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Alteration, injury, removal of traffic-control devices, see §
414.08
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Detention of shoplifters and those committing motion picture piracy, see §
606.23
   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police Department,
see §
606.24
   Endangering aircraft and airport operations, see §
672.12
   Parents’ liability for destructive acts of their children, see R.C. §
3109.09
   “Physical harm to property” defined, see §
606.01
   Possessing criminal tools, see §
672.13
   “Property” defined, see §
606.01
   “Serious physical harm to property” defined, see §
606.01
   Value of written instrument or evidence of debt, see R.C. § 1.07
§ 642.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   ACTIVE DUTY SERVICE MEMBER. Any member of the armed forces of the
United States performing active duty under Title 10 of the United States Code.
   (b)   ANHYDROUS AMMONIA. A compound formed by the combination of two gaseous
elements, nitrogen and hydrogen, in the manner described below. ANHYDROUS
AMMONIA is one part nitrogen to three parts hydrogen (NH3). ANHYDROUS AMMONIA
by weight is 14 parts nitrogen to three parts hydrogen, which is approximately
82% nitrogen to 18% hydrogen.
   (c)   ASSISTANCE DOG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.
   (d)   CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE. Any services provided by or through the
facilities of any cable television system or other similar closed circuit
coaxial cable communications system, or any microwave or similar transmission
service used in connection with any cable television system or other similar
closed circuit coaxial cable communications system.
   (e)   COIN MACHINE. Any mechanical or electronic device designed to do both
of the following:
      (1)   Receive a coin or bill, or token made for that purpose; and
      (2)   In return for the insertion or deposit of a coin, bill or token,
automatically dispense property, provide a service or grant a license.
   (f)   COMPUTER. An electronic device that performs logical, arithmetic and
memory functions by the manipulation of electronic or magnetic impulses.
COMPUTER includes, but is not limited to, all input, output, processing,
storage, computer program or communication facilities that are connected, or
related, in a computer system or network to an electronic device of that
nature.
   (g)   COMPUTER CONTAMINANT. A computer program that is designed to modify,
damage, destroy, disable, deny or degrade access to, allow unauthorized access
to, functionally impair, record or transmit information within a computer,
computer system or computer network without the express or implied consent of
the owner or other person authorized to give consent and that is of a type or
kind described in divisions (1) through (4) of this definition or of a type or
kind similar to a type or kind described in divisions (1) through (4) of this
definition:
      (1)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “viruses” and
“worms” that are self-replicating or self-propagating and that are designed to
contaminate other computer programs, compromise computer security, consume
computer resources, modify, destroy, record or transmit data, or disrupt the
normal operation of the computer, computer system or computer network;
      (2)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “Trojans” or “Trojan
horses” that are not self-replicating or self-propagating and that are designed
to compromise computer security, consume computer resources, modify, destroy,
record or transmit data, or disrupt the normal operation of the computer,
computer system or computer network;
      (3)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “zombies” that are
designed to use a computer without the knowledge and consent of the owner, or
other person authorized to give consent, and that are designed to send large
quantities of data to a targeted computer network for the purpose of degrading
the targeted computer’s or network’s performance, or denying access through the
network to the targeted computer or network, resulting in what is commonly
known as “denial of service” or “distributed denial of service” attacks; and
      (4)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “trap doors,” “back
doors” or “root kits” that are designed to bypass standard authentication
software and that are designed to allow access or use of a computer without the
knowledge or consent of the owner, or other person authorized to give consent.
   (h)   COMPUTER HACKING.
      (1)   COMPUTER HACKING means any of the following:
         A.   Gaining access or attempting to gain access to all or part of a
computer, computer system or a computer network without express or implied
authorization with the intent to defraud or with intent to commit a crime;
         B.   Misusing computer or network services, including, but not limited
to, mail transfer programs, file transfer programs, proxy servers and web
servers, by performing functions not authorized by the owner of the computer,
computer system or computer network or other person authorized to give consent.
As used in this division, MISUSE OF COMPUTER AND NETWORK SERVICES includes, but
is not limited to, the unauthorized use of any of the following:
            1.   Mail transfer programs to send mail to persons other than the
authorized users of that computer or computer network;
            2.   File transfer program services or proxy servers to access
other computers, computer systems or computer networks; and
            3.   Web servers to redirect users to other web pages or web
servers.
         C.   1.   Subject to division (1)C.2. of this definition, using a
group of computer programs commonly known as “port scanners” or “probes” to
intentionally access any computer, computer system or computer network without
the permission of the owner of the computer, computer system or computer
network or other person authorized to give consent. The group of computer
programs referred to in this division includes, but is not limited to, those
computer programs that use a computer network to access a computer, computer
system or another computer network to determine any of the following: the
presence or types of computers or computer systems on a network; the computer
network’s facilities and capabilities; the availability of computer or network
services; the presence or versions of computer software including, but not
limited to, operating systems, computer services or computer contaminants; the
presence of a known computer software deficiency that can be used to gain
unauthorized access to a computer, computer system or computer network; or any
other information about a computer, computer system or computer network not
necessary for the normal and lawful operation of the computer initiating the
access.
            2.   The group of computer programs referred to in division (1)C.1.
of this definition does not include standard computer software used for the
normal operation, administration, management and test of a computer, computer
system or computer network, including, but not limited to, domain name
services, mail transfer services and other operating system services, computer
programs commonly called “ping,” “tcpdump” and “traceroute” and other network
monitoring and management computer software, and computer programs commonly
knows as “nslookup” and “whois” and other systems administration computer
software.
         D.   The intentional use of a computer, computer system or a computer
network in a manner that exceeds any right or permission granted by the owner
of the computer, computer system or computer network or other person authorized
to give consent.
      (2)   COMPUTER HACKING does not include the introduction of a computer
contaminant, as defined in this section, into a computer, computer system,
computer program or computer network.
   (i)   COMPUTER NETWORK. A set of related and remotely-connected computers
and communication facilities that includes more than one computer system that
has the capability to transmit among the connected computers and communication
facilities through the use of computer facilities.
   (j)   COMPUTER PROGRAM. An ordered set of data representing coded
instructions or statements that, when executed by a computer, causes the
computer to process data.
   (k)   COMPUTER SERVICES. Includes, but is not limited to, the use of a
computer system, computer network, computer program, data that is prepared for
computer use or data that is contained within a computer system or computer
network.
   (l)   COMPUTER SOFTWARE. Computer programs, procedures and other
documentation associated with the operation of a computer system.
   (m)   COMPUTER SYSTEM. A computer and related devices, whether connected or
unconnected, including, but not limited to, data input, output and storage
devices, data communications links, and computer programs and data that make
the system capable of performing specified special purpose data processing
tasks.
   (n)   COUNTERFEIT TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. A telecommunications device
that, alone or with another telecommunications device, has been altered,
constructed, manufactured or programmed to acquire, intercept, receive or
otherwise facilitate the use of a telecommunications service or information
service without the authority or consent of the provider of the
telecommunications service or information service. The phrase includes, but is
not limited to, a clone telephone, clone microchip, tumbler telephone or
tumbler microchip; a wireless scanning device capable of acquiring,
intercepting, receiving or otherwise facilitating the use of telecommunications
service or information service without immediate detection; or a device,
equipment, hardware or software designed for, or capable of, altering or
changing the electronic serial number in a wireless telephone.
   (o)   CREATE A SUBSTANTIAL RISK OF SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO ANY PERSON.
Includes the creation of a substantial risk of serious physical harm to any
emergency personnel.
   (p)   CREDIT CARD. Includes, but is not limited to, a card, code, device or
other means of access to a customer’s account for the purpose of obtaining
money, property, labor or services on credit, or for initiating an electronic
fund transfer at a point-of-sale terminal, an automated teller machine or a
cash dispensing machine. It also includes a county procurement card issued
under R.C. § 301.29.
   (q)   DANGEROUS DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   (r)   DATA. A representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts or
instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner and
that are intended for use in a computer, computer system or computer network.
   (s)   DECEPTION. To knowingly deceive another or cause another to be
deceived by any false or misleading representation, by withholding information,
by preventing another from acquiring information, or by any other conduct, act
or omission that creates, confirms or perpetuates a false impression in
another, including a false impression as to law, value, state of mind or other
objective or subjective fact.
   (t)   DEFRAUD. To knowingly obtain, by deception, some benefit for oneself
or another, or to knowingly cause, by deception, some detriment to another.
   (u)   DEPRIVE. To do any of the following:
      (1)   To withhold property of another permanently, or for a period that
appropriates a substantial portion of its value or use, or with purpose to
restore it only upon payment of a reward or other consideration;
      (2)   To dispose of property so as to make it unlikely that the owner
will recover it; or
      (3)   To accept, use or appropriate money, property or services, with
purpose not to give proper consideration in return for the money, property or
services, and without reasonable justification or excuse for not giving proper
consideration.
   (v)   DISABLED ADULT. A person who is 18 years of age or older and has some
impairment of body or mind that makes the person unable to work at any
substantially remunerative employment that the person otherwise would be able
to perform and that will, with reasonable probability, continue for a period of
at least 12 months without any present indication of recovery from the
impairment, or who is 18 years of age or older and has been certified as
permanently and totally disabled by an agency of this state or the United
States that has the function of so classifying persons.
   (w)   DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
   (x)   ELDERLY PERSON. A person who is 65 years of age or older.
   (y)   ELECTRONIC FUND TRANSFER. Has the same meaning as in 92 Stat. 3728, 15
U.S.C. § 1693a, as amended.
   (z)   EMERGENCY PERSONNEL. Any of the following persons:
      (1)   A peace officer, as defined in R.C. § 2935.01;
      (2)   A member of a fire department or other firefighting agency of a
municipal corporation, township, township fire district, joint fire district,
other political subdivision or combination of political subdivisions;
      (3)   A member of a private fire company, as defined in R.C. § 9.60, or a
volunteer firefighter;
      (4)   A member of a joint ambulance district or joint emergency medical
services district;
      (5)   An emergency medical technician-basic, emergency medical
technician-intermediate, emergency medical technician-paramedic, ambulance
operator or other member of an emergency medical service that is owned of
operated by a political subdivision or a private entity;
      (6)   The State Fire Marshal, the Chief Deputy State Fire Marshal or an
assistant state fire marshal; or
      (7)   A fire prevention officer of a political subdivision or an arson,
fire or similar investigator of a political subdivision.
   (aa)   FEDERALLY-LICENSED FIREARMS DEALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5502.63.
   (bb)   FIREARM and DANGEROUS ORDNANCE. Have the same meaning as in R.C. §
2923.11.
   (cc)   FORGE. To fabricate or create, in whole or in part and by any means,
any spurious writing or to make, execute, alter, complete, reproduce or
otherwise purport to authenticate any writing, when the writing in fact is not
authenticated by that conduct.
   (dd)   GAIN ACCESS. To approach, instruct, communicate with, store data in,
retrieve data from or otherwise make use of any resources of a computer,
computer system or computer network, or any cable service or cable system both
as defined in R.C. § 2913.04.
   (ee)   INFORMATION SERVICE.
      (1)   Subject to division (2) of this definition, the offering of a
capability for generating, acquiring, storing, transforming, processing,
retrieving, utilizing or making available information via telecommunications,
including but not limited to electronic publishing.
      (2)   INFORMATION SERVICE does not include any use of a capability of a
type described in division (1) of this definition for the management, control
or operation of a telecommunications system or the management of a
telecommunications service.
   (ff)   INTERNET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 341.42.
   (gg)   MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   (hh)   OCCUPIED STRUCTURE. Any house, building, outbuilding, watercraft,
aircraft, railroad car, truck, trailer, tent or other structure, vehicle or
shelter, or any portion thereof, to which any of the following applies:
      (1)   It is maintained as a permanent or temporary dwelling, even though
it is temporarily unoccupied and whether or not any person is actually present;
      (2)   At the time, it is occupied as the permanent or temporary
habitation of any person, whether or not any person is actually present;
      (3)   At the time, it is specially adapted for the overnight
accommodation of any person, whether or not any person is actually present; and
      (4)   At the time, any person is present or likely to be present in it.
   (ii)   OWNER. Unless the context requires a different meaning, any person,
other than the actor, who is the owner of, who has possession or control of, or
who has any license or interest in property or services, even though the
ownership, possession, control, license or interest is unlawful.
   (jj)   POLICE DOG OR HORSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.321.
   (kk)   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2744.01.
   (ll)   RENTED PROPERTY. Personal property in which the right of possession
and use of the property is for a short and possibly indeterminate term in
return for consideration; the rentee generally controls the duration of
possession of the property within any applicable minimum or maximum term; and
the amount of consideration is generally determined by the duration of
possession of the property.
   (mm)   SERVICES. Includes labor, personal services, professional services,
rental services, public utility services including wireless service as defined
in R.C. § 128.01(F)(1), common carrier services, and food, drink,
transportation, entertainment and cable television services and, for purposes
of R.C. § 2913.04 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, includes
cable services as defined in that section.
   (nn)   SLUG. An object that, by virtue of its size, shape, composition or
other quality, is capable of being inserted or deposited in a coin machine as
an improper substitute for a genuine coin, bill or token made for that purpose.
   (oo)   STATE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2744.01.
   (pp)   TELECOMMUNICATION. The origination, emission, dissemination,
transmission or reception of data, images, signals, sounds or other
intelligence or equivalence or intelligence of any nature over any
communications system by any method, including, but not limited to, a fiber
optic, electronic, magnetic, optical, digital or analog method.
   (qq)   TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Any instrument, equipment, machine or
other device that facilitates telecommunication, including, but not limited to,
a computer, computer network, computer chip, computer circuit, scanner,
telephone, cellular telephone, pager, personal communications device,
transponder, receiver, radio, modem or device that enables the use of a modem.
   (rr)   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. The providing, allowing, facilitating or
generating of any form of telecommunication through the use of a
telecommunications device over a telecommunications system.
   (ss)   THEFT OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2911.12, 2911.13,
2911.31, 2911.32, 2913.02, 2913.03, 2913.04, 2913.041, 2913.11, 2913.21,
2913.31, 2913.32, 2913.33, 2913.34, 2913.40, 2913.42, 2913.43, 2913.44,
2913.45, 2913.47, 2913.48, former R.C. § 2913.47 or 2913.48, or R.C. § 2913.51,
2915.05 or 2921.41;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States substantially equivalent to any
section listed in division (1) of this definition, or a violation of R.C. §
2913.41, 2913.81 or 2915.06 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law
of this or any other state or the United States involving robbery, burglary,
breaking and entering, theft, embezzlement, wrongful conversion, forgery,
counterfeiting, deceit or fraud; or
      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit or complicity in
committing any offense under division (1), (2) or (3) of this definition.
   (tt)   UTTER. To issue, publish, transfer, use, put or send into
circulation, deliver or display.
   (uu)   WRITING. Any computer software, document, letter, memorandum, note,
paper, plate, data, film or other thing having in or upon it any written,
typewritten or printed matter, and any token, stamp, seal, credit card, badge,
trademark, label or other symbol of value, right, privilege, license or
identification.
(R.C. §§ 2909.01, 2913.01)
§ 642.02 THEFT.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to deprive the owner of property or services,
shall knowingly obtain or exert control over either the property or services in
any of the following ways:
      (1)   Without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give
consent;
      (2)   Beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of the owner or
person authorized to give consent;
      (3)   By deception;
      (4)   By threat; or
      (5)   By intimidation.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of theft. Except as otherwise
provided in this division, a violation of this section is misdemeanor theft, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If any of the following criteria are met, then
a violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law:
      (1)   If the value of the property or services is $1,000 or more;
      (2)   If the property stolen is any of the property listed in R.C. §
2913.71;
      (3)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person, disabled adult,
active duty service member, or spouse of an active duty service member;
      (4)   If the property stolen is a firearm or dangerous ordnance;
      (5)   If the property stolen is a motor vehicle;
      (6)   If the property stolen is any dangerous drug, or if the offender
previously has been convicted of a felony drug abuse offense;
      (7)   If the property stolen is a police dog or horse or an assistance
dog and the offender knows or should know that the property stolen is a police
dog or horse or an assistance dog;
      (8)   If the property stolen is anhydrous ammonia; or
      (9)   If the property stolen is a special purchase article as defined in
R.C. § 4737.04 or is a bulk merchandise container as defined in R.C. §
4737.012.
   (c)   In addition to the penalties described in division (b) of this
section, if the offender committed the violation by causing a motor vehicle to
leave the premises of an establishment at which gasoline is offered for retail
sale without the offender making full payment for gasoline that was dispensed
into the fuel tank of the motor vehicle or into another container, the court
may do one of the following:
      (1)   Unless division (c)(2) of this section applies, suspend for not
more than six months the offender’s driver’s license, probationary driver’s
license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit or
nonresident operating privilege;
      (2)   If the offender’s driver’s license, probationary driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit or nonresident
operating privilege has previously been suspended pursuant to division (c)(1)
of this section, or any other substantially equivalent state or local law,
impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s license, permit or privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7), provided that the suspension
shall be at least six months; or
      (3)   The court, in lieu of suspending the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, probationary driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or nonresident operating privilege pursuant to division (c)
(1) or (c)(2) of this section, instead may require the offender to perform
community service for a number of hours determined by the court.
   (d)   In addition to the penalties described in division (b) of this
section, if the offender committed the violation by stealing rented property or
rental services, the court may order that the offender make restitution
pursuant to R.C. § 2929.18 or 2929.28. Restitution may include, but is not
limited to, the cost of repairing or replacing the stolen property, or the cost
of repairing the stolen property and any loss of revenue resulting from
deprivation of the property due to theft of rental services that is less than
or equal to the actual value of the property at the time it was rented.
Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property or rental services shall
be determined pursuant to the provisions of R.C. § 2913.72.
   (e)   The sentencing court that suspends an offender’s license, permit or
nonresident operating privilege under division (c) of this section may grant
the offender limited driving privileges during the period of the suspension in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 4510.
(R.C. § 2913.02)
Statutory reference:
   Felony theft provisions, see R.C. § 2913.02(B)
§ 642.03 DEGREE OF OFFENSE WHEN CERTAIN PROPERTY INVOLVED.
   Regardless of the value of the property involved, and regardless of whether
the offender previously has been convicted of a theft offense, a violation of §
642.02 or 642.22 is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law if
the property involved is any of the following:
   (a)   A credit card;
   (b)   A printed form for a check or other negotiable instrument, that on its
face identifies the drawer or maker for whose use it is designed or identifies
the account on which it is to be drawn, and that has not been executed by the
drawer or maker or on which the amount is blank;
   (c)   A motor vehicle identification license plate as prescribed by R.C. §
4503.22, a temporary motor vehicle license registration as prescribed by R.C. §
4503.182, or any comparable temporary motor vehicle license registration as
prescribed by the applicable law of another state or the United States;
   (d)   A blank form for a certificate of title or a manufacturer’s or
importer’s certificate to a motor vehicle, as prescribed by R.C. § 4505.07; or
   (e)   A blank form for any license listed in R.C. § 4507.01.
(R.C. § 2913.71)
§ 642.035 EVIDENCE OF THEFT OF RENTED PROPERTY.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   RENTEE. A person who pays consideration to a renter for the use of
rented property.
      (2)   RENTER. A person who owns rented property.
   (b)   Each of the following shall be considered evidence of intent to commit
theft of rented property or rental services:
      (1)   At the time of entering into the rental contract, the rentee
presented the renter with identification that was materially false, fictitious
or not current with respect to name, address, place of employment or other
relevant information; or
      (2)   After receiving a notice demanding the return of the rented
property as provided in division (c) of this section, the rentee neither
returned the rented property nor made arrangements acceptable with the renter
to return the rented property.
   (c)   To establish that a rentee has an intent to commit theft of rented
property or rental services under division (b)(2) above, a renter may issue a
notice to a rentee demanding the return of the rented property. The renter
shall mail the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
rentee at the address the rentee gave when the rental contract was executed, or
to the rentee at the last address the rentee or the rentee’s agent furnished in
writing to the renter.
   (d)   A demand for the return of the rented property is not a prerequisite
for the prosecution of a rentee for theft of rented property or rental
services. The evidence specified in division (b) above does not constitute the
only evidence that may be considered as evidence of intent to commit theft of
rented property or rental services.
(R.C. § 2913.72)
§ 642.04 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF A VEHICLE; VEHICLE TRESPASS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle,
motorcycle, motorboat or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of
the owner or person authorized to give consent.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle,
motorboat or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of the owner or
person authorized to give consent, and either remove it from this state, or
keep possession of it for more than 48 hours.
   (c)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section:
      (1)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor, though mistaken,
reasonably believed that he or she was authorized to use or operate the
property; and
      (2)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor reasonably believed
that the owner or person empowered to give consent would authorize the actor to
use or operate the property.
   (d)   Whoever violates divisions (a) and (b) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of a vehicle.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (d)(1), a violation
of division (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled adult and if the victim
incurs a loss as a result of the violation, a violation of division (a) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (b) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (e)   No person shall knowingly enter in or upon a motor vehicle, motorcycle
or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of the owner thereof or of
a person authorized to give consent.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (e) of this section is guilty of vehicle
trespass, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(Ord. 1995-265, passed 1-15-1996)
Statutory reference:
   Theft offense involving motor vehicle, offender to pay towing and storage
fees, see R.C. 2913.82
   Unauthorized use of a vehicle, see R.C. § 2912.03
§ 642.05 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly use or operate the property of another
without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent.
   (b)   No person, in any manner and by any means, including, but not limited
to, computer hacking, shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access
to, or cause access to be gained to any computer, computer system, computer
network, cable service, cable system, telecommunications device,
telecommunications service or information service without the consent of, or
beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of, the owner of the
computer, computer system, computer network, cable service, cable system,
telecommunications device, telecommunications service or information service or
other person authorized to give consent.
   (c)   Except as permitted under R.C. § 5503.101, no person shall knowingly
gain access to, attempt to gain access to, cause access to be granted to, or
disseminate information gained from access to the law enforcement automated
database system created pursuant to R.C. § 5503.10 without the consent of, or
beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of, the chair of the Law
Enforcement Automated Data System Steering Committee.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to,
cause access to be granted to, or disseminate information gained from access to
the Ohio Law Enforcement Gateway established and operated pursuant to R.C. §
109.57(C)(1) without the consent of, or beyond the scope of the express or
implied consent of, the Superintendent of the Bureau of Criminal Identification
and Investigation.
   (e)   The affirmative defenses contained in R.C. § 2913.03(C) are
affirmative defenses to a charge under this section.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of property. Except as otherwise provided in this division
(f), unauthorized use of property is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (1)   If unauthorized use of property is committed for the purpose of
devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to obtain property or services,
unauthorized use of property is whichever of the following is applicable:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided below, unauthorized use of property
is a misdemeanor of the first degree; or
         B.   If the value of the property or services or the loss to the
victim is $1,000 or more, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (2)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled
adult, unauthorized use of property is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (g)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of computer, cable or telecommunication property, a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (h)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of the law enforcement automated database system, a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (i)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of the Ohio Law Enforcement Gateway, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
   (j)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CABLE OPERATOR. Any person or group of persons that does either of
the following:
         A.   Provides cable service over a cable system and directly through
one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that cable system; or
         B.   Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of a cable system.
      (2)   CABLE SERVICE. Any of the following:
         A.   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or
of information that a cable operator makes available to all subscribers
generally;
         B.   Subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the
selection or use of video programming or of information that a cable operator
makes available to all subscribers generally, both as described in division (j)
(2)A. above; and
         C.   Any cable television service.
      (3)   CABLE SYSTEM. Any facility, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes video
programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community.
CABLE SYSTEM does not include any of the following:
         A.   Any facility that serves only to retransmit the television
signals of one or more television broadcast stations;
         B.   Any facility that serves subscribers without using any public
right-of-way;
         C.   Any facility of a common carrier that, under 47 U.S.C. § 522(7)
(c), is excluded from the term CABLE SYSTEM as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(7);
         D.   Any open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. § 573; or
         E.   Any facility of any electric utility used solely for operating
its electric utility system.
(R.C. § 2913.04)
Statutory reference:
   Telecommunications: fraud and unlawful use of a device, felony offenses, see
R.C. §§ 2913.05 and 2913.06
§ 642.06 INJURING VINES, BUSHES, TREES OR CROPS.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly cut down,
destroy, girdle or otherwise injure a vine, bush, shrub, sapling, tree or crop
standing or growing on the land of another or upon public land.
   (b)   In addition to the penalty provided in division (c) of this section,
whoever violates this section is liable in treble damages for the injury
caused.
(R.C. § 901.51)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 901.99(A))
§ 642.07 DESECRATION.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall purposely deface, damage,
pollute or otherwise physically mistreat any of the following:
      (1)   Any public monument;
      (2)   Any historical or commemorative marker, or any structure, Indian
mound or earthwork, cemetery, thing or site of great historical or
archeological interest;
      (3)   A place of worship, its furnishings or religious artifacts or
sacred texts within the place of worship or within the grounds upon which the
place of worship is located;
      (4)   A work of art or museum piece; and
      (5)   Any other object of reverence or sacred devotion.
   (b)   As used in this section, CEMETERY means any place of burial and
includes burial sites that contain American Indian burial objects placed with
or containing American Indian human remains.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of desecration. A violation of
division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(4) or (a)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the second degree. A violation of division (a)(3) of this section is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2927.11)
§ 642.08 ASSAULTING POLICE DOG OR HORSE OR ASSISTANCE DOG.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to
a police dog or horse in either of the following circumstances.
      (1)   The police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement officer in
the performance of the officer’s official duties at the time the physical harm
is caused or attempted.
      (2)   The police dog or horse is not assisting a law enforcement officer
in the performance of the officer’s official duties at the time the physical
harm is caused or attempted, but the offender has actual knowledge that the dog
or horse is a police dog or horse.
   (b)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Taunt, torment or strike a police dog or horse;
      (2)   Throw an object or substance at a police dog or horse;
      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct a police dog or horse, or interfere with
or obstruct a law enforcement officer who is being assisted by a police dog or
horse, in a manner that does any of the following:
         A.   Inhibits or restricts the law enforcement officer’s control of
the police dog or horse;
         B.   Deprives the law enforcement officer of control of the police dog
or horse;
         C.   Releases the police dog or horse from its area of control;
         D.   Enters the area of control of the police dog or horse without the
consent of the law enforcement officer, including placing food or any other
object or substance into that area; or
         E.   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the police dog or horse to
assist a law enforcement officer.
      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical
injury or death to a police dog or horse; or
      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog, fail to
reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in
a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or
otherwise endanger a police dog or horse that at the time of the conduct, the
police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement officer in the performance
of the officer's duties or that the person knows is a police dog or horse.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to
an assistance dog in either of the following circumstances.
      (1)   The dog, at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted, is
assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment.
      (2)   The dog, at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted, is
not assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment, but the offender has actual knowledge that
the dog is an assistance dog.
   (d)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Taunt, torment or strike an assistance dog;
      (2)   Throw an object or substance at an assistance dog;
      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct an assistance dog, or interfere with or
obstruct a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a person with a
mobility impairment who is being assisted or served by an assistance dog, in a
manner that does any of the following:
         A.   Inhibits or restricts the assisted or served person’s control of
the dog;
         B.   Deprives the assisted or served person of control of the dog;
         C.   Releases the dog from its area of control;
         D.   Enters the area of control of the dog without the consent of the
assisted or served person, including placing food or any other object or
substance into that area; or
         E.   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the dog to assist the
assisted or served person;
      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical
injury or death to an assistance dog; or
      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog, fail to
reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in
a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or
otherwise endanger an assistance dog that at the time of the conduct is
assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment or that the person knows is an assistance
dog.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
assaulting a police dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided in this division
(e), assaulting a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If
the violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse other than
death or serious physical harm, assaulting a police dog or horse is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in serious physical
harm to the police dog or horse or results in its death, assaulting a police
dog or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
harassing a police dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided this division
(e), harassing a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If
the violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse but does not
result in its death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing a police dog
or horse is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in
serous physical harm to the police dog or horse or results in its death,
harassing a police dog or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of
assaulting an assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this division
(e), assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog other than death or
serious physical harm, assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the violation results in serious physical harm to the
assistance dog or results in its death, assaulting an assistance dog is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of
harassing an assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this division (e),
harassing an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog but does not result in
the death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing an assistance dog is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in serious physical
harm to the assistance dog or results in its death, harassing an assistance dog
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   In addition to any other sanctions or penalty imposed for the
offense under this section, R.C. Chapter 2929 or any other provision of the
Revised Code or this code, whoever violates division (a), (b), (c) or (d) of
this section is responsible for the payment of all of the following:
         A.   Any veterinary bill or bill for medication incurred as a result
of the violation by the police department regarding a violation of division (a)
or (b) of this section or by the person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired
or the person with a mobility impairment assisted or served by the assistance
dog regarding a violation of division (c) or (d) of this section;
         B.   The cost of any damaged equipment that results from the
violation;
         C.   If the violation did not result in the death of the police dog or
horse or the assistance dog that was the subject of the violation and if, as a
result of that dog or horse being the subject of the violation, the dog or
horse needs further training or retraining to be able to continue in the
capacity of a police dog or horse or an assistance dog, the cost of any further
training or retraining of that dog or horse by a law enforcement officer or by
the person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or the person with a
mobility impairment assisted or served by the assistance dog;
         D.   If the violation resulted in the death of the assistance dog that
was the subject of the violation or resulted in serious physical harm to the
police dog or horse or the assistance dog or horse that was the subject of the
violation to the extent that the dog or horse needs to be replaced on either a
temporary or a permanent basis, the cost of replacing that dog or horse and of
any further training of a new police dog or horse or a new assistance dog by a
law enforcement officer or by the person who is blind, deaf, or hearing
impaired or the person with a mobility impairment assisted or served by the
assistance dog, which replacement or training is required because of the death
of or the serious physical harm to the dog or horse that was the subject of the
violation.
   (f)   This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian whose conduct
is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4741.
   (g)   This section only applies to an offender who knows or should know at
the time of the violation that the police dog or horse or assistance dog that
is the subject of a violation under this section is a police dog or horse or an
assistance dog.
   (h)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   ASSISTANCE DOG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.
      (2)   BLIND. Had the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.
      (3)   PERSON WITH A MOBILITY IMPAIRMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 955.011.
      (4)   PHYSICAL HARM. Any injury, illness or other psychological
impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.
      (5)   POLICE DOG OR HORSE. A dog or horse that has been trained and may
be used to assist law enforcement officers in the performance of their official
duties.
      (6)   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM. Any of the following:
         A.   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death;
         B.   Any physical harm that causes permanent maiming or that involves
some temporary, substantial maiming; or
         C.   Any physical harm that causes acute pain of a duration that
results in substantial suffering.
(R.C. § 2921.321)
§ 642.09 ARSON.
   (a)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly do any of
the following:
      (1)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
property of another without the other person’s consent;
      (2)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
property of the offender or another, with purpose to defraud;
      (3)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to the
statehouse or a courthouse, school building, or other building or structure
that is owned or controlled by the state, any political subdivision, or any
department, agency, or instrumentality of the state or a political subdivision,
and that is used for public purposes;
      (4)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm, through the
offer or the acceptance of an agreement for hire or other consideration, to any
property of another without the other person’s consent or to any property of
the offender or another with purpose to defraud;
      (5)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any park,
preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over land, forest, timberland,
greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is owned or controlled by
another person, the state, or a political subdivision without the consent of
the other person, the state, or the political subdivision;
      (6)   With purpose to defraud, cause, or create a substantial risk of,
physical harm to any park, preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over
land, forest, timberland, greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is
owned or controlled by the offender, another person, the state, or a political
subdivision.
   (b)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly do any of
the following:
      (1)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
structure of another that is not an occupied structure;
      (2)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm, through the
offer or the acceptance of an agreement for hire or other consideration, to any
structure of another that is not an occupied structure;
      (3)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
structure that is not an occupied structure and that is in or on any park,
preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over land, forest, timberland,
greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is owned or controlled by
another person, the state, or a political subdivision.
   (c)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (b)(1)
or (b)(2) of this section that the defendant acted with the consent of the
other person.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (b)(3) of
this section that the defendant acted with the consent of the other person, the
state, or the political subdivision.
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of arson.
      (2)   A violation of division (a)(1) or (b)(1) of this section is one of
the following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (d)(2)B. of this
section, a misdemeanor of the first degree;
         B.   If the value of the property or the amount of the physical harm
involved is $1,000 or more, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (3)   A violation of division (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), (a)(5), (a)(6), (b)
(2) or (b)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2909.03)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated arson, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2909.02
   Arson, felony provisions generally, see R.C. § 2909.03
   Convicted arsonist to make restitution to public agency, see R.C. § 2929.28
§ 642.10 CRIMINAL DAMAGING OR ENDANGERING; VEHICULAR VANDALISM.
   (a)   Criminal damaging or endangering.
      (1)   No person shall cause or create a substantial risk of physical harm
to any property of another without the other person’s consent:
         A.   Knowingly, by any means; or
         B.   Recklessly, by means of fire, explosion, flood, poison gas,
poison, radioactive material, caustic or corrosive material, or other
inherently dangerous agency or substance.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (a) is guilty of criminal damaging
or endangering, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If violation of this
division (a) creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging
or endangering is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the property involved
in a violation of this division (a) is an aircraft, an aircraft engine,
propeller, appliance, spare part or any other equipment or implement used or
intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the violation
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging or endangering
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the property
involved in a violation of this division (a) is an aircraft, an aircraft
engine, propeller, appliance, spare part or any other equipment or implement
used or intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the
violation creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person or if the
property involved in a violation of this division (a) is an occupied aircraft,
criminal damaging or endangering is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2909.06)
   (b)   Vehicular vandalism.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division (b), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         A.   ALLEY, STREET and VEHICLE. Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
4511.01.
         B.   HIGHWAY. Any highway as defined in R.C. § 4511.01 or any lane,
road, street, alley, bridge or overpass.
         C.   VESSEL and WATERS IN THIS STATE. Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 1546.01.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any
object at, onto or in the path of any of the following:
         A.   Any vehicle on a highway; and
         B.   Any boat or vessel on any of the waters in this state.
      (3)   Whoever violates this division (b) is guilty of vehicular
vandalism. Except as otherwise provided in this division (b)(3), vehicular
vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of this
division (b) creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person or the
violation of this division (b) causes serious physical harm to property,
vehicular vandalism is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
If the violation of this division (b) causes physical harm to any person or
serious physical harm to any person, vehicular vandalism is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.09)
Statutory reference:
   Disrupting public services, felony offense, see R.C. § 2909.04
   Railroad grade crossing device vandalism, see R.C. § 2909.101
   Railroad vandalism, see R.C. § 2909.10
   Vandalism, felony offense, see R.C. § 2909.05
§ 642.105 CRIMINAL DAMAGING THROUGH OPERATION OF A MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly or recklessly cause physical harm to real or
personal property of another without his or her consent through the operation
of a motor vehicle over or upon such property.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal damaging through
the operation of a motor vehicle, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(1964 Code, § 541.10)
§ 642.11 CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.
   (a)   No person shall:
      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage,
destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with the either of the following:
         A.   The property of another;
         B.   One’s own residential real property with the purpose to decrease
the value of or enjoyment of the residential real property, if both of the
following apply:
            1.   The residential real property is subject to a mortgage.
            2.   The person has been served with a summons and complaint in a
pending residential mortgage loan foreclosure action relating to that real
property. As used in this division, “pending” includes the time between
judgment entry and confirmation of sale.
      (2)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of property of
another, employ a tear gas device, stink bomb, smoke generator or other device
releasing a substance that is harmful or offensive to persons exposed, or that
tends to cause public alarm;
      (3)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy
or otherwise improperly tamper with a bench mark, triangulation station,
boundary marker or other survey station, monument or marker;
      (4)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy
or otherwise improperly tamper with any safety device, the property of another,
or the property of the offender when required or placed for the safety of
others, so as to destroy or diminish its effectiveness or availability for its
intended purpose;
      (5)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of the property
of another, set a fire on the land of another or place personal property that
has been set on fire on the land of another, which fire or personal property is
outside and apart from any building, other structure, or personal property that
is on that land; or
      (6)   Without privilege to do so, and with intent to impair the
functioning of any computer, computer system, computer network, computer
software or computer program, knowingly do any of the following:
         A.   In any manner or by any means, including, but not limited to,
computer hacking, alter, damage, destroy or modify a computer, computer system,
computer network, computer software, or computer program or data contained in a
computer, computer system, computer network, computer software or computer
program; or
         B.   Introduce a computer contaminant into a computer, computer
system, computer network, computer software or computer program.
      (7)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly destroy or improperly tamper
with a critical infrastructure facility.
   (B)   As used in this section:
      CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2911.21.
      IMPROPERLY TAMPER. Means to change the physical location or the physical
condition of the property.
      SAFETY DEVICE. Means any fire extinguisher, fire hose, or fire axe, or
any fire escape, emergency exit, or emergency escape equipment, or any life
line, life-saving ring, life preserver, or life boat or raft, or any alarm,
light, flare, signal, sign, or notice intended to warn of danger or emergency,
or intended for other safety purposes, or any guard railing or safety
barricade, or any traffic sign or signal, or any railroad grade crossing sign,
signal, or gate, or any first aid or survival equipment, or any other device,
apparatus, or equipment intended for protecting or preserving the safety of
persons or property.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal mischief,
and shall be punished as provided in division (C)(2), (C)(3), or (C)(4) of this
section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree. Except as otherwise provided
in this division, if the violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4),
or (A)(5) of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person,
criminal mischief committed in violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3),
(A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
property involved in the violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4),
or (A)(5) of this section is an aircraft, an aircraft engine, propeller,
appliance, spare part, fuel, lubricant, hydraulic fluid, any other equipment,
implement, or material used or intended to be used in the operation of an
aircraft, or any cargo carried or intended to be carried in an aircraft and if
the violation creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or if the
aircraft in question is an occupied aircraft, criminal mischief committed in
violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (A)(6) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the value of the computer, computer system, computer
network, computer software, computer program, or data involved in the violation
of division (A)(6) of this section or the loss to the victim resulting from the
violation is $1,000 or more, or if the computer, computer system, computer
network, computer software, computer program, or data involved in the violation
of division (A)(6) is used or intended to be used in the operation of an
aircraft and the violation creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or
if the aircraft in question is an occupied aircraft, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (A)(6) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   Criminal mischief committed in violation of division (A)(7) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.07)
§ 642.12 CRIMINAL TRESPASS.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another;
      (2)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, the
use of which is lawfully restricted to certain persons, purposes, modes or
hours, when the offender knows the offender is in violation of any such
restriction or is reckless in that regard;
      (3)   Recklessly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, as
to which notice against unauthorized access or presence is given by actual
communication to the offender, or in a manner prescribed by law, or by posting
in a manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential
intruders, or by fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to restrict
access;
      (4)   Being on the land or premises of another, negligently fail or
refuse to leave upon being notified by signage posted in a conspicuous place or
otherwise being notified to do so by the owner or occupant, or the agent or
servant of either; or
      (5)   Knowingly enter or remain on a critical infrastructure facility.
   (b)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the land or
premises involved was owned, controlled, or in custody of a public agency.
   (c)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the offender was
authorized to enter or remain on the land or premises involved, when the
authorization was secured by deception.
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal trespass.
Criminal trespass in violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), or (A)(4) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Criminal trespass in
violation of division (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28, if the person, in committing the
violation of this section, used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle, the court shall impose a fine of two times the usual amount
imposed for the violation.
      (3)   If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to two or more violations of this section, R.C. § 2911.21 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and the offender, in committing each violation,
used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, the court, in
addition to or independent of all other penalties imposed for the violation,
may impound the certificate of registration of that snowmobile or off-highway
motorcycle or the certificate of registration and license plate of that all-
purpose vehicle for not less than 60 days. In such a case, R.C. § 4519.47
applies.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, if the
offender, in committing the violation of this section, used an all-purpose
vehicle, the Clerk of the Court shall pay the fine imposed pursuant to this
section to the State Recreational Vehicle Fund created by R.C. § 4519.11.
   (f)   As used in divisions (a) through (e) of this section:
      (1)   ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE, and SNOWMOBILE. Have
the same meanings as in R.C. § 4519.01.
      (2)   CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY. Means:
         A.   One of the following, if completely enclosed by a fence or other
physical barrier that is obviously designed to exclude intruders, or if clearly
marked with signs that are reasonably likely to come to the attention of
potential intruders and that indicate entry is forbidden without site
authorization:
            1.   A petroleum or alumina refinery;
            2.   An electric generating facility, substation, switching
station, electrical control center, or electric transmission and distribution
lines and associated equipment;
            3.   A chemical, polymer, or rubber manufacturing facility;
            4.   A water intake structure, water treatment facility, waste
water facility, drainage facility, water management facility, or any similar
water or sewage treatment system and its water and sewage piping;
            5.   A natural gas company facility or interstate natural gas
pipeline, including a pipeline interconnection, a natural gas compressor
station and associated facilities, city gate or town border station, metering
station, above-ground piping, regulator station, valve site, delivery station,
fabricated assembly, or any other part of a natural gas storage facility
involved in the gathering, storage, transmission, or distribution of gas;
            6.   A telecommunications central switching office or remote
switching facility or an equivalent network facility that serves a similar
purpose;
            7.   Wireline or wireless telecommunications infrastructure,
including telecommunications towers and telephone poles and lines, including
fiber optic lines;
            8.   A port, trucking terminal, or other freight transportation
facility;
            9.   A gas processing plant, including a plant used in the
processing, treatment, or fractionation of natural gas or natural gas liquids;
            10.   A transmission facility used by a federally licensed radio or
television station;
            11.   A steel-making facility that uses an electric arc furnace to
make steel;
            12.   A facility identified and regulated by the United States
Department of Homeland Security’s Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards
Program under 6 C.F.R. part 27;
            13.   A dam that is regulated by the state or federal government;
            14.   A crude oil or refined products storage and distribution
facility, including valve sites, pipeline interconnections, pump station,
metering station, below- or above-ground pipeline, or piping and truck loading
or off-loading facility;
            15.   A video service network and broadband infrastructure,
including associated buildings and facilities, video service headends, towers,
utility poles, and utility lines such as fiber optic lines. As used in this
division, “video service network” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
            16.   Any above-ground portion of an oil, gas, hazardous liquid or
chemical pipeline, tank, or other storage facility;
            17.   Any above-ground portion of a well, well pad, or production
operation;
            18.   A laydown area or construction site for pipe and other
equipment intended for use on an interstate or intrastate natural gas or crude
oil pipeline;
            19.   Any mining operation, including any processing equipment,
batching operation, or support facility for that mining operation.
         B.   With respect to a video service network or broadband or wireless
telecommunications infrastructure, the above-ground portion of a facility
installed in a public right-of-way on a utility pole or in a conduit;
         C.   Any railroad property;
         D.   An electronic asset of any of the following:
            1.   An electric light company that is a public utility under R.C.
§ 4905.02;
            2.   An electric cooperative, as defined in R.C. § 4928.01;
            3.   A municipal electric utility, as defined in R.C. § 4928.01;
            4.   A natural gas company that is a public utility under R.C. §
4905.02;
            5.   A telephone company that is a public utility under R.C. §
4905.02;
            6.   A video service provider, including a cable operator, as those
terms are defined in R.C. § 1332.21.
      (3)   ELECTRONIC ASSET. Includes, but is not limited to, the hardware,
software, and data of a programmable electronic device; all communications,
operations, and customer data networks; and the contents of those data
networks.
      (4)   LAND or PREMISES. Includes any land, building, structure, or place
belonging to, controlled by, or in custody of another, and any separate
enclosure or room, or portion thereof.
      (5)   PRODUCTION OPERATION, WELL, and WELL PAD. Have the same meanings as
in R.C. § 1509.01.
(R.C. § 2911.21)
   (g)   Criminal trespass on a place of public amusement.
      (1)   As used in this division (g), PLACE OF PUBLIC AMUSEMENT means a
stadium, theater or other facility, whether licensed or not, at which a live
performance, sporting event or other activity takes place for entertainment of
the public and to which access is made available to the public, regardless of
whether admission is charged.
      (2)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly enter or
remain on any restricted portion of a place of public amusement and, as a
result of that conduct, interrupt or cause the delay of the live performance,
sporting event, or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement
after a printed written notice has been given as provided in division (g)(4)A.
of this section that the general public is restricted from access to that
restricted portion of the place of public amusement. A restricted portion of a
place of public amusement may include, but is not limited to, a playing field,
an athletic surface or a stage located at the place of public amusement.
      (3)   An owner or lessee of a place of public amusement, an agent of the
owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a place of public amusement
may use reasonable force to restrain and remove a person from a restricted
portion of the place of public amusement if the person enters or remains on the
restricted portion of the place of public amusement and, as a result of that
conduct, interrupts or causes the delay of the live performance, sporting event
or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement. This division
(g)(3) does not provide immunity from criminal liability for any use of force
beyond reasonable force by an owner or lessee of a place of public amusement,
an agent of either the owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a
place of public amusement.
      (4)   A.   Notice has been given that the general public is restricted
from access to a portion of a place of public amusement if a printed written
notice of the restricted access has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at
the entrance to that portion of the place of public amusement. If a printed
written notice is posted or exhibited as described in this division (g)(4)
regarding a portion of a place of public amusement, in addition to that posting
or exhibition, notice that the general public is restricted from access to that
portion of the place of public amusement also may be given, but is not required
to be given, by either of the following means:
            1.   By notifying the person personally, either orally or in
writing, that access to that portion of the place of public amusement is
restricted; or
            2.   By broadcasting over the public address system of the place of
public amusement an oral warning that access to that portion of the place of
public amusement is restricted.
         B.   If notice that the general public is restricted from access to a
portion of a place of public amusement is provided by the posting or exhibition
of a printed written notice as described in division (g)(4)A. of this section,
the municipality, in a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (g)(2)
of this section, is not required to prove that the defendant received actual
notice that the general public is restricted from access to a portion of a
place of public amusement.
      (5)   A.   Whoever violates division (g)(2) of this section is guilty of
criminal trespass on a place of public amusement, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
         B.   In addition to any jail term, fine or other sentence, penalty or
sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to division (g)(5)A. of this
section, a court may require an offender who violates this section to perform
not less than 30 and not more than 120 hours of supervised community service
work.
(R.C. § 2911.23)
§ 642.125 AGGRAVATED TRESPASS.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall enter or remain on the land or premises of
another with purpose to commit on that land or those premises a misdemeanor,
the elements of which involve causing physical harm to another person or
causing another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to
that person.
      (2)   No person shall enter or remain on a critical infrastructure
facility with purpose to destroy or tamper with the facility.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated trespass.
Aggravated trespass in violation of division (a)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Aggravated trespass in violation of division
(a)(2) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
   (c)   As used in this section, CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2911.21.
(R.C. § 2911.211)
§ 642.13 TAMPERING WITH COIN MACHINES.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to commit theft or to defraud, shall knowingly
enter, force an entrance into, tamper with or insert any part of an instrument
into any coin machine.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with coin
machines, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of this section or of any theft offense as
defined in R.C. § 2913.01, tampering with coin machines is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2911.32)
§ 642.14 PASSING BAD CHECKS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CHECK. Includes any form of debit from a demand deposit account,
including, but not limited to, any of the following:
         A.   A check, bill of exchange, draft, order of withdrawal, or similar
negotiable or non-negotiable instrument; and
         B.   An electronic check, electronic transaction, debit card
transaction, check card transaction, substitute check, web check or any form of
automated clearing house transaction.
      (2)   ISSUE A CHECK. Causing any form of debit from a demand deposit
account.
   (b)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall issue or transfer or cause
to be issued or transferred a check or other negotiable instrument, knowing
that it will be dishonored or knowing that a person has ordered or will order
stop payment on the check or other negotiable instrument.
   (c)   For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers a check
or other negotiable instrument is presumed to know that it will be dishonored
if either of the following occurs:
      (1)   The drawer has no account with the drawee at the time of issue or
the stated date, whichever is later; or
      (2)   The check or other negotiable instrument was properly refused
payment for insufficient funds upon presentment within 30 days after issue or
the stated date, whichever is later, and the liability of the drawer, indorser
or any party who may be liable thereon is not discharged by payment or
satisfaction within ten days after receiving notice of dishonor.
   (d)   In determining the value of the payment for purposes of division (e)
of this section, the court may aggregate all checks and other negotiable
instruments that the offender issued or transferred or caused to be issued or
transferred in violation of division (b) of this section within a period of 180
consecutive days.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of passing bad checks. Except
as otherwise provided in this division (e), passing bad checks is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the check or checks or other negotiable instrument or
instruments are issued or transferred to a single vendor or single other person
for the payment of $1,000 or more, or if the check or checks or other
negotiable instrument or instruments are issued or transferred to multiple
vendors or persons for the payment of $1,500 or more, passing bad checks is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.11)
§ 642.145 FORGING OR SELLING FORGED IDENTIFICATION CARDS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly do either of the following:
      (1)   Forge an identification card; or
      (2)   Sell or otherwise distribute a card that purports to be an
identification card, knowing it was forged.
   (b)   As used in this section, IDENTIFICATION CARD means a card that
includes personal information or characteristics of an individual, a purpose of
which is to establish the identity of the bearer described on the card, whether
the words “identity,” “identification,” “identification card” or other similar
words appear on the card.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of forging
identification cards or selling or distributing forged identification cards.
Except as otherwise provided in this division (c), forging identification cards
or selling or distributing forged identification cards is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
division (a) of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, forging identification cards or selling or distributing
forged identification cards is a misdemeanor of the first degree and, in
addition, the court shall impose upon the offender a fine not less than $250.
      (2)   If the victim of a violation of this section is an elderly person,
R.C. § 2913.31(C)(2)(b) applies and the offense shall be prosecuted under R.C.
§ 2913.31.
(R.C. § 2913.31(B), (C)(2))
Statutory reference:
   Forgery, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2913.31(A), (C)(1)
   Forgery of originating address or other routing information in connection
with the transmission of an electronic mail advertisement, felony provisions,
see R.C. § 2307.64
§ 642.15 MISUSE OF CREDIT CARDS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Practice deception for the purpose of procuring the issuance of a
credit card, when a credit card is issued in actual reliance thereon; or
      (2)   Knowingly buy or sell a credit card from or to a person other than
the issuer.
      (3)   As an officer, employee, or appointee of a political subdivision or
as a public servant as defined under R.C. § 2921.01, knowingly misuse a credit
card account held by a political subdivision.
   (b)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Obtain control over a credit card as security for a debt;
      (2)   Obtain property or services by the use of a credit card, in one or
more transactions, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the card
has expired or been revoked, or was obtained, is retained or is being used in
violation of law;
      (3)   Furnish property or services upon presentation of a credit card,
knowing that the card is being used in violation of law; or
      (4)   Represent or cause to be represented to the issuer of a credit card
that property or services have been furnished, knowing that the representation
is false.
   (c)   No person, with purpose to violate this section, shall receive,
possess, control or dispose of a credit card.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misuse of credit cards.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (d)(3) of this section, a
violation of division (a), (b)(1) or (c) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (d)(2) or division
(d)(3) of this section, a violation of division (b)(2), (b)(3) or (b)(4) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the cumulative retail
value of the property and services involved in one or more violations of
division (b)(2), (b)(3) or (b)(4) of this section which violations involve one
or more credit card accounts and occur within a period of 90 consecutive days
commencing on the date of the first violation, is $1,000 or more, misuse of
credit cards is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled
adult, and if the offense involves a violation of division (b)(1) or (b)(2) of
this section, misuse of credit cards is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.21)
§ 642.155 RECORDING CREDIT CARD, TELEPHONE OR SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBERS.
   (a)   No person shall record or cause to be recorded either of the
following:
      (1)   A credit card account number of the other party to a transaction,
when a check, bill of exchange or other draft is presented for payment; or
      (2)   The telephone number or Social Security account number of the other
party to a transaction, when payment is made by credit card charge agreement,
check, bill of exchange or other draft.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a transaction, if all
of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The credit card account number, Social Security account number or
telephone number is recorded for a legitimate business purpose, including
collection purposes;
      (2)   The other party to the transaction consents to the recording of the
credit card account number, Social Security account number or telephone number;
and
      (3)   The credit card account number, Social Security account number or
telephone number that is recorded during the course of the transaction is not
disclosed to any third party for any purposes other than collection purposes
and is not used to market goods or services unrelated to the goods or services
purchased in the transaction.
   (c)   Nothing in this section prohibits the recording of the number of a
credit card account when given in lieu of a deposit to secure payment in the
event of default, loss, damage or other occurrence, or requires a person to
accept a check presented for payment, if the other party to the transaction
refuses to consent to the recording of the number of the party’s Social
Security account or license to operate a motor vehicle.
(R.C. § 1349.17)
   (d)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1349.99)
§ 642.16 MAKING OR USING SLUGS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Insert or deposit a slug in a coin machine, with purpose to
defraud; or
      (2)   Make, possess or dispose of a slug, with purpose of enabling
another to defraud by inserting or depositing it in a coin machine.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or using slugs, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 2913.33)
§ 642.17 PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF PURPOSE TO DEFRAUD.
   In a prosecution of a person for a theft offense that alleges that the
person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she was facilitating a
fraud, hired or rented an aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy or other property or equipment, kept or
operated any of the same that has been hired or rented, or engaged
accommodations at a hotel, motel, inn, campground or other hostelry, it is
prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud if the person did any of the
following:
   (a)   Used deception to induce the rental agency to furnish the person with
the aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat, sailboat, camper, trailer,
horse, buggy or other property or equipment, or used deception to induce the
hostelry to furnish the person with accommodations;
   (b)   Hired or rented any aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy or other property or equipment, or
engaged accommodations, knowing that he or she is without sufficient means to
pay the hire or rental;
   (c)   Absconded without paying the hire or rental;
   (d)   Knowingly failed to pay the hire or rental as required by the contract
of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure; or
   (e)   Knowingly failed to return hired or rented property as required by the
contract of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure.
(R.C. § 2913.41)
§ 642.18 TAMPERING WITH RECORDS.
   (a)   No person, knowing that he or she has no privilege to do so, and with
purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is facilitating a fraud, shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Falsify, destroy, remove, conceal, alter, deface or mutilate any
writing, computer software, data or record; or
      (2)   Utter any writing or record, knowing it to have been tampered with
as provided in division (a)(1) of this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with records.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(3) of this section, if the
offense does not involve data or computer software, tampering with records is
whichever of the following is applicable:
         A.   If division (b)(1)B. of this section does not apply, it is a
misdemeanor of the first degree; or
         B.   If the writing or record is a will unrevoked at the time of the
offense, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (b)(3) of this section, if the
offense involves a violation of division (a) of this section involving data or
computer software, tampering with records is whichever of the following is
applicable:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(2)B. of this
section, it is a misdemeanor of the first degree; and
         B.   If the value of the data or computer software involved in the
offense or the loss to the victim is $1,000 or more or if the offense is
committed for the purpose of devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to
obtain property or services and the value of the property or services or the
loss to the victim is $7,500 or more, it is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the writing, data, computer software or record is kept by or
belongs to a local, state or federal governmental entity, it is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.42)
§ 642.19 SECURING WRITINGS BY DECEPTION.
   (a)   No person, by deception, shall cause another to execute any writing
that disposes of or encumbers property, or by which a pecuniary obligation is
incurred.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of securing writings by
deception. Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), securing writings
by deception is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property
or the obligation involved is $1,000 or more, securing writings by deception is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate to state law. If the victim of the
offense is an elderly person, disabled adult, active duty service member, or
spouse of an active duty service member, securing writings by deception is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.43)
§ 642.20 PERSONATING AN OFFICER.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is
facilitating a fraud, or with purpose to induce another to purchase property or
services, shall personate a law enforcement officer, or an inspector,
investigator or agent of any governmental agency.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of personating an officer, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2913.44)
§ 642.205 DIMINISHING OR INTERFERING WITH FORFEITABLE PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall destroy, damage, remove or transfer property that is
subject to forfeiture or otherwise take any action in regard to property that
is subject to forfeiture with purpose to do any of the following:
      (1)   Prevent or impair the state’s or political subdivision’s lawful
authority to take the property into its custody or control under R.C. Chapter
2981 or to continue holding the property under its lawful custody or control;
      (2)   Impair or defeat the court’s continuing jurisdiction over the
person and property; or
      (3)   Devalue property that the person knows, or has reasonable cause to
believe, is subject to forfeiture proceedings under R.C. Chapter 2981.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with or
diminishing forfeitable property. Except as otherwise provided in this division
(b), interference with or diminishing forfeitable property is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the value of the property is $1,000 or more, interference
with or diminishing forfeitable property is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2981.07)
§ 642.21 DEFRAUDING CREDITORS.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud one or more of his or her
creditors, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Remove, conceal, destroy, encumber, convey or otherwise deal with
any of his or her property; or
      (2)   Misrepresent or refuse to disclose to a fiduciary appointed to
administer or manage his or her affairs or estate, the existence, amount or
location of any of his or her property, or any other information regarding the
property which he or she is legally required to furnish to the fiduciary.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of defrauding creditors.
Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), defrauding creditors is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property involved is
$1,000 or more, defrauding creditors is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.45)
§ 642.22 RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall receive, retain or dispose of property of another
knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the property has been
obtained through commission of a theft offense.
   (b)   It is not a defense to a charge of receiving stolen property in
violation of this section that the property was obtained by means other than
through the commission of a theft offense if the property was explicitly
represented to the accused person as being obtained through the commission of a
theft offense.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of receiving stolen property.
Except as otherwise provided in this division (c), receiving stolen property is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If any of the following criteria are met,
then a violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law:
      (1)   The value of the property involved is $1,000 or more;
      (2)   The property involved is any of the property listed in R.C. §
2913.71;
      (3)   The property involved is a firearm or dangerous ordnance, as
defined in R.C. § 2923.11;
      (4)   The property involved is a motor vehicle as defined in R.C. §
4501.01;
      (5)   The property involved is any dangerous drug, as defined in R.C. §
4729.01; or
      (6)   The property involved in violation of this section is a special
purchase article as defined in R.C. § 4737.04 or a bulk merchandise container
as defined in R.C. § 4737.012.
(R.C. § 2913.51)
§ 642.23 POSSESSION OF MUNICIPAL PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall, without being authorized, have in his or her control
or possession any equipment, tools, implements or other property belonging to
the municipality.
(R.C. § 5589.12)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 5589.99(B))
§ 642.24 DETERMINING PROPERTY VALUE IN THEFT OFFENSE.
   (a)   If more than one item of property or services is involved in a theft
offense or in a violation of R.C. § 1716.14(A) involving a victim who is an
elderly person or disabled adult, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the value of the property or services involved for the purpose of
determining the value as required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value
of all property or services involved in the offense.
   (b)   (1)   When a series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02, or a series of
violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or
complicity in violations of R.C. § 1716.14(A), 2913.02, 2913.03 or 2913.04,
2913.21(B)(1) or (B)(2), or 2913.31 or 2913.43 involving a victim who is an
elderly person or disabled adult, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance to any of these offenses, is committed by the offender in the
offender’s same employment, capacity or relationship to another, all of those
offenses shall be tried as a single offense. When a series of offenses under
R.C. § 2913.02, or a series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation
of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in violations of R.C. § 2913.02 or
2913.43 involving a victim who is an active duty service member or spouse of an
active duty service member, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance
to any of these offenses, is committed by the offender in the offender’s same
employment, capacity, or relationship to another, all of those offenses shall
be tried as a single offense. The value of the property or services involved in
the series of offenses for the purpose of determining the value as required by
R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property and services involved
in all offenses in the series.
      (2)   If an offender commits a series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02
that involves a common course of conduct to defraud multiple victims, all of
the offenses may be tried as a single offense. If an offender is being tried
for the commission of a series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation
of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in violations of R.C. § 1716.14(A),
2913.02, 2913.03 or 2913.04, 2913.21(B)(1) or (B)(2), or 2913.31 or 2913.43,
whether committed against one victim or more than one victim, involving a
victim who is an elderly person or disabled adult, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, pursuant to a scheme
or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried as a single offense.
If an offender is being tried for the commission of a series of violations of,
attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in
violations of R.C. § 2913.02 or 2913.43, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, whether committed against one
victim or more than one victim, involving a victim who is an active duty
service member or spouse of an active duty service member pursuant to a scheme
or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried as a single offense.
If the offenses are tried as a single offense, the value of the property or
services involved for the purpose of determining the value as required by R.C.
§ 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property and services involved in
all of the offenses in the course of conduct.
      (3)   When a series of two or more offenses under R.C. § 2913.40,
2913.48, or 2921.41 is committed by the offender in the offender’s same
employment, capacity or relationship to another, all of those offenses may be
tried as a single offense. If the offenses are tried as a single offense, the
value of the property or services involved for the purpose of determining the
value as required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property
and services involved in all of the offenses in the series of two or more
offenses.
      (4)   In prosecuting a single offense under division (b)(1), (b)(2) or
(b)(3) of this section, it is not necessary to separately allege and prove each
offense in the series. Rather, it is sufficient to allege and prove that the
offender, within a given span of time, committed one or more theft offenses or
violations of R.C. § 2913.40, 2913.48, or 2921.41 in the offender’s same
employment, capacity or relationship to another as described in division (b)(1)
or (b)(3) of this section, or committed one or more theft offenses that involve
a common course of conduct to defraud multiple victims or a scheme or course of
conduct as described in division (b)(2) of this section. While it is not
necessary to separately allege and prove each offense in the series in order to
prosecute a single offense under division (b)(1), (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this
section, it remains necessary in prosecuting them as a single offense to prove
the aggregate value of the property or services in order to meet the requisite
statutory offense level sought by the prosecution.
   (c)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of
property or services involved in a theft offense.
      (1)   The value of an heirloom, memento, collector’s item, antique,
museum piece, manuscript, document, record or other thing that has intrinsic
worth to its owner and that either is irreplaceable or is replaceable only on
the expenditure of substantial time, effort or money, is the amount which would
compensate the owner for its loss.
      (2)   The value of personal effects and household goods, and of
materials, supplies, equipment and fixtures used in the profession, business,
trade, occupation or avocation of its owner, which property is not covered
under division (c)(1) of this section, and which retains substantial utility
for its purpose regardless of its age or condition, is the cost of replacing
the property with new property of like kind and quality.
      (3)   The value of any real or personal property that is not covered
under division (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section, and the value of services, is
the fair market value of the property or services. As used in this section,
FAIR MARKET VALUE is the money consideration which a buyer would give and a
seller would accept for property or services, assuming that the buyer is
willing to buy and the seller is willing to sell, that both are fully informed
as to all facts material to the transaction, and that neither is under any
compulsion to act.
   (d)   Without limitation on the evidence which may be used to establish the
value of property or services involved in a theft offense:
      (1)   When the property involved is personal property held for sale at
wholesale or retail, the price at which the property was held for sale is prima
facie evidence of its value;
      (2)   When the property involved is a security or commodity traded on an
exchange, the closing price or, if there is no closing price, the asked price,
given in the latest marked quotation prior to the offense, is prima facie
evidence of the value of the security or commodity;
      (3)   When the property involved is livestock, poultry or raw
agricultural products for which a local market price is available, the latest
local market price prior to the offense is prima facie evidence of the value of
the livestock, poultry or products;
      (4)   When the property involved is a negotiable instrument, the face
value is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument;
      (5)   When the property involved is a warehouse receipt, bill of lading,
pawn ticket, claim check or other instrument entitling the holder or bearer to
receive property, the face value or, if there is no face value, the value of
the property covered by the instrument less any payment necessary to receive
the property, is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument;
      (6)   When the property involved is a ticket of admission, ticket for
transportation, coupon, token or other instrument entitling the holder or
bearer to receive property or services, the face value or, if there is no face
value, the value of the property or services which may be received by the
instrument is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument; and
      (7)   When the services involved are gas, electricity, water, telephone,
transportation, shipping or other services for which the rate is established by
law, the duly established rate is prima facie evidence of the value of the
services.
      (8)   When the services involved are services for which the rate is not
established by law, and the offender has been notified prior to the offense of
the rate for the services, either in writing or orally, or by posting in a
manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential offenders,
the rate contained in the notice is prima facie evidence of the value of the
services.
(R.C. § 2913.61(B) - (E))
§ 642.25 DETERMINING PROPERTY VALUE IN ARSON.
   (a)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of
property or amount of physical harm involved in a violation of §
642.06:
      (1)   If the property is an heirloom, memento, collector’s item, antique,
museum piece, manuscript, document, record or other thing that is either
irreplaceable or is replaceable only on the expenditure of substantial time,
effort or money, the value of the property or the amount of physical harm
involved is the amount that would compensate the owner for its loss.
      (2)   If the property is not covered under division (a)(1) of this
section, and the physical harm is such that the property can be restored
substantially to its former condition, the amount of physical harm involved is
the reasonable cost of restoring the property.
      (3)   If the property is not covered under division (a)(1) of this
section, and the physical harm is such that the property cannot be restored
substantially to its former condition, the value of the property, in the case
of personal property, is the cost of replacing the property with new property
of like kind and quality, and in the case of real property or real property
fixtures, is the difference in the fair market value of the property
immediately before and immediately after the offense.
   (b)   As used in this section, FAIR MARKET VALUE has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2913.61.
   (c)   Prima facie evidence of the value of property, as provided in R.C. §
2913.61(D), may be used to establish the value of property pursuant to this
section.
(R.C. § 2909.11(B) - (D))
§ 642.26 PROSECUTIONS FOR THEFT OF UTILITIES.
   (a)   In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in R.C. § 2913.01,
that involves alleged tampering with a gas, electric, steam or water meter,
conduit or attachment of a utility that has been disconnected by the utility,
proof that a meter, conduit or attachment of a utility has been tampered with
is prima facie evidence that the person who is obligated to pay for the service
rendered through the meter, conduit or attachment, and who is in possession or
control of the meter, conduit or attachment at the time the tampering occurred
has caused the tampering with intent to commit a theft offense.
   (b)   In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in R.C. § 2913.01,
that involves the alleged reconnection of a gas, electric, steam or water
meter, conduit or attachment of a utility that has been disconnected by the
utility, proof that a meter, conduit or attachment disconnected by a utility
has been reconnected without the consent of the utility is prima facie evidence
that the person in possession or control of the meter, conduit or attachment at
the time of the reconnection has reconnected the meter, conduit or attachment
with intent to commit a theft offense.
   (c)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   TAMPER. To interfere with, damage or bypass a utility meter,
conduit or attachment with the intent to impede the correct registration of a
meter or the proper functions of a conduit or attachment so as to reduce the
amount of utility service that is registered on the meter.
(R.C. § 4933.18)
      (2)   UTILITY. Any electric light company, gas company, natural gas
company, pipe-line company, water-works company or heating or cooling company,
as defined in R.C. § 4905.03(C), (D), (E), (F), (G) or (H), its lessees,
trustees or receivers, or any similar utility owned or operated by a political
subdivision.
   (d)   Each electric light company, gas company, natural gas company,
pipeline company, waterworks company or heating or cooling company, as defined
by R.C. § 4905.03(C), (D), (E), (F), (G) or (H), or its lessees, trustees or
receivers, and each similar utility owned or operated by a political
subdivision, shall notify its customers, on an annual basis, that tampering
with or bypassing a meter constitutes a theft offense that could result in the
imposition of criminal sanctions.
(R.C. § 4933.19)
§ 642.27 FOOD STAMPS (REPEALED).
Editor’s note:
   Section 642.27 was repealed as part of the 1996 updating and revision of
these Codified Ordinances because a violation of substantially equivalent state
law (R.C. § 2913.46) was made a felony by the Ohio General Assembly by Am. Sub.
S.B. No. 269, effective June 28, 1996 and July 1, 1996.
§ 642.28 DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS.
   (a)   No person shall distribute handbills, circulars or other
advertisements, or ring a doorbell, sound a door knocker, or otherwise call the
inhabitant of any residence to the door for the purpose of receiving such
handbill, circular or other advertisement which he or she or any person with
him or her may be distributing. This section shall not apply to cards or
circulars promoting a candidate for public office, civic issues or elections,
or charitable causes.
   (b)   No person shall hire any person to distribute any handbill, circular
or other advertisement contrary to the provisions of division (a) of this
section.
   (c)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(1964 Code, § 509.10)
§ 642.29 BILLPOSTING AND ADVERTISING.
   (a)   No person shall stick or post any advertisement, poster, sign,
handbill or placard of any description upon any private building, tree, post,
fence, billboard or other structure or thing, the property of another, without
permission of the occupant or owner of the same, nor paint, mark, write, print,
impress or in any manner attach any notice or advertisement, or the name of any
commodity or thing, or any trademark, symbol or figure of any kind upon
anything whatever, the property of another, without first obtaining permission
of the owner of such thing on which he or she desires to place such notice,
advertisement, name, mark or figure. This provision does not modify city
parking regulations applicable to signs.
   (b)   No person shall stick, post or attach any advertisement, poster, sign,
handbill or placard of any kind or description upon any telegraph, telephone,
railway or electric light pole within the city or upon any public building,
voting booth, flagging, curbstone, walk, step, stone or sidewalk, or write,
print or impress or in any manner attach any notice or advertisement of any
kind upon any public building, voting booth, flagging, curbstone, step, stone
or sidewalk, the property of the city, or within the street lines of the city,
or over which the city or Council has the care, custody or control, except such
as may be required by the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city.
   (c)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(1964 Code, § 541.25)
§ 642.30 MISCONDUCT INVOLVING A PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM.
   (a)   As used in this section, PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM means a county
transit system operated in accordance with R.C. §§ 306.01 to 306.13, a regional
transit authority operated in accordance with R.C. §§ 306.30 to 306.71 or a
regional transit commission operated in accordance with R.C. §§ 306.80 to
306.90.
   (b)   No person shall evade the payment of the known fares of a public
transportation system.
   (c)   No person shall alter any transfer, pass, ticket or token of a public
transportation system with the purpose of evading the payment of fares or of
defrauding the system.
   (d)   No person shall do any of the following while in any facility or on
any vehicle of a public transportation system:
      (1)   Play sound equipment without the proper use of a private earphone;
      (2)   Smoke, eat or drink in any area where the activity is clearly
marked as being prohibited; or
      (3)   Expectorate upon a person, facility or vehicle.
   (e)   No person shall write, deface, draw or otherwise mark on any facility
or vehicle of a public transportation system.
   (f)   No person shall fail to comply with a lawful order of a public
transportation system police officer, and no person shall resist, obstruct or
abuse a public transportation police officer in the performance of the
officer’s duties.
   (g)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of
misconduct involving a public transportation system.
      (1)   A violation of division (b), (c) or (f) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   A violation of division (d) of this section is a minor misdemeanor
on a first offense. If a person previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of any division of this section or of a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any division of this section, a
violation of division (d) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (3)   A violation of division (e) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
   (h)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, 75% of each fine paid to
satisfy a sentence imposed for a violation of any of the provisions of this
section shall be deposited into the treasury of the county and 25% shall be
deposited with the county transit board, regional transit authority or regional
transit commission that operates the public transportation system involved in
the violation, unless the Board of County Commissioners operates the public
transportation system, in which case 100% of each fine shall be deposited into
the treasury of the county.
(R.C. § 2917.41)
§ 642.31 LIBRARY MATERIALS.
   (a)   No person shall purposely or negligently detain or fail to return to a
public library any book, magazine, pamphlet, manuscript, picture, clipping,
phonograph, video recording or other property belonging to such library, or
fail or refuse to pay the reasonable value thereof, within 30 days from the
date of the posting by registered mail of the notice addressed to such person
at the last address furnished the public library, which notice may be given at
any time after the date on which such person should have returned the loaned
property.
   (b)   No person shall give a fictitious or incorrect name or address at any
public library in order to obtain possess or use of any book, magazine,
pamphlet, manuscript, picture, clipping, phonograph, video recording or other
property belonging to such library, or practice any deceit of any character
whatsoever to conceal or mislead with respect to such person’s identity,
address or place of employment.
   (c)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(1964 Code, § 541.26)
§ 642.32 INSURANCE FRAUD.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   DATA. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01 and additionally
includes any other representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts or
instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner.
      (2)   DECEPTIVE. A statement, in whole or in part, would cause another to
be deceived because it contains a misleading representation, withholds
information, prevents the acquisition of information, or by any other conduct,
act or omission creates, confirms or perpetuates a false impression, including
but not limited to a false impression as to law, value, state of mind or other
objective or subjective fact.
      (3)   INSURER. Any person that is authorized to engage in the business of
insurance in this state under R.C. Title 39, the Ohio Fair Plan Underwriting
Association created under R.C. § 3929.43, any health insuring corporation, and
any legal entity that is self-insured and provides benefits to its employees or
members.
      (4)   POLICY. A policy, certificate, contract or plan that is issued by
an insurer.
      (5)   STATEMENT. Includes, but is not limited to, any notice, letter or
memorandum; proof of loss; bill of lading; receipt for payment; invoice,
account or other financial statement; estimate of property damage; bill for
services; diagnosis or prognosis; prescription; hospital, medical or dental
chart or other record; x-ray, photograph, videotape or movie film; test result;
other evidence of loss, injury or expense; computer-generated document; and
data in any form.
   (b)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Present to, or cause to be presented to, an insurer any written or
oral statement that is part of, or in support of, an application for insurance,
a claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a claim for any other benefit
pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the statement,
is false or deceptive; or
      (2)   Assist, aid, abet, solicit, procure or conspire with another to
prepare or make any written or oral statement that is intended to be presented
to an insurer as part of, or in support of, an application for insurance, a
claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a claim for any other benefit
pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the statement,
is false or deceptive.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of insurance fraud. Except as
otherwise provided in this division (c), insurance fraud is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the amount of the claim that is false or deceptive is
$1,000 or more, insurance fraud is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (d)   This section shall not be construed to abrogate, waive or modify R.C.
§ 2317.02(A).
(R.C. § 2913.47)
§ 642.33 WORKERS’ COMPENSATION FRAUD.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Receive workers’ compensation benefits to which the person is not
entitled;
      (2)   Make or present or cause to be made or presented a false or
misleading statement with the purpose to secure payment for goods or services
rendered under R.C. Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127 or 4131 or to secure workers’
compensation benefits;
      (3)   Alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any record or document
that is necessary to fully establish the validity of any claim filed with, or
necessary to establish the nature and validity of all goods and services for
which reimbursement or payment was received or is requested from the Bureau of
Workers’ Compensation, or a self-insuring employer under R.C. Chapter 4121,
4123, 4127 or 4131;
      (4)   Enter into an agreement or conspiracy to defraud the Bureau of
Workers’ Compensation or a self-insuring employer by making or presenting or
causing to be made or presented a false claim for workers’ compensation
benefits;
      (5)   Make or present or cause to be made or presented a false statement
concerning manual codes, classification or employees, payroll, paid
compensation or number of personnel, when information of that nature is
necessary to determine the actual workers’ compensation premium or assessment
owed to the Bureau by an employer;
      (6)   Alter, forge or create a workers’ compensation certificate or
falsely show current or correct workers’ compensation coverage; or
      (7)   Fail to secure or maintain workers’ compensation coverage as
required by R.C. Chapter 4123 with the intent to defraud the Bureau of Workers’
Compensation.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of workers’ compensation
fraud. Except as otherwise provided in this division (b), workers’ compensation
fraud is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of premiums and
assessments unpaid pursuant to actions described in division (a)(5), (a)(6) or
(a)(7) of this section, or goods, services, property or money stolen is $1,000
or more, workers’ compensation fraud is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (c)   Upon application of the governmental body that conducted the
investigation and prosecution of a violation of this section, the court shall
order the person who is convicted of the violation to pay the governmental body
its costs of investigating and prosecuting the case. These costs are in
addition to any other costs or penalty provided under federal, state or local
law.
   (d)   The remedies and penalties provided in this section are not exclusive
remedies and penalties and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or
civil remedy or penalty for any act that is in violation of this section.
   (e)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CLAIM. Any attempt to cause the Bureau of Workers’ Compensation, an
independent third party with whom the administrator or an employer contracts
under R.C. § 4121.44, or a self-insuring employer to make payment or
reimbursement for workers’ compensation benefits.
      (2)   EMPLOYER, EMPLOYEE and SELF-INSURING EMPLOYER. Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 4123.01.
      (3)   EMPLOYMENT. Participating in any trade, occupation, business,
service or profession for substantial gainful remuneration.
      (4)   FALSE. Wholly or partially untrue or deceptive.
      (5)   GOODS. Includes, but is not limited to, medical supplies,
appliances, rehabilitative equipment and any other apparatus or furnishing
provided or used in the care, treatment or rehabilitation of a claimant for
workers’ compensation benefits.
      (6)   RECORDS. Any medical, professional, financial or business record
relating to the treatment or care of any person, to goods or services provided
to any person, or to rates paid for goods or services provided to any person,
or any record that the administrator of workers’ compensation requires pursuant
to rule.
      (7)   REMUNERATION. Includes, but is not limited to, wages, commissions,
rebates and any other reward or consideration.
      (8)   SERVICES. Includes, but is not limited to, any service provided by
any health care provider to a claimant for workers’ compensation benefits and
any and all services provided by the Bureau as part of workers’ compensation
insurance coverage.
      (9)   STATEMENT. Includes but is not limited to any oral, written,
electronic, electronic impulse or magnetic communication notice, letter,
memorandum, receipt for payment, invoice, account, financial statement or bill
for services; a diagnosis, prognosis, prescription, hospital, medical or dental
chart or other record; and a computer generated document.
      (10)   WORKERS’ COMPENSATION BENEFITS. Any compensation or benefits
payable under R.C. Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127 or 4131.
(R.C. § 2913.48)
§ 642.34 MEDICAID FRAUD.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   PROVIDER. Any person who has signed a provider agreement with the
Department of Medicaid to provide goods or services pursuant to the Medicaid
program or any person who has signed an agreement with a party to such a
provider agreement under which the person agrees to provide goods or services
that are reimbursable under the Medicaid program.
      (2)   PROVIDER AGREEMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
      (3)   RECIPIENT. Any individual who receives goods or services from a
provider under the Medicaid program.
      (4)   RECORDS. Any medical, professional, financial or business records
relating to the treatment or care of any recipient, to goods or services
provided to any recipient, or to rates paid for goods or services provided to
any recipient, and any records that are required by the rules of the Medicaid
Director to be kept for the Medicaid program.
      (5)   STATEMENT OR REPRESENTATION. Any oral, written, electronic,
electronic impulse or magnetic communication that is used to identify an item
of goods or a service for which reimbursement may be made under the Medicaid
program or that states income and expense and is or may be used to determine a
rate of reimbursement under the Medicaid program.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a false or
misleading statement or representation for use in obtaining reimbursement from
the Medicaid assistance program.
   (c)   No person, with purpose to commit fraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Contrary to the terms of the person’s provider agreement, charge,
solicit, accept or receive for goods or services that the person provides under
the Medicaid program any property, money or other consideration in addition to
the amount of reimbursement under the Medicaid program and the person’s
provider agreement for the goods or services and any cost-sharing expenses
authorized by R.C. § 5162.20 or rules adopted by the Medicaid Director
regarding the Medicaid program.
      (2)   Solicit, offer or receive any remuneration, other than any cost-
sharing expenses authorized by R.C. § 5162.20 or rules adopted by the Medicaid
Director regarding the Medicaid program, in cash or in kind, including but not
limited to a kickback or rebate, in connection with the furnishing of goods or
services for which whole or partial reimbursement is or may be made under the
Medicaid program.
   (d)   No person, having submitted a claim for or provided goods or services
under the Medicaid program, shall do either of the following for a period of at
least six years after a reimbursement pursuant to that claim, or a
reimbursement for those goods or services, is received under the Medicaid
program:
      (1)   Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any records
that are necessary to fully disclose the nature of all goods or services for
which the claim was submitted, or for which reimbursement was received, by the
person; or
      (2)   Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any records
that are necessary to disclose fully all income and expenditures upon which
rates of reimbursements were based for the person.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of Medicaid fraud. Except as
otherwise provided in this division (e), Medicaid fraud is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the value of the property, services or funds obtained in
violation of this section is $1,000 or more, Medicaid fraud is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (f)   Upon application of the governmental agency, office or other entity
that conducted the investigation and prosecution in a case under this section,
the court shall order any person who is convicted of a violation of this
section for receiving any reimbursement for furnishing goods or services under
the Medicaid assistance program to which the person is not entitled to pay to
the applicant its cost of investigating and prosecuting the case. The costs of
investigation and prosecution that a defendant is ordered to pay pursuant to
this division (f) shall be in addition to any other penalties for the receipt
of that reimbursement that are provided in this section, R.C. § 2913.40 or
5164.35, or any other provision of law.
   (g)   The provisions of this section are not intended to be exclusive
remedies and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or civil remedy for
any act that is in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 2913.40)
   (h)   Medicaid eligibility fraud.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following in an application
for enrollment in the Medicaid program or in a document that requires a
disclosure of assets for the purpose of determining eligibility for the
Medicaid program:
         A.   Make or cause to be made a false or misleading statement;
         B.   Conceal an interest in property;
         C.   1.   Except as provided in division (h)(1)C.2. of this section,
fail to disclose a transfer of property that occurred during the period
beginning 36 months before submission of the application or document and ending
on the date the application or document was submitted;
            2.   Fail to disclose a transfer of property that occurred during
the period beginning 60 months before submission of the application or document
and ending on the date the application or document was submitted and that was
made to an irrevocable trust a portion of which is not distributable to the
applicant for or recipient of Medicaid or to a revocable trust.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates this division (h) is guilty of Medicaid
eligibility fraud. Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation
of this division (h) is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the
Medicaid services paid as a result of the violation is $1,000 or more, a
violation of this division (h) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
         B.   In addition to imposing a sentence under division (h)(2)A. of
this section, the court shall order that a person who is guilty of Medicaid
eligibility fraud make restitution in the full amount of any Medicaid services
paid on behalf of an applicant for or recipient of Medicaid for which the
applicant or recipient was not eligible, plus interest at the rate applicable
to judgments on unreimbursed amounts from the date on which the Medicaid
services were paid to the date on which restitution is made.
         C.   The remedies and penalties provided in this division (h) are not
exclusive and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or civil remedy for
any act that is in violation of this division (h).
      (3)   This division (h) does not apply to a person who fully disclosed in
an application for Medicaid or in a document that requires a disclosure of
assets for the purpose of determining eligibility for Medicaid all of the
interests in property of the applicant for or recipient of Medicaid, all
transfers of property by the applicant for or recipient of Medicaid, and the
circumstances of all those transfers.
      (4)   Any amounts of Medicaid services recovered as restitution under
this division (h) and any interest on those amounts shall be credited to the
General Revenue Fund, and any applicable federal share shall be returned to the
appropriate agency or department of the United States.
      (5)   For the purpose of this division (h), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         A.   MEDICAID SERVICES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
         B.   PROPERTY. Any real or personal property or other asset in which a
person has any legal title or interest.
(R.C. § 2913.401)
§ 642.35 MOTION PICTURE PIRACY.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   AUDIOVISUAL RECORDING FUNCTION. The capability of a device to
record or transmit a motion picture or any part of a motion picture by means of
any technology existing on, or developed after, March 9, 2004.
      (2)   FACILITY. A movie theater.
   (b)   No person, without the written consent of the owner or lessee of the
facility and of the licensor of the motion picture, shall knowingly operate an
audiovisual recording function of a device in a facility in which the motion
picture is being shown.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of motion
picture piracy, a misdemeanor of the first degree on the first offense and a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
   (d)   This section does not prohibit or restrict a lawfully authorized
investigative, law enforcement, protective or intelligence gathering employee
or agent of the government of this state or a political subdivision of this
state, or of the federal government, when acting in an official capacity, from
operating an audiovisual recording function of a device in any facility in
which a motion picture is being shown.
   (e)   Division (b) of this section does not limit or affect the application
of any other prohibition in this code or the Ohio Revised Code. Any act that is
a violation of both division (b) of this section and another provision of this
code or the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, under the
other provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code, or under both this
section and the other provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code.
(R.C. § 2913.07)
§ 642.36 CRIMINAL SIMULATION.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud, or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Make or alter any object so that it appears to have value because
of antiquity, rarity, curiosity, source or authorship, which it does not in
fact possess;
      (2)   Practice deception in making, retouching, editing or reproducing
any photograph, movie film, video tape, phonograph record or recording tape;
      (3)   Falsely or fraudulently make, simulate, forge, alter or counterfeit
any wrapper, label, stamp, cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control
Commission under R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303, falsely or fraudulently cause to
be made, simulated, forged, altered or counterfeited any wrapper, label, stamp,
cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under R.C. Chapters
4301 and 4303, or use more than once any wrapper, label, stamp, cork or cap
prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303;
or
      (4)   Offer, or possess with the purpose to offer, any object that the
person knows to have been simulated as provided in divisions (a)(1), (a)(2) or
(a)(3) of this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal simulation. Except
as otherwise provided in this division (b), criminal simulation is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the loss to the victim is $1,000 or more,
criminal simulation is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.32)
§ 642.37 RAILROAD VANDALISM; CRIMINAL TRESPASS; INTERFERENCE WITH OPERATION OF
TRAIN; GRADE CROSSING DEVICE VANDALISM.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any object
at, onto, or in the path of, any railroad rail, railroad track, locomotive,
engine, railroad car, or other vehicle of a railroad company while such vehicle
is on a railroad track.
   (b)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall climb upon or into any
locomotive, engine, railroad car, or other vehicle of a railroad company when
it is on a railroad track.
   (c)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall disrupt, delay, or
prevent the operation of any train or other vehicle of a railroad company while
such vehicle is on a railroad track.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of railroad
vandalism. Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of criminal
trespass on a locomotive, engine, railroad car, or other railroad vehicle.
Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of interference with
the operation of a train. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
railroad vandalism; criminal trespass on a locomotive, engine, railroad car, or
other railroad vehicle; and interference with the operation of a train each is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of division (a), (b), or
(c) of this section causes serious physical harm to property or creates a
substantial risk of physical harm to any person, causes physical harm to any
person, or causes serious physical harm to any person, the violation is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.10)
   (e)   No person shall knowingly deface, damage, obstruct, remove, or
otherwise impair the operation of any railroad grade crossing warning signal or
other protective device, including any gate, bell, light, crossbuck, stop sign,
yield sign, advance warning sign, or advance pavement marking.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (e) of this section is guilty of railroad
grade crossing device vandalism. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
railroad grade crossing device vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the violation of division (e) of this section causes serious physical harm
to property or creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person,
causes physical harm to any person, or causes serious physical harm to any
person, railroad grade crossing device vandalism is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.101)
CHAPTER 648: PEACE DISTURBANCES
Section
   
648.01   Riot
   
648.02   Failure to disperse
   
648.03   Justifiable use of force to suppress riot
   
648.04   Disorderly conduct
   
648.05   Disturbing a lawful meeting
   
648.06   Misconduct at an emergency
   
648.07   Inducing panic
   
648.08   Making false alarms
   
648.09   Disturbing the peace
   
648.10   Conduct in shopping centers
   
648.11   Minor’s curfew
   
648.12   Picketing
   
648.13   Inciting to violence
   
648.14   Impeding public passage of an emergency service responder
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Arson, see §
642.09
   Assault, see §§
636.02,
636.03
   Barking or howling dogs, see §
618.07
   Cordoning off riot areas; prohibiting sales of firearms and explosives, see
R.C. § 3761.16
   “Deadly force” defined, see §
606.01
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Desecration, see §
642.07
   Detention of shoplifters, see §
606.23
   Fireworks, see §
672.10
   “Force” defined, see §
606.01
   Horn, siren and theft alarm signal, see §
438.20
   Interfering with civil rights, see §
606.20
   Liquor sale to intoxicated person, see §
612.03
   Menacing, see §§
636.04,
636.045,
636.05
   Noisy mufflers, see §
438.21
   “Peeling;” cracking exhaust noises, see §
432.35
   Pointing and discharging firearms and other weapons, see §
672.09
   Power to regulate peace disturbances, see R.C. § 715.49
   Resisting arrest, see §
606.16
   Riot and civil disorder assistance by State Highway Patrol, see R.C. §
5503.02
   Suspension of beer and liquor sales during emergency, see R.C. § 4301.251
   Trespass, see §§
642.12,
642.125
§ 648.01 RIOT.
   (a)   No person shall participate with four or more others in a course of
disorderly conduct in violation of R.C. § 2917.11 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance:
      (1)   With purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of a
misdemeanor, other than disorderly conduct;
      (2)   With purpose to intimidate a public official or employee into
taking or refraining from official action, or with purpose to hinder, impede or
obstruct a function of government; or
      (3)   With purpose to hinder, impede or obstruct the orderly process of
administration or instruction at an educational institution, or to interfere
with or disrupt lawful activities carried on at the institution.
   (b)   No person shall participate with four or more others with purpose to
do an act with unlawful force or violence, even though the act might otherwise
be lawful.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of riot, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(R.C. § 2917.03)
   (d)   For the purposes of prosecuting violations of this section, the
prosecution is not required to allege or prove that the offender expressly
agreed with four or more others to commit any act that constitutes a violation
this section prior to or while committing those acts.
(R.C. § 2917.031)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated riot, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2917.02
§ 648.02 FAILURE TO DISPERSE.
   (a)   Where five or more persons are participating in a course of disorderly
conduct in violation of R.C. § 2917.11 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, and there are other persons in the vicinity whose presence creates
the likelihood of physical harm to persons or property or of serious public
inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, a law enforcement officer or other public
official may order the participants and the other persons to disperse. No
person shall knowingly fail to obey the order.
   (b)   Nothing in this section requires persons to disperse who are peaceably
assembled for a lawful purpose.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to disperse.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(3) of this section,
failure to disperse is a minor misdemeanor.
      (3)   Failure to disperse is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the
failure to obey the order described in division (a) of this section creates the
likelihood of physical harm to persons or is committed at the scene of a fire,
accident, disaster, riot or emergency of any kind.
(R.C. § 2917.04)
§ 648.03 JUSTIFIABLE USE OF FORCE TO SUPPRESS RIOT.
   A law enforcement officer or firefighter engaged in suppressing a riot or in
protecting persons or property during a riot:
   (a)   Is justified in using force, other than deadly force, when and to the
extent he or she has probable cause to believe such force is necessary to
disperse or apprehend rioters; and
   (b)   Is justified in using force, including deadly force, when and to the
extent he or she has probable cause to believe such force is necessary to
disperse or apprehend rioters whose conduct is creating a substantial risk of
serious physical harm to persons.
(R.C. § 2917.05)
§ 648.04 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (a)   No person shall recklessly cause inconvenience, annoyance or alarm to
another, by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Engaging in fighting, in threatening harm to persons or property,
or in violent or turbulent behavior;
      (2)   Making unreasonable noise or an offensively coarse utterance,
gesture or display, or communicating unwarranted and grossly abusive language
to any person;
      (3)   Insulting, taunting or challenging another, under circumstances in
which that conduct is likely to provoke a violent response;
      (4)   Hindering or preventing the movement of persons on a public street,
road, highway or right-of-way, or to, from, within or upon public or private
property, so as to interfere with the rights of others, and by any act that
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender; or
      (5)   Creating a condition that is physically offensive to persons or
that presents a risk of physical harm to persons or property, by any act that
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender.
   (b)   No person while voluntarily intoxicated shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   In a public place or in the presence of two or more persons, engage
in conduct likely to be offensive or to cause inconvenience, annoyance or alarm
to persons of ordinary sensibilities, which conduct the offender, if he or she
were not intoxicated, should know is likely to have such effect on others; or
      (2)   Engage in conduct or create a condition that presents a risk of
physical harm to himself, herself or another, or to the property of another.
   (c)   Violation of any statute or ordinance of which an element is operating
a motor vehicle, locomotive, watercraft, aircraft or other vehicle while under
the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse is not a violation of division
(b) of this section.
   (d)   If a person appears to an ordinary observer to be intoxicated, it is
probable cause to believe that the person is voluntarily intoxicated for
purposes of division (b) of this section.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disorderly conduct.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (e)(2) of this section,
disorderly conduct is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   Disorderly conduct is a misdemeanor of the third degree if any of
the following applies:
         A.   The offender persists in disorderly conduct after reasonable
warning or request to desist;
         B.   The offense is committed in the vicinity of a school or in a
school safety zone;
         C.   The offense is committed in the presence of any law enforcement
officer, firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services
person, or other authorized person who is engaged in the person’s duties at the
scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot or emergency of any kind; or
         D.   The offense is committed in the presence of any emergency
facility person who is engaged in the person’s duties in an emergency facility.
(Ord. 1998-93, passed 5-18-1998)
   (f)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SCHOOL. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2925.01.
      (2)   EMERGENCY FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.04.
      (3)   EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. Is the singular of EMERGENCY FACILITY
PERSONNEL as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.
      (4)   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. Is the singular of EMERGENCY
MEDICAL SERVICES PERSONNEL as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.
Statutory reference:
   Disorderly conduct, see R.C. § 2917.11
§ 648.05 DISTURBING A LAWFUL MEETING.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting,
procession or gathering, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Do any act which obstructs or interferes with the due conduct of
the meeting, procession or gathering; or
      (2)   Make any utterance, gesture or display which outrages the
sensibilities of the group.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disturbing a lawful
meeting. Except as otherwise provided in this division, disturbing a lawful
meeting is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Disturbing a lawful meeting is a
misdemeanor of the first degree if either of the following applies:
      (1)   The violation is committed with the intent to disturb or disquiet
any assemblage of people met for religious worship at a tax-exempt place of
worship, regardless of whether the conduct is within the place at which the
assemblage is held or is on the property on which that place is located and
disturbs the order and solemnity of the assemblage.
      (2)   The violation is committed with the intent to prevent, disrupt, or
interfere with a virtual meeting or gathering of people for religious worship,
through use of a computer, computer system, telecommunications device, or other
electronic device or system, or in any other manner.
   (c)   As used in this section:
      (1)   COMPUTER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (2)   COMPUTER SYSTEM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (3)   TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2913.01.
      (4)   VIRTUAL MEETING OR GATHERING. A meeting or gathering by interactive
video conference or teleconference, or by a combination thereof.
(R.C. § 2917.12)
§ 648.06 MISCONDUCT AT AN EMERGENCY.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Hamper the lawful operations of any law enforcement officer,
firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services person or
other authorized person engaged in the person’s duties at the scene of a fire,
accident, disaster, riot or emergency of any kind;
      (2)   Hamper the lawful activities of any emergency facility person who
is engaged in the person’s duties in an emergency facility; or
      (3)   Fail to obey the lawful order of any law enforcement officer
engaged in the law enforcement officer’s duties at the scene of or in
connection with a fire, accident, disaster, riot or emergency of any kind.
   (b)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit access or deny
information to any news media representative in the lawful exercise of the news
media representative’s duties.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misconduct at an emergency.
Except as otherwise provided in this division (c), misconduct at an emergency
is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If violation of this section creates a
risk of physical harm to persons or property, misconduct at an emergency is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   EMERGENCY FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.04.
      (2)   EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. The singular of EMERGENCY FACILITY
PERSONNEL as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.
      (3)   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. The singular of EMERGENCY
MEDICAL SERVICES PERSONNEL as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.
(R.C. § 2917.13)
§ 648.07 INDUCING PANIC.
   (a)   No person shall cause the evacuation of any public place, or otherwise
cause serious public inconvenience or alarm, by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Initiating or circulating a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false;
      (2)   Threatening to commit any offense of violence; or
      (3)   Committing any offense, with reckless disregard of the likelihood
that its commission will cause serious public inconvenience or alarm.
   (b)   Division (a)(1) of this section does not apply to any person
conducting an authorized fire or emergency drill.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inducing panic.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(3), inducing panic is
a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   If a violation of this section results in physical harm to any
person, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law. If a violation of this section results in economic harm of $1,000 or more,
inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the
public place involved in a violation of division (a)(1) is a school or an
institution of higher education, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law. If a violation of this section pertains to a
purported, threatened or actual use of a weapon of mass destruction, inducing
panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (d)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section that pertains
to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass destruction that the
offender did not possess or have the ability to use a weapon of mass
destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of mass destruction was
not a weapon of mass destruction.
      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section
of the Ohio Revised Code or these Codified Ordinances may be prosecuted under
this section, the other section, or both sections.
   (e)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   BIOLOGICAL AGENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2917.33.
      (2)   ECONOMIC HARM. Any of the following:
         A.   All direct, incidental and consequential pecuniary harm suffered
by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct. ECONOMIC HARM as described in
this division (e) includes, but is not limited to, all of the following:
            1.   All wages, salaries or other compensation lost as a result of
the criminal conduct;
            2.   The cost of all wages, salaries or other compensation paid to
employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of
the criminal conduct;
            3.   The overhead costs incurred from the time that a business is
shut down as a result of the criminal conduct; and
            4.   The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was
damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.
         B.   All costs incurred by the state or any political subdivision as a
result of, or in making any response to, the criminal conduct that constituted
the violation of this section or R.C. § 2917.32, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, including, but not limited to, all costs so
incurred by any law enforcement officers, firefighters, rescue personnel or
emergency medical services personnel of the state or the political subdivision.
      (3)   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSONNEL. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2133.21.
      (4)   INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION. Any of the following:
         A.   A state university or college as defined in R.C. § 3345.12(A)(1),
community college, state community college, university branch or technical
college;
         B.   A private, nonprofit college, university or other post-secondary
institution located in this state that possesses a certificate of authorization
issued by the Chancellor of Higher Education pursuant to R.C. Chapter 1713;
         C.   A post-secondary institution with a certificate of registration
issued by the State Board of Career Colleges and Schools pursuant to R.C.
Chapter 3332.
      (5)   SCHOOL. Any school operated by a board of education or any school
for which the Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum standards
under R.C. § 3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular
activities or training provided by the school is being conducted at the time a
violation of this section is committed.
      (6)   WEAPON OF MASS DESTRUCTION. Any of the following:
         A.   Any weapon that is designed or intended to cause death or serious
physical harm through the release, dissemination or impact of toxic or
poisonous chemicals, or other precursors;
         B.   Any weapon involving a disease organism or biological agent;
         C.   Any weapon that is designed to release radiation or radioactivity
at a level dangerous to human life; and
         D.   Any of the following, except to the extent that the item or
device in question is expressly excepted from the definition of DESTRUCTIVE
DEVICE pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(4) and regulations issued under that
section:
            1.   Any explosive, incendiary or poison gas bomb, grenade, rocket
having a propellant charge of more than four ounces, missile having an
explosive or incendiary charge of more than one-quarter ounce, mine or similar
device;
            2.   Any combination of parts either designed or intended for use
in converting any item or device into any item or device described in division
(e)(6)D.1. of this definition and from which an item or device described in
that division may be readily assembled.
(R.C. § 2917.31)
§ 648.08 MAKING FALSE ALARMS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false and likely to cause public inconvenience or alarm;
      (2)   Knowingly cause a false alarm of fire or other emergency to be
transmitted to or within any organization, public or private, for dealing with
emergencies involving a risk of physical harm to persons or property;
      (3)   Report to any law enforcement agency an alleged offense or other
incident within its concern, knowing that the offense did not occur; or
      (4)   Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false and likely to impede the operation of a critical
infrastructure facility.
   (b)   This section does not apply to any person conducting an authorized
fire or emergency drill.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making false alarms. Except
as otherwise provided in this division (c), making false alarms is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If a violation of this section results in
economic harm of $1,000 or more, making false alarms is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. If a violation of this section pertains
to a purported, threatened or actual use of a weapon of mass destruction,
making false alarms is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (d)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section that pertains
to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass destruction that the
offender did not possess or have the ability to use a weapon of mass
destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of mass destruction was
not a weapon of mass destruction.
      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section
of the Ohio Revised Code or these Codified Ordinances may be prosecuted under
this section, the other section, or both sections.
   (e)   As used in this section:
      (1)   CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2911.21.
      (2)   ECONOMIC HARM and WEAPON OF MASS DESTRUCTION. Have the same meaning
as in R.C. § 2917.31.
(R.C. § 2917.32)
§ 648.09 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   (a)   No person shall disturb the good order and quiet of the city by
clamors or noises in the night season, by intoxication, drunkenness, fighting,
quarreling, wrangling, committing assault, assault and battery, using obscene
or profane language in the streets and other public places to the annoyance of
the citizens, or otherwise violating the public peace by indecent and
disorderly conduct, or by lewd and lascivious behavior, or by threatening or
inflicting violence or abuse to the person or property of others.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(1964 Code, § 509.08)
§ 648.10 CONDUCT IN SHOPPING CENTERS.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   SHOPPING CENTER. Any combination of retail stores and services
contained within one or more buildings which are located on one or more parcels
of land united to form a general shopping center site and upon which site there
are located public areas for the nonexclusive use of members of the general
public and occupants, visitors and customers of such retail stores and
services.
      (2)   PUBLIC PORTIONS OF A SHOPPING CENTER. The ingress and egress to the
shopping center, areas designated by the shopping center owner for off-street
parking of automotive or other vehicles, driveways, sidewalks, malls, arcades,
service areas and entranceways into stores and buildings.
(1964 Code, § 507.01)
   (b)   Motor vehicles. No person shall, on the public portions of a shopping
center, race the motor of any motor vehicle, needlessly bring to a sudden start
or stop any motor vehicle, blow any horn of any motor vehicle needlessly, or
engage in any race with another vehicle, so as to create a nuisance or a
disturbance so as to annoy or endanger any person or other vehicle lawfully on
the public portions of the shopping center.
(1964 Code, § 507.02)
   (c)   Personal misconduct. The following acts or conduct of any person on
the public portions of any shopping center are hereby declared to be unlawful:
      (1)   For any one person alone or for more than one person in concert
with others to assemble or congregate on the public portions of the shopping
center for the purpose of lingering or loitering in any manner which will
obstruct, impede or interfere with the free passage of other pedestrians using
such shopping center;
      (2)   In the presence or hearing of another person, to curse or abuse a
person or use any violently abusive language to a person concerning him or her
or any of his or her male or female relatives under circumstances reasonably
calculated to provoke a breach of the peace;
      (3)   To use loud or vociferous language or obscene, vulgar or indecent
language, to swear or curse or yell or shriek in a manner calculated to disturb
another person or persons present upon the public portions of a shopping
center; or
      (4)   To harass by any means, bother or injure any person on the public
portions of the shopping center by making loud or indecent suggestions either
by oral expression or physical act.
(1964 Code, § 507.03)
   (d)   Penalty. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(1964 Code, § 507.99)
§ 648.11 MINOR’S CURFEW.
   (a)   Curfew hours. No minor under 18 years of age shall loiter, congregate,
gather in a group or roam the streets in the city between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, Sundays through Thursdays, or between
the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on Fridays and Saturdays. The time
specified herein shall be Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Standard Daylight
Saving Time, as the case may be.
(1964 Code, § 531.01)
   (b)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Any child who is delivering newspapers, or who is making any other
delivery in good faith, or is on an errand of importance, or who is accompanied
by a parent, legal guardian or other person in loco parentis, or some other
person who is 21 years of age or older and who has been given permission by
such parent, guardian or person in loco parentis to accompany such child, shall
not be deemed to be in violation of this chapter.
      (2)   Any school, church, lodge or other organization that desires to
hold any entertainment or function for children under the age of 18 years,
which entertainment or function shall require such children to be out at a
later hour than that specified in this section, shall notify the Police Chief
of such function. The notice shall state the time the entertainment will end.
Minors who attend this function shall be required to be off the public streets
one hour after the function is ended.
(1964 Code, § 531.02)
   (c)   Disposition of minor. Any minor found in violation of this section
shall be taken to the Public Safety Department Building and the parent,
guardian or person in loco parentis shall be notified to come to such building
and take personal charge of the minor. The minor shall be released only to such
parent, guardian or person in loco parentis or to the juvenile authorities. Any
minor found in violation of this section who has once before been held by the
authorities for violation of this section shall be held for the juvenile
authorities for proper disposition.
(1964 Code, § 531.03)
   (d)   Responsibility of parents, guardians and the like. No parent, guardian
or person in loco parentis shall permit any minor to violate this section.
   (e)   Penalty. Whoever violates division (d) of this section hereof shall,
for a first offense, be warned, and for a second or subsequent offense shall be
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(1964 Code, § 531.99)
§ 648.12 PICKETING.
   (a)   Picketing defined. For purposes of this chapter, PICKETING means the
act of standing upon or patrolling any public street, sidewalk or other public
place where persons may lawfully assemble by one or more persons for the
purpose of:
      (1)   Persuading other persons to cease patronizing, contracting with,
employing or leaving the employ of any person or persons; or
      (2)   Giving publicity to or communicating information regarding the
existence, facts or merits of a labor dispute or other controversy.
(1964 Code, § 539.01)
   (b)   Prohibited conduct. No person shall:
      (1)   Engage in picketing by force, violence, duress, breach of the peace
or threat of any of the foregoing;
      (2)   Engage in picketing in such manner as to prevent ingress to or
egress from any premises;
      (3)   Engage in picketing in such a manner as to obstruct, prevent or
interfere with the free or unobstructed use of any public street, sidewalk or
other public place by other persons; or
      (4)   Engage in picketing in other than a reasonable and peaceful manner.
(1964 Code, § 539.02)
   (c)   Penalty. Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the third degree on a
second offense.
(1964 Code, § 539.99)
§ 648.13 INCITING TO VIOLENCE.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly engage in conduct designed to urge or incite
another to commit any offense of violence when either of the following apply:
      (1)   The conduct takes place under circumstances that create a clear and
present danger that any offense of violence will be committed; and
      (2)   The conduct proximately results in the commission of any offense of
violence.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inciting to violence. If
the offense of violence that the other person is being urged or incited to
commit is a misdemeanor, inciting to violence is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offense of violence that the other person is being urged or
incited to commit is a felony, inciting to violence is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2917.01)
§ 648.14 IMPEDING PUBLIC PASSAGE OF AN EMERGENCY SERVICE RESPONDER.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly obstruct any
highway, street, sidewalk, or any other public passage in such a manner as to
render the highway, street, sidewalk, or passage impassable without
unreasonable inconvenience or hazard if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The obstruction prevents an emergency vehicle from accessing a
highway or street, prevents an emergency service responder from responding to
an emergency, or prevents an emergency vehicle or an emergency service
responder from having access to an exit from an emergency.
      (2)   Upon receipt of a request or order from an emergency service
responder to remove or cease the obstruction, the person refuses to remove or
cease the obstruction.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not limit or affect the application
of R.C. § 2921.31 or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code. Any conduct
that is a violation of division (a) of this section and that also is a
violation of R.C. § 2921.31 or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code may
be prosecuted under this section, the other section of the Ohio Revised Code,
or both sections.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawfully impeding public
passage of an emergency service responder, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   As used in this section, EMERGENCY SERVICE RESPONDER has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2903.13.
(R.C. § 2917.14)
CHAPTER 660: SAFETY, SANITATION AND HEALTH
Section
   
660.01   Venting of heaters and burners
   
660.02   Spreading contagion
   
660.03   Littering and dumping upon public and private property; fertilization;
deposit of leaves
   
660.04   Noxious odors; filthy accumulations; polluting and diverting
watercourses
   
660.05   Duty to keep sidewalks in repair and clean
   
660.06   Abandoned refrigerators and airtight containers
   
660.07   Waste material, junk and junk vehicles on public and private property
   
660.075   Storage of unlicensed vehicles
   
660.08   Open burning
   
660.084   Burning refuse
   
660.086   Air pollution
   
660.09   Barricades and warning lights
   
660.10   Sidewalk obstructions; damage or injury
   
660.11   Obstructing fire hydrants
   
660.12   Smoking in city buildings
   
660.13   Snow plowing and blowing
   
660.14   Debris removal
   
660.15   Sand blasting operations
   
660.16   Scavenging prohibited; exception
   
660.17   Harboring rats
   
660.18   Maintenance of tree lawns
   
660.19   Materials and equipment in streets
   
660.20   Polychlorinated biphenyls
   
660.21   Notice to fill lots, remove putrid substances
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Animal nuisances, see §
618.14
   Excavation liability, see R.C. §§ 723.49 et seq.
   Inducing panic, see §
648.07
   Littering from motor vehicles, see §
432.40
   Loads dropping or leaking; tracking mud; removal required, see §
440.06
   Nuisances, see R.C. Ch. 3767
   Placing harmful substance or objects in food or confection, see §
636.16
   Placing injurious material or obstruction in street, see §
412.01
   Rabies control, see §
618.11
   Riot, see §§
648.01
   Safety and equipment for motor vehicles, see
Ch. 438
   Weapons and explosives, see
Ch. 672
   Willfully leaving vehicles on private or public property, see §
452.05
§ 660.01 VENTING OF HEATERS AND BURNERS.
   (a)   The use of a brazier, salamander, space heater, room heater, furnace,
water heater or other burner or heater, using wood, coal, coke, fuel oil,
kerosene, gasoline, natural gas, liquid petroleum gas or similar fuel, and
tending to give off carbon monoxide or other harmful gases, must comply with
the following provisions:
      (1)   When used in living quarters, or in any enclosed building or space
in which persons are usually present, shall be used with a flue or vent so
designed, installed and maintained as to vent the products of combustion
outdoors; except in storage, factory or industrial buildings which are provided
with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide poisoning;
and
      (2)   When used as a portable or temporary burner or heater at a
construction site, or in a warehouse, shed or structure in which persons are
temporarily present, shall be vented as provided in division (a)(1) or used
with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide poisoning.
   (b)   This section does not apply to domestic ranges, laundry stoves, gas
logs installed in a fireplace with an adequate flue, or hot plates, unless the
same are used as space or room heaters.
   (c)   No person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in charge
or occupant of premises, negligently permit the use of a burner or heater in
violation of the standards for venting and ventilation provided in this
section.
   (d)   Division (a) above does not apply to any kerosene-fired space or room
heater that is equipped with an automatic extinguishing tip-over device, or to
any natural gas-fired or liquid petroleum gas-fired space or room heater that
is equipped with an oxygen depletion safety shut-off system, and that has its
fuel piped from a source outside the building in which it is located, that are
approved by an authoritative source recognized by the State Fire Marshal in the
State Fire Code adopted by him or her under R.C. § 3737.82.
   (e)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules to ensure the safe use of
unvented kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum gas heaters exempted from
division (a) above when used in assembly buildings, business buildings, high
hazard buildings, institutional buildings, mercantile buildings and type R-
1 and R-2 residential buildings, as these groups of buildings are defined in
rules adopted by the Board of Building Standards under R.C. § 3781.10. No
person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in charge or occupant
of premises, negligently permit the use of a heater in violation of any rules
adopted under this division (e).
   (f)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules prescribing standards for
written instructions containing ventilation requirements and warning of any
potential fire hazards that may occur in using a kerosene, natural gas or
liquid petroleum gas heater. No person shall sell or offer for sale any
kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum gas heater unless the manufacturer
provides with the heater written instructions that comply with any rules
adopted under this division (f).
   (g)   No product labeled as a fuel additive for kerosene heaters and having
a flash point below 100°F or 37.8°C shall be sold, offered for sale or used in
any kerosene space heater.
   (h)   No device that prohibits any safety feature on a kerosene, natural gas
or liquid petroleum gas space heater from operating shall be sold, offered for
sale or used in connection with any kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum
gas space heater.
   (i)   No person shall sell or offer for sale any kerosene-fired, natural gas
or liquid petroleum gas-fired heater that is not exempt from division (a)
above, unless it is marked conspicuously by the manufacturer on the container
with the phrase “Not Approved For Home Use.”
   (j)   No person shall use a cabinet-type, liquid petroleum gas-fired heater
having a fuel source within the heater, inside any building, except as
permitted by the State Fire Marshal in the State Fire Code adopted by him or
her under R.C. § 3737.82.
(R.C. § 3701.82)
   (k)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 3701.99(B))
§ 660.02 SPREADING CONTAGION.
   (a)   No person, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the
person has a dangerous, contagious disease, shall knowingly fail to take
reasonable measures to prevent exposing self to other persons, except when
seeking medical aid.
   (b)   No person, having charge or care of a person whom the person having
charge or care knows or has reasonable cause to believe has a dangerous,
contagious disease, shall recklessly fail to take reasonable measures to
protect others from exposure to the contagion, and to inform health authorities
of the existence of the contagion.
   (c)   No person, having charge of a public conveyance or place of public
accommodation, amusement, resort or trade, and knowing or having reasonable
cause to believe that persons using the conveyance or place have been or are
being exposed to a dangerous, contagious disease, shall negligently fail to
take reasonable measures to protect the public from exposure to the contagion,
and to inform health authorities of the existence of the contagion.
(R.C. § 3701.81)
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
(R.C. § 3701.99(C))
§ 660.03 LITTERING AND DUMPING UPON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY; FERTILIZATION;
DEPOSIT OF LEAVES.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall throw, drop, pour, deposit or, having done so,
permit to remain, in or on any public street or highway or public ground, any
nail, tack, glass, crockery, scrap iron, tin, wire, bottle, thorn, clipping or
any other article or thing likely to injure the feet of any person or animal or
the tire of any vehicle.
      (2)   No person shall throw or cause to be deposited, or permit to be
thrown or deposited, dirt, debris or offal in or upon any street, lane, alley,
tree lawn or any other public ground or the premises of another. This provision
shall not apply to fill dirt, top soil or similar dirt which is deposited in
connection with the construction, grading or seeding of any premises.
      (3)   The provisions of this division (a) shall apply to debris or mud
deposited from tires of vehicles as well as leaking loads.
   (b)   No person shall dump, throw or cast any material upon the property of
any other person without permission. No person shall dump any refuse, rubbish,
manure or garbage of any property in the city unless a permit is obtained from
the Mayor to do so, in which permit the conditions controlling such dumping are
set forth, except for reasonable fertilization purposes in connection with the
immediate planting or landscaping or crops. If planting is delayed, a permit
shall be obtained from the Mayor even for fertilization purposes.
   (c)   No person shall dump or deposit any leaves, grass clippings, brush or
wood debris in such a way that it obstructs a waterway or sewer system within
any public street or sidewalk except on the tree lawn between the sidewalk and
the curb.
   (d)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(1964 Code, § 521.14)
§ 660.04 NOXIOUS ODORS; FILTHY ACCUMULATIONS; POLLUTING AND DIVERTING
WATERCOURSES.
   (a)   No person shall erect, continue to use or maintain a building,
structure or place for the exercise of a trade, employment or business or for
keeping or feeding an animal which, by occasioning noxious exhalations or
noisome or offensive smells, becomes injurious to the health, comfort or
property of individuals or of the public.
   (b)   No person shall cause or allow offal, filth or noisome substances to
be collected or remain in any place to the damage or prejudice of others or of
the public.
   (c)   No person shall unlawfully obstruct or impede the passage of a
navigable river, harbor or collection of water, or corrupt or render
unwholesome or impure a watercourse, stream of water or unlawfully divert the
watercourse from its natural course or state to the injury or prejudice of
others.
(R.C. § 3767.13)
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 3767.99(C))
§ 660.05 DUTY TO KEEP SIDEWALKS IN REPAIR AND CLEAN.
   (a)   Every owner, occupant and person in control of any lot or land within
the city along the front or side of which any sidewalk is located, or upon
which is located any sidewalk forming a continuation of a sidewalk upon a
public street or highway and available for use by the public as such a
continuation, shall make a reasonable effort to keep such sidewalk and
continuation thereof free and unobstructed from snow, ice, slush, dirt, mud,
tree limbs and other objects. Every such owner, occupant and person in control
shall keep such sidewalk in good repair and free of nuisance. A continuation of
a sidewalk within the meaning of this section shall not include any sidewalk or
portion thereof located upon private property and used only for single-family,
two-family or multi-family residences.
   (b)   Where the elevation or topography of any lot or parcel of land
abutting upon a sidewalk is such in relation to the sidewalk that earth, stone,
sand or gravel slide, fall or are carried upon such sidewalk by force of
gravity or by action of water, the owner or person in charge or control of such
lot or parcel of land shall, within 72 hours after the deposit of such matter
upon the sidewalk, remove or cause the same to be removed. If, by reason of the
elevation or topography of such lot or parcel of land, a recurrence of an
obstruction or nuisance upon the sidewalk is probable or reasonably to be
anticipated, the owner or person in charge or control of such lot or parcel of
land shall construct upon his or her land such a suitable retaining wall or
other device as will effectually prevent such recurrence. No person shall
obstruct or permit a nuisance to exist upon any public sidewalk.
(1964 Code, § 521.06) (Ord. 2012-118, passed 5-7-2012)
§ 660.06 ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS AND AIRTIGHT CONTAINERS.
   (a)   No person shall abandon, discard or knowingly permit to remain on
premises under the person’s control, in a place accessible to children, any
abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semi-airtight
container which has a capacity of one and one-half cubic feet or more and an
opening of 50 square inches or more and which has a door or lid equipped with a
hinge, latch or other fastening device capable of securing the door or lid,
without rendering the equipment harmless to human life by removing the hinges,
latches or other hardware which may cause a person to be confined therein. This
section shall not apply to an icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semi-
airtight container located in that part of a building occupied by a dealer,
warehouse or repairer.
(R.C. § 3767.29)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 3767.99(B))
§ 660.07 WASTE MATERIAL, JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall deposit or leave garbage, waste, putrid substances,
junk, waste materials from oil and gas drilling operations, including brine, or
other waste material on any public street or any other public property or in
any pond or watercourse, nor shall any person who is the owner, occupant or
person in possession of any property within the city, deposit, permit to
remain, or permit any other person to deposit, on private property, any of such
material. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   WASTE MATERIAL. Any material which has been discarded or abandoned
or any material no longer in use, and, without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, includes junk, waste boxes, cartons, plastic or wood scraps or
shavings, waste paper and paper products and other combustible materials or
substances no longer in use or discarded or abandoned, metal or ceramic scraps
or pieces of all types, glass and other noncombustible materials or substances
no longer in use or discarded or abandoned, and machinery, appliances or
equipment, or parts thereof, no longer in use or discarded or abandoned.
      (2)   JUNK. Includes old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries,
paper and rubber. It also includes inoperable, partially dismantled or wrecked
vehicles of any kind, whether motor vehicles, automobiles, motorcycles,
emergency vehicles, public safety vehicles, school buses, bicycles, commercial
tractors, agricultural tractors, house trailers, trucks, buses, trailers,
semitrailers, railroad trains, railroad cars, watercraft or any other form of
device for the transportation of persons or property, and, without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, with respect to any automobile or other
transportation device of any kind, the operation of which requires issuance of
a license by the federal government or any agency thereof or by the state or
any agency or political subdivision thereof, any such automobile or other
transportation device shall be deemed to be junk unless a current valid license
has been issued for the operation of such automobile or other transportation
device, which license, if required by law, is displayed upon such automobile or
other transportation device. The word also includes other automobiles or other
transportation devices. The word also includes other old scrap and ferrous or
nonferrous materials which are not held for sale or for remelting purposes by
an establishment having facilities for processing such materials.
   (b)   The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Director of
Service and the Director of Public Safety or by either of them.
   (c)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(1964 Code, § 521.15)
§ 660.075 STORAGE OF UNLICENSED VEHICLES.
   (a)   No person shall store, or permit to be stored, for a period of more
than 15 days, any unlicensed motor vehicle upon any lot or land within the
boundaries of the city unless the same is in a completely enclosed building or
garage or unless it is stored by an automobile agency or used car lot.
   (b)   Any person who violates this section of the Code shall be deemed
guilty of a minor misdemeanor, punishable by a maximum fine of $100, with no
imprisonment.
(Ord. 1989-229, passed 10-2-1989; Ord. 2008-39, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 660.08 OPEN BURNING.
   (a)   (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         A.   AGRICULTURAL WASTE. Any waste material generated by crop,
horticultural, or livestock production practices, and includes such items as
woody debris and plant matter from stream flooding, bags, cartons, structural
materials, and landscape wastes that are generated in agricultural activities,
but does not include land clearing waste; buildings (including dismantled/
fallen barns); garbage; dead animals; animal waste; motor vehicles and parts
thereof; nor economic poisons and containers thereof, unless the manufacturer
has identified open burning as a safe disposal procedure.
         B.   AIR CURTAIN BURNER. An engineered apparatus consisting of a
motorized high- velocity fan and an air distribution system designed to aid in
the efficient combustion of materials placed in a manufactured steel structure
and for which a permit-to-install has been obtained as required in O.A.C.
Chapter 3745-31 and a permit-to-operate has been obtained as required in O.A.C.
Chapter 3745-77.
         C.   AIR CURTAIN DESTRUCTOR. An engineered apparatus consisting of a
motorized high-velocity fan and an air distribution system designed to aid in
the efficient combustion of materials placed in an adjacent pit. An air curtain
burner may be used in place of an air curtain destructor, but an air curtain
destructor may not be used in place of an air curtain burner.
         D.   BUILDING MATERIALS. Those materials resulting from the
alteration, construction, destruction, rehabilitation, or repair of any human-
made physical structure, including, without limitation, houses, buildings,
industrial or commercial facilities, or roadways.
         E.   ECONOMIC POISONS. Include but are not restricted to pesticides
such as insecticides, fungicides, rodenticides, miticides, nematocides and
fumigants; herbicides; seed disinfectants; and defoliants.
         F.   EMERGENCY BURNING. The burning of clean wood waste or deceased
animals caused by a natural disaster or an uncontrolled event such as the
following:
            1.   A tornado.
            2.   High winds.
            3.   An earthquake.
            4.   An explosion.
            5.   A flood.
            6.   A hail storm, a rain storm, or an ice storm.
         G.   GARBAGE. Any waste material resulting from the handling,
processing, preparation, cooking and consumption of food or food products.
         H.   INHABITED BUILDING. Any inhabited private dwelling house and any
public structure which may be used as a place of resort, assembly, education,
entertainment, lodging, trade, manufacture, repair, storage, traffic, or
occupancy by the public. Examples would include, but are not limited to,
highway rest stops, restaurants, motels, hotels and gas stations.
         I.   LAND CLEARING WASTE. Plant waste material which is removed from
land, including plant waste material removed from stream banks during projects
involving more than one property owner, for the purpose of rendering the land
useful for residential, commercial, or industrial development. Land clearing
waste also includes the plant waste material generated during the clearing of
land for new agricultural development.
         J.   LANDSCAPE WASTE. Any plant waste material, except garbage,
including trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves, grass,
shrubbery, yard trimmings, and crop residues.
         K.   OHIO EPA. The Ohio Environmental Protection Agency Director or
agencies delegated authority by the Director of the Ohio Environmental
Protection Agency pursuant to R.C. § 3704.03 or the Chief of any Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency District Office.
         L.   OPEN BURNING. The burning of any materials wherein air
contaminants resulting from combustion are emitted directly into the ambient
air without passing through a stack or chimney. Open burning includes the
burning of any refuse or salvageable material in any device not subject to or
designed specifically to comply with the requirements of O.A.C. 3745-17-09 or
O.A.C. 3745-17-10.
         M.   RESIDENTIAL WASTE. Any waste material, including landscape waste,
generated on the property of a one-, two- or three-family residence as a result
of residential activities, but not including garbage, rubber, grease, asphalt,
liquid petroleum products, or plastics.
         N.   RESTRICTED AREA. The area within the boundary of the
municipality, plus a zone extending 1,000 feet beyond the boundaries of a
municipality having a population of 1,000 to 10,000 persons and a zone
extending one mile beyond any municipality having a population of 10,000
persons or more according to the latest federal census.
         O.   UNRESTRICTED AREA. All areas outside the boundaries of a
restricted area as defined in this section.
      (2)   Referenced materials. This subchapter includes references to
certain matter or materials. The text of the referenced materials is not
included in the legislation contained in this subchapter. Information on the
availability of the referenced materials as well as the date of, and/or the
particular edition or version of the material is included in this section. For
materials subject to change, only the specific versions specified in this
section are referenced. Material is referenced as it exists on the effective
date of this section. Except for subsequent annual publication of existing
(unmodified) Code of Federal Regulation compilations, any amendment or revision
to a referenced document is not applicable unless and until this section has
been amended to specify the new dates.
         A.   Availability. The referenced materials are available as follows:
            1.   Clean Air Act. Information and copies may be obtained by
writing to: Superintendent of Documents, Attn: New Orders, PO Box 371954,
Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954. The full text of the act as amended in 1990 is also
available in electronic format at www.epa.gov/oar/caa/. A copy of the act is
also available for inspection and use at most public libraries and the State
Library of Ohio.
            2.   Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.). Information and copies
may be obtained by writing to: Superintendent of Documents, Attn: New Orders,
PO Box 371954, Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954. The full text of the C.F.R. is also
available in electronic format at http://www.ecfr.gov. The C.F.R. compilations
are also available for inspection and use at most public libraries and the
State Library of Ohio.
            3.   National Fire Protection Association. Information on the
National Fire Protection Association codes may be obtained by contacting the
Association at 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts 02169-7471, 617-770-
3000. Codes may be ordered at www.nfpa.org/catalog/home/index.asp. Copies of
the code exist or are available at most public libraries and the State Library
of Ohio.
         B.   Referenced materials.
            1.   40 C.F.R. § 60.2974: “Am I required to apply for and obtain a
title V operating permit for my air curtain incinerator that burns only wood
waste, clean lumber, and yard waste?” as published in the July 1, 2017 Code of
Federal Regulations.
            2.   40 C.F.R. § 60.3069: “Am I required to apply for and obtain a
title V operating permit for my air curtain incinerator that burns only wood
waste, clean lumber, and yard waste?” as published in the July 1, 2017 Code of
Federal Regulations.
            3.   NFPA publication 1403: “Standard on Live Fire Training
Evolutions, Chapter 4, Acquired Structures” published April 30, 2007.
            4.   Section 129 of the Clean Air Act, contained in 42 U.S.C. §
7429: “Solid waste combustion” published January 6, 2017 in Supplement IV of
the 2012 Edition of the United States Code.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-01)
   (b)   Relation to other laws.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any provision in O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19, no open
burning shall be conducted in an area where an air alert, warning or emergency
under O.A.C. Chapter 3745-25 is in effect.
      (2)   No provisions of O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19 permitting open burning,
and no permission to open burn granted by the Ohio EPA, shall exempt any person
from compliance with any section of the Ohio Revised Code, or any regulation of
any state department, or any local ordinance or regulation dealing with open
burning.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-02)
   (c)   Open burning in restricted areas.
      (1)   No person or property owner shall cause or allow open burning in a
restricted area except as provided in divisions (c)(2) to (c)(4) of this
section or in R.C. § 3704.11.
      (2)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes without
notification to or permission from the Ohio EPA:
         A.   Heating tar, welding, acetylene torches, highway safety flares,
heating for warmth of outdoor workers and strikers, smudge pots and similar
occupational needs;
         B.   Bonfires, campfires and outdoor fireplace equipment, whether for
cooking food for human consumption, pleasure, religious, ceremonial, warmth,
recreational or similar purposes, if the following conditions are met:
            1.   They are fueled with clean seasoned firewood, natural gas or
equivalent, or any clean burning fuel with emissions that are equivalent to or
lower than those created from the burning of seasoned firewood;
            2.   They are not used for waste disposal purposes; and
            3.   They shall have a total fuel area of three feet or less in
diameter and two feet or less in height.
         C.   Disposal of hazardous explosive materials, military munitions or
explosive devices that require immediate action to prevent endangerment of
human health, public safety, property or the environment and that are excluded
from the requirement to obtain a hazardous waste permit pursuant to O.A.C.
3745-50-45(D)(1)(d);
         D.   Recognized training in the use of fire extinguishers for
commercial or industrial fire prevention; and
         E.   Fires set at the direction of federal, state, and local law
enforcement officials for the purpose of destruction of cannabis sativa
(marijuana) plant vegetation, processed marijuana material and/or other drugs
seized by federal, state, or local law enforcement officials.
         F.   Fires allowed by divisions (c)(2)A., (c)(2)B. and (c)(2)D. of
this section shall not be used for waste disposal purposes and shall be of
minimum size sufficient for their intended purpose; the fuel shall be chosen to
minimize the generation and emission of air contaminants.
      (3)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes with prior
notification to the Ohio EPA in accordance with division (d)(2) of this
section:
         A.   Prevention or control of disease or pests, with written or oral
verification to the Ohio EPA from the Ohio Department of Health or local health
department, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, cooperative
extension service, Ohio Department of Agriculture or United States Department
of Agriculture, that open burning is the only appropriate disposal method; and
         B.   Bonfires or campfires used for ceremonial purposes that do not
meet the requirements of division (c)(2)B. of this section, provided the
following conditions are met:
            1.   They have a total fuel area no greater than five feet in
diameter by five feet in height and burn no longer than three hours;
            2.   They are not used for waste disposal purposes; and
            3.   They are fueled with clean seasoned firewood, natural gas or
equivalent, or any clean burning fuel with emissions that are equivalent to or
lower than those created from the burning of seasoned firewood.
         C.   Disposal of agricultural waste generated on the premises if the
following conditions are observed:
            1.   The fire is set only when atmospheric conditions will readily
dissipate contaminants;
            2.   The fire does not create a visibility hazard on the roadways,
railroad tracks or air fields;
            3.   The fire is located at a point on the premises no less than
1,000 feet from any inhabited building not located on the premises;
            4.   The wastes are stacked and dried to provide the best
practicable condition for efficient burning; and
            5.   No materials are burned which contain rubber, grease, asphalt,
liquid petroleum products, plastics or building materials.
         D.   Recognized horticultural, silvicultural (forestry), range
management, prairie and grassland management, invasive species management, or
wildlife management practices, if all of the following conditions are met:
            1.   The fire shall be performed within 180 days of submitting the
notification.
            2.   The fire shall be performed when it is anticipated weather
conditions will minimize the dispersion of smoke near populated areas and the
smoke does not create a visibility hazard on roadways, railroad tracks, or air
fields. Smoke dispersion conditions shall be evaluated before, during, and
after the fire and actions taken to minimize smoke impacts.
            3.   The person making the notification shall notify the local fire
department having jurisdiction over the burn area at least 24 hours before the
fire is anticipated to occur.
            4.   The person making the notification shall provide reasonable
notification to populations potentially impacted by the smoke before the fire
occurs. Populations potentially impacted shall include, at a minimum, those
within one-quarter mile of the burn site. Reasonable notification shall include
one of the following:
               a.   Posting notice of intent to burn, including contact
information for the person making the notification and the anticipated date
that the fire will occur, within open view from a public roadway adjacent to
and outside of the property on which the fire will occur.
               b.   Posting a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in
the local community in which the fire will occur. The notice shall include, at
a minimum, the address of the property at which the fire will occur, contact
information for the person making the notification and the anticipated date
that the fire will occur.
               c.   Delivering written notice directly to residences and
businesses within a minimum of one-quarter mile of the burn site. Notices shall
include, at a minimum, the address of the property at which the fire will
occur, contact information for the person making the notification and the
anticipated date that the fire will occur.
            5.   The person making the notification shall document information
on the weather, smoke conditions, any air quality concerns before, during, and
after the fire, the actual number of acres burned, the time the fire was
initially kindled, the time when active kindling ceased and the time at which
mop up activities ceased. The person making the notification shall maintain
this information for a minimum of one year from the date of the fire and shall
provide this information to the appropriate Ohio EPA district office or local
air agency within ten days upon request.
            6.   Reasonable access to the burn site shall be provided to Ohio
EPA representatives at any time during the fire.
      (4)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes upon
receipt of written permission from the Ohio EPA, in accordance with division
(d)(1) of this section, provided that any conditions specified in the
permission are followed:
         A.   Disposal of ignitable or explosive materials where the Ohio EPA
determines that there is no practical alternate method of disposal, excluding
those materials identified in division (c)(2)C. of this section;
         B.   Instruction in methods of firefighting or for research in the
control of fires as recognized by the State Fire Marshal Division of the Ohio
Department of Commerce and the guidelines set forth in the National Fire
Protection Association’s (NFPA) publication 1403, Standard on Live Fire
Training Evolutions, Chapter 4, Acquired Structures, provided that the
application required in division (d)(1)A. of this section is submitted by the
commercial or public entity responsible for the instruction;
         C.   In emergency or other extraordinary circumstances for any purpose
determined to be necessary by the Director and performed as identified in the
appendix to O.A.C. § 3745-19-03. If deemed necessary, the open burning may be
authorized with prior oral approval by the Director followed by the issuance of
a written permission to open burn within seven working days of the oral
approval;
         D.   Fires or pyrotechnic effects, for purposes other than waste
disposal, set as part of commercial film-making or video production activities
for motion pictures and television.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-03)
   (d)   Permission to individuals and notification to the Ohio EPA.
      (1)   Permission.
         A.   An application for permission to open burn shall be submitted in
writing to Ohio EPA. The applicant shall allow Ohio EPA at least ten working
days to review the permit. Applicant may proceed with burn upon receipt of
written permission from Ohio EPA. Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays shall
not be considered working days. The application shall be in such form and
contain such information as required by the Ohio EPA.
         B.   Except as provided in divisions (d)(1)F. and (d)(1)G. of this
section, the applications shall contain, as a minimum, the following
information:
            1.   The purpose of the proposed burning;
            2.   The quantity or acreage and the nature of the materials to be
burned;
            3.   The date or dates when the burning will take place;
            4.   The location of the burning site, including a map showing
distances to residences, populated areas, roadways, air fields and other
pertinent landmarks; and
            5.   The methods or actions which will be taken to reduce the
emissions of air contaminants.
         C.   Permission to open burn shall not be granted unless the applicant
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Ohio EPA that open burning is necessary
to the public interest; will be conducted in a time, place and manner as to
minimize the emission of air contaminants, when atmospheric conditions are
appropriate; and will have no serious detrimental effect upon adjacent
properties or the occupants thereof. The Ohio EPA may impose such conditions as
may be necessary to accomplish the purpose of O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19.
         D.   Except as provided in division (d)(1)F. of this section,
permission to open burn must be obtained for each specific project. In
emergencies where public health or environmental quality will be seriously
threatened by delay while written permission is sought, the fire may be set
with oral permission of the Ohio EPA.
         E.   Violations of any of the conditions set forth by the Ohio EPA in
granting permission to open burn shall be grounds for revocation of that
permission and refusal to grant future permission, as well as for the
imposition of other sanctions provided by law.
         F.   The Ohio Department of Commerce, Division of State Fire Marshal,
may request permission to open burn on an annual basis for the purpose of
training firefighters on pre-flashover conditions using the Ohio Fire Academy’s
mobile training laboratory at either the academy or at other training sites in
Ohio. The annual application required pursuant to division (d)(1)A. of this
section shall contain information as required in division (d)(1)B. of this
section, except the information required in divisions (d)(1)B.3. and (d)(1)B.4.
of this section need not be provided unless it is available at the time of
submittal of the application. The Academy shall contact the appropriate Ohio
EPA District Office or local air agency at least five working days before each
training session of the date or dates when the training session will take place
and its location. Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays shall not be considered a
working day.
         G.   For open burning defined under division (c)(4)B. of this section
and O.A.C. 3745-19-04(C)(2), permission to open burn shall not be granted
unless the applicant provides proof of written notice of intent to demolish
received by the appropriate Ohio EPA field office in accordance with O.A.C.
3745-20-03.
      (2)   Notification.
         A.   Notification shall be submitted in writing at least ten working
days before the fire is to be set. Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays shall
not be considered a working day. It shall be in such form and contain such
information as shall be required by the Ohio EPA.
         B.   Such notification shall inform the Ohio EPA regarding the
following:
            1.   The purpose of the proposed burning;
            2.   The nature and quantities of materials to be burned;
            3.   The date or dates when the burning will take place; and
            4.   The location of the burning site.
         C.   The Ohio EPA, after receiving notification, may determine that
the open burning is not allowed under O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19 and the Ohio EPA
shall notify the applicant to this effect.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-05)
   (e)   Penalty. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. In addition, the
offender shall be required to pay the cost of proper disposal of the materials
burned. The cost of proper disposal of the materials burned shall be the amount
it would have cost to dispose of the materials in a manner that is consistent
with the air, water and solid waste laws, ordinances and regulations of the
municipality and the state.
§ 660.084 BURNING REFUSE.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided by law, no person shall burn any refuse,
rubbish, garbage or other material, or, being the owner or in possession or
control of any premises within the city, cause, procure or knowingly permit
such burning in such a manner as to produce smoke or odors which are offensive,
injurious or in any way prejudicial to the health or comfort of any person
within the city or injurious or destructive to any property therein.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(1964 Code, § 621.12)
§ 660.086 AIR POLLUTION.
   (a)   No person shall cause or permit the emission within the city of smoke
the density of which is equal to or greater than No. 3 of the Ringelmann Chart,
as published and used by the United States Bureau of Mines, from any steam
roller, derrick, shovel, tar kettle or other similar machine, or from the
smokestack or chimney of any building or premises, or from any sand blasting
operation, or from any incinerator, except for six minutes in any one hour,
during which time the firebox is cleaned out or a new fire is being built
therein. Such unlawful emission is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be
summarily abated by any member of the Police Department, in addition to the
penalty provided for in division (b) of this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Ord. 1989-82, passed 8-7-1989)
§ 660.09 BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.
   (a)   No person shall abandon or knowingly permit to remain on public or
private property, any excavation, well, cesspool or structure which is in the
process of construction, reconstruction, repair or alteration unless the same
is adequately protected by suitable barricades and guarded by warning devices
or lights at night so that the condition will not reasonably prove dangerous to
life or limb.
   (b)   No person shall destroy, remove, damage or extinguish any barricade or
warning light that is placed for the protection of the public so as to prevent
injury to life or limb.
   (c)   Any owner or agent in control of a premises upon which a basement,
cellar, well or cistern has been abandoned due to demolition, failure to build
or any other reason shall cause the same to be filled to the ground surface
with rock, gravel, earth or other suitable material.
   (d)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 660.10 SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTIONS; DAMAGE OR INJURY.
   (a)   No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a sidewalk or
playground any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails or other articles which may
damage property of another or injure any person or animal traveling along or
upon the sidewalk or playground.
   (b)   No person shall walk on, or allow any animal upon, or injure or deface
in any way, any soft or newly laid sidewalk pavement.
   (c)   No person shall place, deposit or maintain any merchandise, goods,
material or equipment upon any sidewalk so as to obstruct pedestrian traffic
thereon except for such reasonable time as may be actually necessary for the
delivery or pickup of the articles. In no case shall the obstruction remain on
the sidewalk for more than one hour.
   (d)   No person shall unload upon, or transport any heavy merchandise,
goods, material or equipment over or across any sidewalk or curb without first
placing some sufficient protection over the pavement to protect against damage
or injury.
   (e)   No person shall allow any cellar or trap door, coal chute or elevator
or lift opening in any sidewalk to remain open without providing suitable
safeguards to protect and warn pedestrian traffic of the dangerous conditions.
   (f)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 660.11 OBSTRUCTING FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (a)   No person shall place, or cause to be placed, any building materials,
vehicle or obstruction of any kind within ten feet of any fire hydrant.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(1964 Code, § 521.28)
§ 660.12 SMOKING IN CITY BUILDINGS.
   (a)   No smoking shall be permitted in the City Hall, the police station,
the fire stations, the Service Department building or any other building owned
or leased by the city.
(Ord. 1993-18, passed 4-6-1993)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. 1995-41, passed 4-3-1995)
§ 660.13 SNOW PLOWING AND BLOWING.
   (a)   Permit required. No person shall use a motor vehicle or machine to
plow or remove snow from private property in the city for a fee or charge of
any kind without first securing a permit from the Public Works Division or
Service Department for such vehicle.
   (b)   Application for permit.
      (1)   The following information shall be provided by any applicant using
less than ten snow removal units for a snowplow operator's permit:
         A.   Name, home address, business address, state driver's license
number, and telephone number;
         B.   Make, model, serial number, and state license plate number of the
motor vehicle or machine to be used for snowplowing and removal, insurance
company information and policy number.
      (2)   The application for a snowplow operator's permit for a company or
applicant using less than ten motor vehicles and/or machines shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $5 for each motor vehicle or machine
registered.
      (3)   The following information shall be provided by any applicant using
ten or more snow removal units for a snowplow operator's permit:
         A.   Name, home address, business address, state driver's license
number, and telephone number;
         B.   Make, model, serial number, and state license plate number of the
motor vehicle or machine to be used for snowplowing and removal, insurance
company information and policy number. Motor vehicles and machines shall have
the name of the company prominently marked on their snow removal vehicles or
machines.
      (4)   The application for a snowplow operator's permit, for ten or more
snow removal units, shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $50 for
companies or applicants using and registering ten or more motor vehicles and/or
machines.
   (c)   Effective date; revocation of permit.
      (1)   A snowplow operator's permit shall be effective during the period
from October 15 to April 15 of the following year. A permit issued in one such
time period is not valid for a subsequent time period.
      (2)   A snowplow operator's permit is subject to revocation by the City
Prosecutor upon the following grounds:
         A.   Fraud or willful and knowing misrepresentation made in applying
for a snowplow operator's permit or made in the conduct of the snowplowing and
removal business;
         B.   Failure to pay any fees as required by this chapter;
         C.   Violation of any ordinance of the city pertaining to business
regulation or snow plowing and removal.
   (d)   Snow and dirt removal.
      (1)   Every owner, occupant or person in control of any lot or land
within the city, along the front or side of which a sidewalk is located, shall
keep the sidewalk free from snow, ice, slush, dirt, mud or any other foreign
substance, provided that no sidewalk shall be required to be cleaned more often
than once in any one day nor before the hour of 9:00 a.m. next following the
fall of any snow. The city has the option and right, at its sole discretion,
but not the responsibility or duty to participate in snow removal from
sidewalks in the right-of-way.
      (2)   No owner, occupant or person in control of a lot or land within the
city, or their agent or employee, or any other person shall cause any snow
removed from any premises, private property, drive, public parking area, or
sidewalk, to be placed onto any portion of the traveled surface of any public
street within the City of Solon, including pushing or mechanically blowing snow
across city streets. Plowing across the street is prohibited. Snow shall remain
on the property from which it originated.
      (3)   Every owner, occupant or person in control of any lot or land shall
keep the area around the mailbox clear and free of any obstruction so delivery
from the post office can be maintained.
      (4)   No owner, occupant or person in control of a lot or land within the
city, or their agent or employee, or other person shall cause snow to be
removed from public or private property in such a manner as to obstruct free
and clear access to fire hydrants within the city.
   (e)   Penalty. An owner, occupant, or person in control of any lot or land
who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a minor
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $50. Each day's continued
violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(1964 Code, § 521.10) (Ord. 2021-122, passed 6-7-2021)
§ 660.14 DEBRIS REMOVAL.
   (a)   (1)   The owner, occupant or person in control of any lot or land
within the city shall keep all yard areas free from the accumulation in the
open of paper, bottles, cans, cartons, rubbish and other debris.
      (2)   Operators of business establishments that sell food or other
merchandise in containers that are customarily discarded on the premises or
upon leaving the premises shall provide convenient and strategically located
waste receptacles on their premises. Operators of business establishments shall
maintain the cleanliness of the sidewalks and street areas in front of their
establishments.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(1964 Code, § 521.11)
§ 660.15 SAND BLASTING OPERATIONS.
   (a)   No person shall conduct sand blasting operations in the city without
the provision for and installation of adequate tarping and screening to ensure
that all particles and sand blasting material resulting from the sand blasting
operation remain on the property on which the sand blasting operation is being
conducted.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Ord. 1989-82, passed 8-7-1989)
§ 660.16 SCAVENGING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   (a)   No person shall scavenge or remove rubbish or recyclables stored and
placed for collection from any tree lawn or collection point except from a tree
lawn or collection point on or abutting his or her property and except as
hereinafter provided. Charitable organizations may scavenge such rubbish with
the permission of the owner and after registration with the Police Chief upon a
showing that their scavenging will not disrupt city collections or cause debris
from rubbish to be strewn about and that they are bona fide charitable
organizations which have programs for scavenging without nuisance. Failure to
comply with these requirements shall be cause for revocation of the
registration and permission.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(1964 Code, § 521.17)
§ 660.17 HARBORING RATS.
   (a)   (1)   The following conditions are found to be conducive to harboring
rats and are hereby declared to be nuisances:
         A.   Broken building tile in areaways or in the walls or foundations
of garages;
         B.   Building materials or rubbish dumped or stored behind garages;
         C.   Garage foundations under which rats have burrowed;
         D.   Underground garbage containers around or under which rats have
burrowed;
         E.   Portable play houses, dog houses, tool sheds and stored building
materials resting directly on the ground surface or less than eight inches
above the surface;
         F.   Rubbish or garbage containers resting directly on the ground
surface or less than eight inches above such surface;
         G.   Garbage containers without watertight bottoms and tightly fitting
tops; and
         H.   Concrete or wooden garage floors so broken that rats can burrow
or have burrowed under them.
      (2)   No owner or occupant of any premises on which any such condition
exists shall fail or refuse, within five days after being notified thereof by
an officer or employee of the Service Department, to abate the same.
      (3)   In addition, such nuisances may be abated by the proper officers or
employees of the city.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(1964 Code, § 521.18)
§ 660.18 MAINTENANCE OF TREE LAWNS.
   (a)   The owner or person in control of premises shall maintain the tree
lawn adjoining his or her premises in a clean and nuisance-free condition.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(1964 Code, § 521.25)
§ 660.19 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT IN STREETS.
   (a)   No person shall cause to be piled, stored or left on any portion of
any public street or highway any building material or material or equipment of
any kind, nor, being the owner or occupant of any property fronting upon a
public street or highway, permit the placing or storage of any such material on
such street or highway in front of such property.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(1964 Code, § 521.27)
§ 660.20 POLYCHLORINATED BIPHENYLS.
   (a)   Person defined. As used in this section, PERSON includes all persons,
natural and artificial, and includes, but is not limited to, private
corporations, public utilities, partners, principals, agents and employees.
   (b)   Prohibitions.
      (1)   No person shall introduce or install within the city any new
electrical equipment containing or utilizing polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs)
in a concentration of 500 parts per 1,000,000 or greater. Existing
installations are permitted to remain in place for the useful life of the
equipment in accordance with federal PCB regulations found in 40 C.F.R. Part
761. No person shall introduce or install within the city any used or rebuilt
electrical equipment containing or utilizing polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs)
in a concentration of 50 parts per 1,000,000 or greater.
      (2)   Within 45 days of the enactment of this section (Ordinance 1988-10,
passed March 7, 1988), all persons who own, lease, operate or maintain within
the city any electrical equipment known to contain or utilize polychlorinated
biphenyls in a concentration of 500 parts per 1,000,000 or greater shall
conduct a survey thereof and shall submit to the Fire Chief a written itemized
report containing the following information: the exact location of such
equipment, the date of original installation of each piece of equipment and the
projected useful life of each piece at the time of installation.
      (3)   All persons who own, lease, operate or maintain within the city any
electrical equipment known to contain or utilize polychlorinated biphenyls in a
concentration of 500 parts per 1,000,000 or greater shall, in the daily
operation thereof, proceed as follows:
         A.   Whenever a leak or discharge of any polychlorinated biphenyls
greater than 500 parts per 1,000,000 occurs at any location within the city,
the Fire Chief shall be notified, in person or by telephone, within 24 hours of
discovery;
         B.   The owner of such leaking or discharging electrical equipment
shall begin repairs within 48 hours. If such electrical equipment is not
repairable, it shall be promptly removed from the city and disposed of in such
a way as to be consistent with federal PCB regulations; and
         C.   All such leaking or discharging polychlorinated biphenyls shall
be disposed of in accordance with federal PCB regulations, with guidance from
the Fire Chief, so that, upon completion, the removal of polychlorinated
biphenyls will be consistent with the United States EPA PCB Spill Cleanup
Policy.
      (4)   The Director of Law, upon the request of the Director of Public
Safety, is hereby authorized to bring a civil action to enforce the provisions
of this section.
(Ord. 1988-10, passed 3-7-1988)
   (c)   Penalty. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each installation in violation
shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense, and each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
§ 660.21 NOTICE TO FILL LOTS, REMOVE PUTRID SUBSTANCES.
   (a)   No person shall fail to comply with the following requirements within
the lawful time after service or publication of the notice or resolution is
made as required by law: to fill or drain any lot or land or remove all putrid
substances therefrom, or remove all obstructions from culverts, covered drains
or natural watercourses as provided in R.C. § 715.47.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
CHAPTER 666: SEX RELATED OFFENSES
Section
   
666.01   Definitions
   
666.02   Unlawful sexual conduct with a minor
   
666.03   Sexual imposition
   
666.04   Public indecency
   
666.05   Voyeurism
   
666.06   Polygraph examinations for victims: restrictions on use
   
666.07   Procuring; engagement in sexual activity for hire
   
666.08   Soliciting
   
666.085   Loitering to engage in solicitation
   
666.09   Prostitution
   
666.10   Rules of evidence
   
666.11   Disseminating matter harmful to juveniles
   
666.115   Displaying matter harmful to juveniles
   
666.12   Pandering obscenity (Repealed)
   
666.13   Possession and viewing of obscene material involving a minor
(Repealed)
   
666.14   Deception to obtain matter harmful to juveniles
   
666.15   Presumptions; notice
   
666.16   Declaratory judgment
   
666.17   Injunction; abatement of nuisance
   
666.18   Exposure of performers in public; exemption of theatrical
establishments
   
666.19   Aiding and abetting unlawful exposure
   
666.20   Unlawful operation of viewing booths depicting sexual conduct
   
666.21   Juveniles on the premises of adult entertainment establishments
prohibited
   
666.22   Prohibition on residency
   
666.23   Sexually oriented businesses; illegal operation and activity
   
666.24   Unlawful advertising of massage
   
666.25   Nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images
   
666.99   Sentencing for sexually oriented offenses; sexual predators;
registration
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Assistance to victims of sexual assault, see R.C. §§ 2907.28 through 2907.30
   Child victim, disposition of, see R.C. § 2945.481
   Criminal child enticement, see §
636.08
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Examination and treatment for venereal disease; HIV tests, see R.C. §
2907.27
   Power to restrain houses of ill fame, see R.C. § 715.52
   Registration of sex offenders in cities and counties, see R.C. §§ 2950.01 et
seq.
   Sentencing generally, see
Ch. 698
   Spreading contagion, see §
660.02
§ 666.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   HARMFUL TO JUVENILES. That quality of any material or performance
describing or representing nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sado-
masochistic abuse in any form to which all of the following apply:
      (1)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole, appeals to
the prurient interest of juveniles in sex;
      (2)   The material or performance is patently offensive to prevailing
standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable
for juveniles; and
      (3)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole, lacks
serious literary, artistic, political and scientific value for juveniles.
   (b)   JUVENILE. Any unmarried person under 18 years of age.
   (c)   MATERIAL. Any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print,
picture, figure, image, description, motion picture film, video cassette, laser
disc, phonograph record, cassette tape, compact disc or other tangible thing
capable of arousing interest through sight, sound or touch and includes an
image or text appearing on a computer monitor, television screen, liquid
crystal display or similar display device or an image or text recorded on a
computer hard disk, computer floppy disk, compact disk, magnetic tape or
similar data storage device.
   (d)   MENTAL HEALTH CLIENT OR PATIENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2305.51.
   (e)   MENTAL HEALTH PROFESSIONAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2305.115.
   (f)   MINOR. A person under the age of 18.
   (g)   NUDITY. The showing, representation or depiction of human male or
female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a full, opaque covering,
or of a female breast with less than a full, opaque covering of any portion
thereof below the top of the nipple, or of covered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.
   (h)   OBSCENE. When considered as a whole, and judged with reference to
ordinary adults or, if it is designed for sexual deviates or other specially
susceptible group, judged with reference to that group, any material or
performance is OBSCENE if any of the following apply:
      (1)   Its dominant appeal is to prurient interest;
      (2)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting
sexual activity, masturbation, sexual excitement or nudity in a way that tends
to represent human beings as mere objects of sexual appetite;
      (3)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting
bestiality or extreme or bizarre violence, cruelty or brutality;
      (4)   Its dominant tendency is to appeal to scatological interest by
displaying or depicting human bodily functions of elimination in a way that
inspires disgust or revulsion in persons with ordinary sensibilities, without
serving any genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral or artistic
purpose; and
      (5)   It contains a series of displays or descriptions of sexual
activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, nudity, bestiality, extreme or
bizarre violence, cruelty or brutality, or human bodily functions of
elimination, the cumulative effect of which is a dominant tendency to appeal to
prurient or scatological interest, when the appeal to such an interest is
primarily for its own sake or for commercial exploitation, rather than
primarily for a genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral or
artistic purpose.
   (i)   PERFORMANCE. Any motion picture, preview, trailer, play, show, skit,
dance or other exhibition performed before an audience.
   (j)   PROSTITUTE. A male or female who promiscuously engages in sexual
activity for hire, regardless of whether the hire is paid to the prostitute or
to another.
   (k)   PUBLIC PLACE. A place to which the public or a substantial group of
persons has access, and includes, but it is not limited to, highways,
transportation facilities, restaurants, bars, entertainment facilities,
schools, places of amusement, parks, playgrounds and hallways, lobbies and
other portions of apartment houses, motels and hotels not constituting rooms or
apartments designed for actual residence.
(Ord. 1993-14, passed 5-17-1993)
   (l)   SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person or
the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained.
   (m)   SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Sexual conduct or sexual contact, or both.
   (n)   SEXUAL CONDUCT. Vaginal intercourse between a male and female; anal
intercourse, fellatio and cunnilingus between persons regardless of sex; and,
without privilege to do so, the insertion, however slight, of any part of the
body or any instrument, apparatus or other object into the vaginal or anal
opening of another. Penetration, however slight, is sufficient to complete
vaginal or anal intercourse.
   (o)   SEXUAL CONTACT. Any touching of an erogenous zone of another,
including without limitation the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region, or, if
the person is a female, a breast, for the purpose of sexually arousing or
gratifying either person.
   (p)   SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals when
in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   (q)   SPOUSE. A person married to an offender at the time of an alleged
offense, except that the person shall not be considered the spouse when any of
the following apply:
      (1)   When the parties have entered into a written separation agreement
pursuant to R.C. § 3103.06;
      (2)   When an action is pending between the parties for annulment,
divorce, dissolution of marriage or legal separation; and
      (3)   In the case of an action for legal separation, after the effective
date of the judgment for legal separation.
   (r)   THEATER. A building, playhouse, room, hall or other place having a
permanent stage upon which movable scenery and theatrical, vaudeville or
similar performances are given and having seats so arranged that a body of
spectators can have an unobstructed view of the stage.
(Ord. 1993-44, passed 5-17-1993)
Statutory reference:
   Sex offenses general definitions, see R.C. § 2907.01
§ 666.02 UNLAWFUL SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH A MINOR.
   (a)   No person who is 18 years of age or older shall engage in sexual
conduct with another when the offender knows the other person is 13 years of
age or older but less than 16 years of age, or the offender is reckless in that
regard.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful sexual conduct
with a minor.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(2), unlawful sexual
conduct with a minor is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(3) of this section, if
the offender is less than four years older than the other person, unlawful
sexual conduct with a minor is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03 or 2907.04, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of former R.C. § 2907.12, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, unlawful sexual conduct with a
minor is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.04)
§ 666.03 SEXUAL IMPOSITION.
   (a)   No person shall have sexual contact with another; cause another to
have sexual contact with the offender; or cause two or more other persons to
have sexual contact when any of the following applies:
      (1)   The offender knows that the sexual contact is offensive to the
other person, or one of the other persons, or is reckless in that regard;
      (2)   The offender knows that the other person’s, or one of the other
person’s ability to appraise the nature of or control the offender’s or
touching person’s conduct is substantially impaired;
      (3)   The offender knows that the other person, or one of the other
persons, submits because of being unaware of the sexual contact;
      (4)   The other person, or one of the other persons, is 13 years of age
or older but less than 16 years of age, whether or not the offender knows the
age of the person, and the offender is at least 18 years of age and four or
more years older than the other person; and
      (5)   The offender is a mental health professional, the other person or
one of the other persons is a mental health client or patient of the offender,
and the offender induces the other person who is the client or patient to
submit by falsely representing to the other person who is the client or patient
that the sexual contact is necessary for mental health treatment purposes.
   (b)   No person shall be convicted of a violation of this section solely
upon the victim’s testimony unsupported by other evidence.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of sexual imposition, a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section, R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03,
2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, former R.C. § 2907.12, or a substantially equivalent
state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this section, R.C. § 2907.02,
2907.03, 2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, former R.C. § 2907.12, or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any combination of those
sections, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree and,
notwithstanding the range of jail terms prescribed in R.C. § 2929.24, the court
may impose on the offender a definite jail term of not more than one year.
(R.C. § 2907.06)
Statutory reference:
   Gross sexual imposition, felony, see R.C. § 2907.05
   Notice to licensing board or agency upon indictment, conviction or guilty
plea of mental health professional, see R.C. §§ 2907.17 and 2907.18
§ 666.04 PUBLIC INDECENCY.
   (a)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following, under
circumstances in which the person’s conduct is likely to be viewed by and
affront others who are in the person’s physical proximity and who are not
members of the person’s household:
      (1)   Expose the person’s private parts;
      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct or masturbation; and
      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be
sexual conduct or masturbation.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following, under circumstances
in which the person's conduct is likely to be viewed by and affront another
person who is in the person's physical proximity, who is a minor, and who is
not the spouse of the offender:
      (1)   Engage in masturbation;
      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct;
      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be
sexual conduct or masturbation; and
      (4)   Expose the person’s private parts with the purpose of personal
sexual arousal or gratification or to lure the minor into sexual activity.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public indecency and
shall be punished as provided in divisions (c)(2), (c)(3), (c)(4) and (c)(5) of
this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(2), a violation
of division (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, a violation of division (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the third degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by
the offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations
of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
a violation of division (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by the
offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more
violations of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, a violation of division (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by
the offender’s conduct was a minor, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(3), a violation
of division (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a violation of division (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section
is a misdemeanor of the second degree or, if any person who was likely to view
and be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section or a substantially equivalent
state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (a)(2) or (a)(3) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if any person who was
likely to view and be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor, a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(4), a violation
of division (b)(1), (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
second degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law
or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (b)(1), (b)(2) or (b)(3) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (b)(1), (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(5), a violation
of division (b)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation of
this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (b)(4) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (d)   (1)   If either of the following applies, the court may determine at
the time of sentencing whether to classify the offender as a tier I sex
offender/child-victim offender for a violation of division (b)(4) of this
section:
         A.   The offender is less than ten years older than the other person.
         B.   The offender is ten or more years older than the other person and
the offender has not previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any
violation of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance.
      (2)   If the offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (b)(4) of this section, is ten or more years older than the other
person, and previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation
of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the court shall issue an order at the time of sentencing that
classifies the offender as a tier I sex offender/child-victim offender subject
to registration under R.C. §§ 2950.04, 2950.041, 2950.05, and 2950.06.
(R.C. § 2907.09)
   (e)   A mother is entitled to breast-feed her baby in any location of a
place of public accommodation, as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, wherein the mother
otherwise is permitted.
(R.C. § 3781.55)
Statutory reference:
   Bail considerations for persons charged, see R.C. § 2907.41
§ 666.05 VOYEURISM.
   (a)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying himself
or herself, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade the
privacy of another, to spy or eavesdrop upon another.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly commit trespass or otherwise secretly or
surreptitiously videotape, film, photograph, broadcast, stream, or otherwise
record another person, in a place where a person has a reasonable expectation
of privacy, for the purpose of viewing the private areas of that person.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly commit trespass or otherwise secretly or
surreptitiously videotape, film, photograph, broadcast, stream, or otherwise
record a minor, in a place where a person has a reasonable expectation of
privacy, for the purpose of viewing the private areas of the minor.
   (d)   No person shall secretly or surreptitiously videotape, film,
photograph, or otherwise record another person above, under, or through the
clothing being worn by that other person for the purpose of viewing the body
of, or the undergarments worn by, that other person.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of voyeurism.
      (1)   A violation of division (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
      (2)   A violation of division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
second degree.
      (3)   A violation of division (d) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (4)   A violation of division (c) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.08)
§ 666.06 POLYGRAPH EXAMINATIONS FOR VICTIMS: RESTRICTIONS ON USE.
   (a)   (1)   A peace officer, prosecutor, other public official, defendant,
defendant's attorney, alleged juvenile offender, or alleged juvenile offender's
attorney shall not ask or require a victim of an alleged sex offense to submit
to a polygraph examination as a condition for proceeding with the investigation
or prosecution of the alleged sex offense.
      (2)   The refusal of the victim of an alleged sex offense to submit to a
polygraph examination shall not prevent the investigation of the alleged sex
offense, the filing of criminal charges with respect to the alleged sex offense
or the prosecution of the alleged perpetrator of the alleged sex offense.
   (b)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   ALLEGED JUVENILE OFFENDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2930.01.
      (2)   PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.51.
      (3)   POLYGRAPH EXAMINATION. Any mechanical or electrical instrument or
device of any type used or allegedly used to examine, test or question an
individual for the purpose of determining the individual’s truthfulness.
      (4)   PROSECUTION. The prosecution of criminal charges in a criminal
prosecution or the prosecution of a delinquent child complaint in a delinquency
proceeding.
      (5)   PROSECUTOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
      (6)   PUBLIC OFFICIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 117.01.
      (7)   SEX OFFENSE. A violation of any provision of §§
666.02 to
666.05 or R.C. §§ 2907.02 to 2907.09.
(R.C. § 2907.10)
§ 666.07 PROCURING; ENGAGEMENT IN SEXUAL ACTIVITY FOR HIRE.
   (a)   Procuring.
      (1)   No person, knowingly and for gain, shall do either of the
following:
         A.   Entice or solicit another to patronize a prostitute or brothel;
         B.   Procure a prostitute for another to patronize, or take or direct
another at the other's request to any place for the purpose of patronizing a
prostitute.
      (2)   No person, having authority or responsibility over the use of
premises, shall knowingly permit the premises to be used for the purpose of
engaging in sexual activity for hire.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (a)(1)A. or (a)(1)B. of this section is
guilty of procuring. Except as otherwise provided in this division, procuring
is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the prostitute who is procured,
patronized, or otherwise involved in a violation of division (a)(1)B. of this
section is under 18 years of age at the time of the violation, regardless of
whether the offender who violates division (a)(1)B. of this section knows the
prostitute’s age, or if a prostitute who engages in sexual activity for hire in
premises used in violation of division (a)(2) of this section is under 18 years
of age at the time of the violation, regardless of whether the offender who
violates division (a)(2) of this section knows the prostitute’s age, procuring
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.23)
   (b)   Engagement in sexual activity for hire.
      (1)   As used in this division (b):
         A.   PERSON WITH A DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY. Has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 2905.32.
         B.   SEXUAL ACTIVITY FOR HIRE. An implicit or explicit agreement to
provide sexual activity in exchange for anything of value paid to the person
engaging in such sexual activity, to any person trafficking that person, or to
any person associated with either such person.
      (2)   No person shall recklessly induce, entice, or procure another to
engage in sexual activity for hire in exchange for the person giving anything
of value to the other person.
      (3)   No person shall recklessly induce, entice, or procure another to
engage in sexual activity for hire in exchange for the person giving anything
of value to the other person if the other person is a person with a
developmental disability and the offender knows or has reasonable cause to
believe that the other person is a person with a developmental disability.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (b)(2) of this section is guilty of
engaging in prostitution, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever violates
division (b)(3) of this section is guilty of engaging in prostitution with a
person with a developmental disability, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. In sentencing an offender under this division for a
violation of division (b)(2) of this section, the court shall require the
offender to attend an education or treatment program aimed at preventing
persons from inducing, enticing, or procuring another to engage in sexual
activity for hire in exchange for the person giving anything of value to the
other person. Notwithstanding the fine specified in R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a) for
a misdemeanor of the first degree, in sentencing an offender under this
division for a violation of division (b)(2) of this section, the court may
impose upon the offender a fine of not more than $1,500.
(R.C. § 2907.231)
§ 666.08 SOLICITING.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly solicit another to engage in sexual activity
for hire in exchange for the person receiving anything of value from the other
person.
   (b)   No person, with knowledge that the person has tested positive as a
carrier of a virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, shall engage
in conduct in violation of division (a) of this section.
   (c)   As used in division (a) of this section, SEXUAL ACTIVITY FOR HIRE
means an implicit or explicit agreement to provide sexual activity in exchange
for anything of value paid to the person  engaging in such sexual activity, to
any person trafficking that person, or to any person associated with either
such person.
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
soliciting. Soliciting is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of engaging
in solicitation after a positive HIV test, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.24)
Statutory reference:
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27
§ 666.085 LOITERING TO ENGAGE IN SOLICITATION.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to solicit another to engage in sexual
activity for hire and while in or near a public place, shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Beckon to, stop or attempt to stop another;
      (2)   Engage or attempt to engage another in conversation;
      (3)   Stop or attempt to stop the operator of a vehicle or approach a
stationary vehicle;
      (4)   If the offender is the operator of or a passenger in a vehicle,
stop, attempt to stop, beckon to, attempt to beckon to, or entice another to
approach or enter the vehicle of which the offender is the operator or in which
the offender is the passenger; or
      (5)   Interfere with the free passage of another.
   (b)   No person, with knowledge that the person has tested positive as a
carrier of a virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, shall engage
in conduct in violation of division (a) of this section.
   (c)   For the purpose of division (a) of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   PUBLIC PLACE. Any of the following:
         A.   A street, road, highway, thoroughfare, bikeway, walkway,
sidewalk, bridge, alley, alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking lot or
transportation facility;
         B.   A doorway or entrance way to a building that fronts on a place
described in division (1)A. of this definition; and
         C.   A place not described in division (1)A. or (1)B. of this
definition that is open to the public.
      (2)   VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
loitering to engage in solicitation, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
loitering to engage in solicitation after a positive HIV test, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.241)
Statutory reference:
   Offenders with knowledge that they test HIV positive, felony, see R.C. §
2907.241(B)
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27
§ 666.09 PROSTITUTION.
   (a)   No person shall engage in sexual activity for hire.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of prostitution, a misdemeanor
of the third degree.
(R.C. § 2907.25)
Statutory reference:
   Offenders with knowledge that they test HIV positive, felony, see R.C. §
2907.25(B)
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27
§ 666.10 RULES OF EVIDENCE.
   (a)   In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a place is a
brothel, evidence as to the reputation of the place and as to the reputation of
the persons who inhabit or frequent it is admissible on the question of whether
the place is or is not a brothel.
   (b)   In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a person is a
prostitute, evidence as to the reputation of the person is admissible on the
question of whether the person is or is not a prostitute.
   (c)   In any prosecution for a violation of §§
666.07 to
666.09, proof of a prior conviction of the accused of any such offense or
substantially equivalent offense is admissible in support of the charge.
   (d)   The prohibition contained in R.C. § 2317.02(D) against testimony by a
husband or wife concerning communications between them does not apply, and the
accused’s spouse may testify concerning any such communication in any of the
following cases:
      (1)   When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of §
666.07 and the spouse testifying was the prostitute involved in the offense or
the person who used the offender’s premises to engage in sexual activity for
hire; or
      (2)   When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of §
666.08 or
666.09.
(R.C. § 2907.26)
§ 666.11 DISSEMINATING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (a)   No person, with knowledge of its character or content, shall
recklessly do any of following:
      (1)   Directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit,
rent or present to a juvenile any material or performance that is obscene or
harmful to juveniles;
      (2)   Offer or agree to sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide,
exhibit, rent or present to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles;
and
      (3)   While in the physical proximity of the juvenile or law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, allow any juvenile or law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile to review or peruse any material or view any live
performance that is harmful to juveniles.
   (b)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section
that involves material or a performance that is harmful to juveniles but not
obscene:
      (1)   The defendant is the parent, guardian or spouse of the juvenile
involved;
      (2)   The juvenile involved, at the time of the conduct in question, was
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian who, with knowledge of its
character, consented to the material or performance being furnished or
presented to the juvenile; and
      (3)   The juvenile exhibited to the defendant or his or her agent or
employee a draft card, driver’s license, birth record, marriage license or
other official or apparently official document purporting to show that the
juvenile was 18 years of age or over or married, and the person to whom the
document was exhibited did not otherwise have reasonable cause to believe that
the juvenile was under the age of 18 and unmarried.
   (c)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section,
involving material or a performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles,
that the material or performance was furnished or presented for a bona fide
medical, scientific, educational, governmental, judicial or other proper
purpose, by a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher,
librarian, clergy, prosecutor, judge or other proper person.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (b)(3) of this section, mistake of
age is not a defense to a charge under this section.
   (d)   (1)   A person directly sells, delivers, furnishes, disseminates,
provides, exhibits, rents or presents or directly offers or agrees to sell,
deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent or present material or a
performance to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles in violation of this section by means of an electronic method of
remotely transmitting information if the person knows or has reason to believe
that the person receiving the information is a juvenile or the group of persons
receiving the information are juveniles.
      (2)   A person remotely transmitting information by means of a method of
mass distribution does not directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate,
provide, exhibit, rent or present or directly offer or agree to sell, deliver,
furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent or present the material or
performance in question to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles in violation of this section if either of the following applies:
         A.   The person has inadequate information to know or have reason to
believe that a particular recipient of the information or offer is a juvenile;
and
         B.   The method of mass distribution does not provide the person the
ability to prevent a particular recipient from receiving the information.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disseminating matter
harmful to juveniles. If the material or performance involved is harmful to
juveniles except as otherwise provided in this division (e), a violation of
this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the material or
performance involved is obscene, violation of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.31)
§ 666.115 DISPLAYING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (a)   No person who has custody, control or supervision of a commercial
establishment, with knowledge of the character or content of the material
involved, shall display at the establishment any material that is harmful to
juveniles and that is open to view by juveniles as part of the invited general
public.
   (b)   It is not a violation of division (a) of this section if the material
in question is displayed by placing it behind “blinder racks” or similar
devices that cover at least the lower two-thirds of the material, if the
material in question is wrapped or placed behind the counter, or if the
material in question otherwise is covered or located so that the portion that
is harmful to juveniles is not open to the view of juveniles.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of displaying matter harmful
to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day during which the
offender is in violation of this section constitutes a separate offense.
(R.C. § 2907.311)
§ 666.12 PANDERING OBSCENITY (REPEALED).
Editor’s note:
   Section 666.12 was repealed as part of the 1996 updating and revision of
these Codified Ordinances because a violation of substantially equivalent state
law (R.C. § 2907.32) was made a felony by the Ohio General Assembly by Am. Sub.
S.B. No. 2, effective July 1, 1996.
§ 666.13 POSSESSION AND VIEWING OF OBSCENE MATERIAL INVOLVING A MINOR
(REPEALED).
Editor’s note:
   Section 666.13 was repealed as part of the 1996 updating and revision of
these Codified Ordinances because a violation of substantially equivalent state
law (R.C. §§ 2907.322 and 2907.323) was made a felony by the Ohio General
Assembly by Am. Sub. S.B. No. 2, effective July 1, 1996.
§ 666.14 DECEPTION TO OBTAIN MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (a)   No person, for the purpose of enabling a juvenile to obtain any
material or gain admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles,
shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is the parent, guardian or spouse
of the juvenile; or
      (2)   Furnish the juvenile with any identification or document purporting
to show that the juvenile is 18 years of age or over or married.
   (b)   No juvenile, for the purpose of obtaining any material or gaining
admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles, shall do either of
the following:
      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is 18 years of age or over or
married; or
      (2)   Exhibit any identification or document purporting to show that he
or she is 18 years of age or over or married.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of deception to obtain matter
harmful to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the second degree. A juvenile who
violates division (b) of this section shall be adjudged an unruly child, with
the disposition of the case as may be appropriate under R.C. Chapter 2151.
(R.C. § 2907.33)
§ 666.15 PRESUMPTIONS; NOTICE.
   (a)   An owner or manager, or agent or employee of an owner or manager, of a
bookstore, newsstand, theater or other commercial establishment engaged in
selling material or exhibiting performances, who, in the course of business
does any of the acts prohibited by §
666.11 is presumed to have knowledge of the character of the material or
performance involved if the owner, manager, or agent or employee of the owner
or manager has actual notice of the nature of the material or performance,
whether or not the owner, manager, or agent or employee of the owner or manager
has precise knowledge of its contents.
   (b)   Without limitation on the manner in which the notice may be given,
actual notice of the character of material or a performance may be given in
writing by the chief legal officer of the municipality. This notice, regardless
of the manner in which it is given, shall identify the sender, identify the
material or performance involved, state whether it is obscene or harmful to
juveniles, and bear the date of the notice.
   (c)   Section
666.11 does not apply to a motion picture operator or projectionist acting
within the scope of employment as an employee of the owner or manager of the
theater or other place for the showing of motion pictures to the general
public, and having no managerial responsibility or financial interest in the
operator’s or projectionist’s place of employment, other than wages.
   (d)   (1)   The provisions of §§
666.11,
666.115 and
666.14(a) do not apply to a person solely because the person provided access or
connection to or from an electronic method of remotely transferring information
not under that person’s control, including having provided capabilities that
are incidental to providing access or connection to or from the electronic
method of remotely transferring the information, and that do not include the
creation of the content of the material that is the subject of the access or
connection.
      (2)   Division (d)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
conspires with an entity actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of §
666.11,
666.115 or
666.14 or who knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.
      (3)   Division (d)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
provides access or connection to an electronic method of remotely transferring
information that is engaged in the violation of §
666.11,
666.115 or
666.14 and that contain content that person has selected and introduced into
the electronic method of remotely transferring information or content over
which that person exercises editorial control.
   (e)   An employer is not guilty of a violation of §
666.11,
666.115 or
666.14 based on the actions of an employee or agent of the employer unless the
employee’s or agent’s conduct is within the scope of the employee’s or agent’s
employment or agency, and the employer does either of the following:
      (1)   With knowledge of the employee’s or agent’s conduct, the employer
authorizes or ratifies the conduct; or
      (2)   The employer recklessly disregards the employee’s or agent’s
conduct.
   (f)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under §
666.11 or
666.115 as the section applies to an image transmitted through the internet or
other electronic method of remotely transmitting information that the person
charged with violating the section has taken, in good faith, reasonable,
effective and appropriate actions under the circumstances to restrict or
prevent access by juveniles to material that is harmful to juveniles, including
any method that is feasible under available technology.
(R.C. § 2907.35)
§ 666.16 DECLARATORY JUDGMENT.
   (a)   Without limitation on the persons otherwise entitled to bring an
action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2721, involving the
same issue, the following persons have standing to bring a declaratory judgment
action to determine whether particular materials or performances are obscene or
harmful to juveniles:
      (1)   The chief legal officer of the municipality if and when there is
reasonable cause to believe that R.C. § 2907.31 or 2907.32, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, is being or is about to be violated; and
      (2)   Any person who, pursuant to R.C. § 2907.35(B) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, has received notice in writing from the chief
legal officer stating that particular materials or performances are obscene or
harmful to juveniles.
   (b)   Any party to an action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to division
(a) of this section is entitled, upon the party’s request, to trial on the
merits within five days after joinder of the issues, and the court shall render
judgment within five days after trial is concluded.
   (c)   An action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to division (a) of this
section shall not be brought during the pendency of any civil action or
criminal prosecution when the character of the particular materials or
performances involved is at issue in the pending case, and either of the
following applies:
      (1)   Either of the parties to the action for a declaratory judgment is a
party to the pending case; or
      (2)   A judgment in the pending case will necessarily constitute res
judicata as to the character of the materials or performances involved.
   (d)   A civil action or criminal prosecution in which the character of
particular materials or performances is at issue, brought during the pendency
of an action for a declaratory judgment involving the same issue, shall be
stayed during the pendency of the action for a declaratory judgment.
   (e)   The fact that a violation of R.C. § 2907.31 or 2907.32, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, occurs prior to a judicial
determination of the character of the material or performance involved in the
violation does not relieve the offender of criminal liability for the
violation, even though prosecution may be stayed pending the judicial
determination.
(R.C. § 2907.36)
§ 666.17 INJUNCTION; ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   (a)   Where it appears that R.C. § 2907.31 or 2907.32, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, is being or is about to be violated, the chief
legal officer of the municipality may bring an action to enjoin the violation.
The defendant, upon his or her request, is entitled to trial on the merits
within five days after the joinder of the issues, and the court shall render
judgment within five days after the trial is concluded.
   (b)   Premises used or occupied for repeated violations of R.C. § 2907.31 or
2907.32, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, constitute a
nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2907.37)
§ 666.18 EXPOSURE OF PERFORMERS IN PUBLIC; EXEMPTION OF THEATRICAL
ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (a)   No person shall, while participating in any live act, demonstration or
exhibition in any public place, place open to the public or place open to
public view:
      (1)   His or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or
pubic hair region;
      (2)   Any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or
simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or pubic
hair region;
      (3)   Any portion of the female breast at or below the areola;
      (4)   Actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling on the breasts,
buttocks, anus or genitals; or
      (5)   Films or pictures depicting acts, a live performance of which would
be prohibited by this section.
   (b)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to a theater which is
primarily devoted to theatrical performances.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(Ord. 1993-42, passed 5-17-1993)
§ 666.19 AIDING AND ABETTING UNLAWFUL EXPOSURE.
   (a)   No person shall cause, permit, procure, counsel or assist any person
to expose or simulate exposure as prohibited in §
666.18.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(Ord. 1993-43, passed 5-17-1993)
§ 666.20 UNLAWFUL OPERATION OF VIEWING BOOTHS DEPICTING SEXUAL CONDUCT.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. An entity that is open to the public and
to which either of the following applies:
         A.   It has a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade
of the sale, rental or viewing of visual materials or performances depicting
sexual conduct; or
         B.   It has as a principal business purpose the sale, rental or
viewing of visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct.
      (2)   VISUAL MATERIALS OR PERFORMANCES. Films, videos, CD-ROM discs,
streaming video or other motion pictures.
   (b)   No person who has custody, control or supervision of a commercial
establishment, with knowledge of the character of the visual material or
performance involved, shall knowingly permit the use of, or offer the use of,
viewing booths, stalls or partitioned portions of a room located in the
commercial establishment for the purpose of viewing visual materials or
performances depicting sexual conduct unless both of the following apply:
      (1)   The inside of each booth, stall or partitioned room is visible
from, and at least one side of each booth, stall or partitioned room is open
to, a continuous and contiguous main aisle or hallway that is open to the
public areas of the commercial establishment and is not obscured by any
curtain, door or other covering or enclosure; and
      (2)   No booth, stall or partitioned room is designed, constructed,
pandered or allowed to be used for the purpose of encouraging or facilitating
nudity or sexual activity on the part of or between patrons or members of the
public, and no booth, stall or partitioned room has any aperture, hole or
opening for the purpose of encouraging or facilitating nudity or sexual
activity.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that
either of the following applies to the involved visual materials or
performances:
      (1)   The visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct are
disseminated or presented for a bona fide medical, scientific, educational,
religious, governmental, judicial or other proper purpose and by or to a
physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher, person pursuing bona
fide studies or research, librarian, member of the clergy, prosecutor, judge or
other person having a proper interest in the visual materials or performances;
or
      (2)   The visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct,
taken as a whole, would be found by a reasonable person to have serious
literary, artistic, political or scientific value or are presented or
disseminated in good faith for a serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific purpose and are not pandered for their prurient appeal.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting unlawful
operation of viewing booths depicting sexual conduct, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(R.C. § 2907.38)
§ 666.21 JUVENILES ON THE PREMISES OF ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
PROHIBITED.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   ADULT ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
in which coin-operated, slug-operated or electronically, electrically or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other
image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five or
fewer persons per machine at any one time, and in which the images so displayed
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting or
describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (2)   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE.
         A.   A commercial establishment that, for any form of consideration,
has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-trade in, derives a
significant or substantial portion of its revenues from, devotes a significant
or substantial portion of its interior business or advertising to, or maintains
a substantial section of its sales or display space for the sale or rental of
any of the following:
            1.   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides or
other visual representations, that are characterized by their emphasis upon the
exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas; and
            2.   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are designed for
use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of self or others.
         B.   Includes a commercial establishment as defined in R.C. § 2907.38.
An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve
the offering for sale, rental or viewing of materials exhibiting or describing
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and still be
categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store.
The existence of other principal business purposes does not exempt an
establishment from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store
or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes is
offering for sale or rental, for some form of consideration, such materials
that exhibit or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
      (3)   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle club
or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are
served, that regularly features any of the following:
         A.   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity;
         B.   Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; and
         C.   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
      (4)   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT. The sale, rental or exhibition, for any form
of consideration, of books, films, video cassettes, magazines, periodicals or
live performances that are characterized by an emphasis on the exposure or
display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activity.
      (5)   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT. An adult arcade, adult
bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, nude or semi- nude model studio or sexual
encounter establishment. An establishment in which a medical practitioner,
psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the state
engages in medically approved and recognized therapy, including but not limited
to massage therapy, as regulated pursuant to R.C. § 4731.15, is not an ADULT
ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT.
      (6)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic
reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon
the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas are regularly shown for any form of consideration.
      (7)   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment that, for any form of consideration, regularly
features persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity or live
performances that are characterized by their emphasis upon the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
      (8)   DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY THEIR EMPHASIS UPON. The dominant
or principal character and theme of the object described by this phrase. For
instance, when the phrase refers to films “that are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas,” the films so described are
those whose dominant or principal character and theme are the exhibition or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (9)   NUDE OR SEMI-NUDE MODEL STUDIO. Any place where a person, who
regularly appears in a state of nudity or semi-nudity, is provided for money or
any other form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons. A modeling
class or studio is not a NUDE OR SEMI-NUDE MODEL STUDIO and is not subject to
this chapter if it is operated in any of the following ways:
         A.   By a college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation;
         B.   By a private college or university that maintains and operates
educational programs, the credits for which are transferable to a college or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation; and
         C.   In a structure that has no sign visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising indicating that a person appearing in a
state of nudity or semi-nudity is available for viewing, if in order to
participate in a class in the structure, a student must enroll at least three
days in advance of the class and if not more than one nude or semi-nude model
is on the premises at any one time.
      (10)   NUDITY, NUDE or STATE OF NUDITY. The showing of the human male or
female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than
a fully opaque covering; or the showing of the female breasts with less than a
fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple.
      (11)   REGULARLY FEATURES or REGULARLY SHOWN. A consistent or substantial
course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a
substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a part of the
ongoing business of the adult entertainment establishment.
      (12)   SEMI-NUDE or STATE OF SEMI-NUDITY. A state of dress in which
opaque clothing covers not more than the genitals, pubic region and nipple of
the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps
or devices.
      (13)   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT.
         A.   A business or commercial establishment that, as one of its
principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration a place where
either of the following occur:
            1.   Two or more persons may congregate, associate or consort for
the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities; or
            2.   Two or more persons appear nude or semi-nude for the purpose
of displaying their nude or semi-nude bodies for their receipt of consideration
or compensation in any type or form.
         B.   An establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist,
psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in
medically approved and recognized therapy, including but not limited to massage
therapy, as regulated pursuant to R.C. § 4731.15, is not a SEXUAL ENCOUNTER
ESTABLISHMENT.
      (14)   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. The cleft of the buttocks, anus, male
or female genitals, or the female breast.
      (15)   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Any of the following:
         A.   Sex acts, normal or perverted, or actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or
         B.   Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the
activities described in division A. of this definition.
   (b)   No person knowingly shall allow an individual, including, but not
limited to, a patron, customer or employee, who is under 18 years of age on the
premises of an adult entertainment establishment.
   (c)   No individual who is under 18 years of age knowingly shall show or
give false information concerning the individual’s name or age, or other false
identification, for the purpose of gaining entrance to an adult entertainment
establishment.
   (d)   A person shall not be found guilty of a violation of division (b) of
this section if the person raises as an affirmative defense and if the jury or,
in a nonjury trial, the court finds the person has established by a
preponderance of the evidence, all of the following:
      (1)   The individual gaining entrance to the adult entertainment
establishment exhibited to an operator, employee, agent or independent
contractor of the adult entertainment establishment a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 and
4507.52 showing that the individual was then at least 18 years of age;
      (2)   The operator, employee, agent or independent contractor made a bona
fide effort to ascertain the true age of the individual gaining entrance to the
adult entertainment establishment by checking the identification presented, at
the time of entrance, to ascertain that the description on the identification
compared with the appearance of the individual and that the identification had
not been altered in any way; and
      (3)   The operator, employee, agent or independent contractor had reason
to believe that the individual gaining entrance to the adult entertainment
establishment was at least 18 years of age.
   (e)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense described in
division (d) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or the
Deputy Registrar who issued a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50 and 4507.52 shall be permitted to
submit certified copies of the records, in the Registrar’s or Deputy
Registrar’s possession, of the issuance of the license or identification card
in question, in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of the Bureau of Motor
Vehicles in the action.
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
permitting a juvenile on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment,
a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day a person violates this division (f)
constitutes a separate offense.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of use by a
juvenile of false information to enter an adult entertainment establishment, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if committed by
an adult.
(R.C. § 2907.39)
§ 666.22 PROHIBITION ON RESIDENCY.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   REGISTERED OFFENDER. Any person who is required to register
pursuant to the terms of R.C. §§ 2950.04 through 2950.06, as the same may be
amended from time to time.
      (2)   RECREATIONAL FACILITIES. All land and buildings used for park,
recreational or educational purposes, including, but not limited to, the
Community Center, the Community Park, the Skate Park, any library, all
playgrounds, ball fields, public pools, park pavilions, preschools, child
daycare centers and school premises.
   (b)   No registered offender shall reside within 1,000 feet of any
recreational facility.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is subject to a cause of action for
injunctive relief. Said action shall be brought by the Director of Law to
enjoin the registered offender from violating this section. The city shall not
be required to prove irreparable harm in order to obtain the relief.
(Ord. 2007-216, passed 9-17-2007)
§ 666.23 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES; ILLEGAL OPERATION AND ACTIVITY.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE. A commercial establishment
that has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-trade or
inventory in, derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues
from, devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or
advertising to, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display
space for the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of books,
magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides or other visual
representations, that are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (2)   ADULT CABARET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
      (3)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic
reproductions that are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown
to more than five individuals for any form of consideration.
      (4)   CHARACTERIZED BY. Describing the essential character or quality of
an item.
      (5)   EMPLOYEE. Any individual who performs any service on the premises
of a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis,
regardless of whether the individual is denominated an employee, independent
contractor, agent or otherwise, but does not include an individual exclusively
on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery
of goods to the premises.
      (6)   NUDITY, NUDE or STATE OF NUDITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2907.39.
      (7)   OPERATOR. Any individual on the premises of a sexually oriented
business who causes the business to function or who puts or keeps in operation
the business or who is authorized to manage the business or exercise overall
operational control of the business premises.
      (8)   PATRON. Any individual on the premises of a sexually oriented
business except for any of the following:
         A.   An operator or an employee of the sexually oriented business;
         B.   An individual who is on the premises exclusively for repair or
maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises; or
         C.   A public employee or a volunteer firefighter emergency medical
services worker acting within the scope of the public employee’s or volunteer’s
duties as a public employee or volunteer.
      (9)   PREMISES. The real property on which the sexually oriented business
is located and all appurtenances to the real property, including, but not
limited to, the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways and
parking lots or parking garages adjacent to the real property under the
ownership, control or supervision of the owner or operator of the sexually
oriented business.
      (10)   REGULARLY. Consistently or repeatedly.
      (11)   SEMI-NUDE or STATE OF SEMI-NUDITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2907.39.
      (12)   SEXUAL DEVICE. Any three-dimensional object designed and marketed
for stimulation of the male or female human genitals or anus or female breasts
or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others, including, but not
limited to, dildos, vibrators, penis pumps and physical representations of the
human genital organs, but not including devices primarily intended for
protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy.
      (13)   SEXUAL DEVICE SHOP. A commercial establishment that regularly
features sexual devices, but not including any pharmacy, drug store, medical
clinic or establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or healthcare
products or services, and not including any commercial establishment that does
not restrict access to its premises by reason of age.
      (14)   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. A business or commercial enterprise that,
as one of its principal business purposes, purports to offer for any form of
consideration physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
individuals of the opposite sex when one or more of the individuals is nude or
semi-nude.
      (15)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult bookstore, adult video store,
adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, sexual device shop or sexual
encounter center, but does not include a business solely by reason of its
showing, selling or renting materials that may depict sex.
      (16)   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Includes human genitals, pubic region
and buttocks and the human female breast below a point immediately above the
top of the areola.
      (17)   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Sexual intercourse, oral copulation,
masturbation or sodomy, or excretory functions as a part of or in connection
with any of these activities.
   (b)   No sexually oriented business shall be or remain open for business
between midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day, except that a sexually oriented
business that holds a liquor permit pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4303 may remain
open until the hour specified in that permit if it does not conduct, offer or
allow sexually oriented entertainment activity in which the performers appear
nude.
   (c)   (1)   No patron who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family
shall knowingly touch any employee while that employee is nude or semi-nude or
touch the clothing of any employee while that employee is nude or semi-nude.
      (2)   No employee who regularly appears nude or semi-nude on the premises
of a sexually oriented business, while on the premises of that sexually
oriented business and while nude or semi-nude, shall knowingly touch a patron
who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who
is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or the clothing of a patron
who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who
is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or allow a patron who is not
a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who is not a
member of the employee’s immediate family to touch the employee or the clothing
of the employee.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of illegally
operating a sexually oriented business, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of illegal
sexually oriented activity in a sexually oriented business. If the offender
touches a specified anatomical area of the patron or employee, or the clothing
covering a specified anatomical area, a violation of division (c) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender does not touch a
specified anatomical area of the patron or employee, or the clothing covering a
specified anatomical area, a violation of division (c) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2907.40)
Statutory reference:
   State indemnification for certain municipal liability stemming from local
adult business regulations, see R.C. § 715.55
§ 666.24 UNLAWFUL ADVERTISING OF MASSAGE.
   (a)   No person, by means of a statement, solicitation, or offer in a print
or electronic publication, sign, placard, storefront display, or other medium,
shall advertise massage, relaxation massage, any other massage technique or
method, or any related service, with the suggestion or promise of sexual
activity.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful advertising of
massage, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (c)   Nothing in this section prevents the municipality from enacting any
regulation of the advertising of massage further than and in addition to the
provisions of divisions (a) and (b) of this section.
   (d)   As used in this section, SEXUAL ACTIVITY has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2907.01.
(R.C. § 2927.17)
§ 666.25 NONCONSENSUAL DISSEMINATION OF PRIVATE SEXUAL IMAGES.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   CABLE SERVICE PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.01.
      (2)   DIRECT-TO-HOME SATELLITE SERVICE. Has the meaning defined in 47
U.S.C. § 303, as amended.
      (3)   DISSEMINATE. Means to post, distribute, or publish on a computer
device, computer network, web site, or other electronic device or medium of
communication.
      (4)   IMAGE. Means a photograph, film, videotape, digital recording, or
other depiction or portrayal of a person.
      (5)   INTERACTIVE COMPUTER SERVICE. Has the meaning defined in the
"Telecommunications Act of 1996", 47 U.S.C. § 230, as amended.
      (6)   INTERNET PROVIDER. Means a provider of internet service, including
all of the following:
         A.   Broadband service, however defined or classified by the Federal
Communications Commission;
         B.   Information service or telecommunications service, both as
defined in the "Telecommunications Act of 1996", 47 U.S.C. § 153, as amended;
         C.   Internet protocol-enabled services, as defined in R.C. § 4927.01.
      (7)   MOBILE SERVICE. Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153, as
amended.
      (8)   SEXUAL ACT. Means any of the following:
         A.   Sexual activity;
         B.   Masturbation;
         C.   An act involving a bodily substance that is performed for the
purpose of sexual arousal or gratification;
         D.   Sado-masochistic abuse.
      (9)   TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER. Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C. §
153, as amended.
      (10) VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly disseminate an image of another person if
all of the following apply:
      (1)   The person in the image is 18 years of age or older.
      (2)   The person in the image can be identified from the image itself or
from information displayed in connection with the image and the offender
supplied the identifying information.
      (3)   The person in the image is in a state of nudity or is engaged in a
sexual act.
      (4)   The image is disseminated without consent from the person in the
image.
      (5)   The image is disseminated with intent to harm the person in the
image.
   (c)   This section does not prohibit the dissemination of an image if any of
the following apply:
      (1)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of a criminal
investigation that is otherwise lawful.
      (2)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of, or in connection
with, the reporting of unlawful conduct.
      (3)   The image is part of a news report or commentary or an artistic or
expressive work, such as a performance, work of art, literary work, theatrical
work, musical work, motion picture, film, or audiovisual work.
      (4)   The image is disseminated by a law enforcement officer, or a
corrections officer or guard in a detention facility, acting within the scope
of the person's official duties.
      (5)   The image is disseminated for another lawful public purpose.
      (6)   The person in the image is knowingly and willingly in a state of
nudity or engaged in a sexual act and is knowingly and willingly in a location
in which the person does not have a reasonable expectation of privacy.
      (7)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of medical treatment or
examination.
   (d)   The following entities are not liable for a violation of this section
solely as a result of an image or other information provided by another person:
      (1)   A provider of interactive computer service;
      (2)   A mobile service;
      (3)   A telecommunications carrier;
      (4)   An internet provider;
      (5)   A cable service provider;
      (6)   A direct-to-home satellite service;
      (7)   A video service provider.
   (e)   Any conduct that is a violation of this section and any other section
of this Code or the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, the
other section, or both sections.
   (f)   (1)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (f)(1)B., (f)
(1)C., or (f)(1)D. of this section, whoever violates this section is guilty of
nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images, a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of this section or any substantially equivalent state or
local law, nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images is a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
         C.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section or any substantially
equivalent state or local law, nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual
images is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         D.   If the offender is under 18 years of age and the person in the
image is not more than five years older than the offender, the offender shall
not be prosecuted under this section.
      (2)   In addition to any other penalty or disposition authorized or
required by law, the court may order any person who is convicted of a violation
of this section or who is adjudicated delinquent by reason of a violation of
this section to criminally forfeit all of the following property to the state
under R.C. Chapter 2981:
         A.   Any profits or proceeds and any property the person has acquired
or maintained in violation of this section that the sentencing court determines
to have been acquired or maintained as a result of the violation;
         B.   Any interest in, securities of, claim against, or property or
contractual right of any kind affording a source of influence over any
enterprise that the person has established, operated, controlled, or conducted
in violation of this section that the sentencing court determines to have been
acquired or maintained as a result of the violation.
   (g)   A victim of a violation of this section may commence a civil cause of
action against the offender, as described in R.C. § 2307.66.
(R.C. § 2917.211)
§ 666.99 SENTENCING FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED OFFENSES; SEXUAL PREDATORS;
REGISTRATION.
   (a)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented offense or
child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on or after
January 1, 1997, and the offender is a tier III sex offender/child-victim
offender relative to the offense or the offense is any offense listed in R.C. §
2901.07(D)(1) to (D)(3), the judge shall include in the offender’s sentence a
statement that the offender is a tier III sex offender/child-victim offender,
shall comply with the requirements of R.C. § 2950.03, and shall require the
offender to submit to a DNA specimen collection procedure pursuant to R.C. §
2901.07.
   (b)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented offense or a
child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on or after
January 1, 1997, the judge shall include in the sentence a summary of the
offender’s duties imposed under R.C. §§ 2950.04, 2950.041, 2950.05 and 2950.06,
and the duration of the duties. The judge shall inform the offender, at the
time of sentencing, of those duties and of their duration. If required under
R.C. § 2950.03(A)(2), the judge shall perform the duties specified in that
section or, if required under R.C. § 2950.03(A)(6), the judge shall perform the
duties specified in that division.
(R.C. § 2929.23)
CHAPTER 672: WEAPONS AND EXPLOSIVES
Section
   
672.01   Definitions
   
672.02   Carrying concealed weapons
   
672.025   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention
   
672.03   Using weapons while intoxicated
   
672.04   Improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle
   
672.05   License or permit to possess dangerous ordnance
   
672.06   Failure to secure dangerous ordnance or firearm
   
672.07   Unlawful transactions in weapons
   
672.071   Facsimile firearms
   
672.075   Display for sale of dangerous weapons
   
672.08   Improperly furnishing firearms to a minor (Repealed)
   
672.085   Underage purchase of a firearm or handgun
   
672.09   Pointing and discharging firearms and other weapons
   
672.095   Discharge of a firearm on or near prohibited premises
   
672.10   Fireworks
   
672.11   Sale of knives to minors
   
672.12   Endangering aircraft and airport operations
   
672.13   Possessing criminal tools
   
672.14   Possession of an object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school
safety zone
   
672.15   Concealed handgun licenses; possession of a revoked or suspended
license; additional restrictions; posting of signs prohibiting possession
   
672.16   Defaced firearms
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Arson, see §
642.09
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Firing ranges, see
Ch. 818
   Hunting and trapping regulated, see §
618.12
   Posting firearm warning signs, see §
612.06
   Prohibiting sales of firearms and explosives in riot areas, see R.C. §
3761.16
   Reporting gunshot wounds, see §
606.12
   Vehicles transporting explosives, see §
440.04
§ 672.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   ACTIVE DUTY. Has the same meaning as defined in 10 U.S.C. § 101.
   (b)   ALIEN REGISTRATION NUMBER. The number issued by the United States
Citizenship and Immigration Services Agency that is located on the alien’s
permanent resident card and may also be commonly referred to as the “USCIS
number” or the “alien number”.
   (c)   AUTOMATIC FIREARM. Any firearm designed or specially adapted to fire a
succession of cartridges with a single function of the trigger.
   (d)   BALLISTIC KNIFE. A knife with a detachable blade that is propelled by
a spring-operated mechanism.
   (e)   CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE or LICENSE TO CARRY A CONCEALED HANDGUN.
      (1)   Means, subject to division (2) of this definition, a license or
temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun issued under R.C. §
2923.125 or R.C. § 2923.1213 or a license to carry a concealed handgun issued
by another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a reciprocity
agreement under R.C. § 109.69.
      (2)   A reference in any provision of this Code to a concealed handgun
license issued under R.C. § 2923.125 or a license to carry a concealed handgun
issued under R.C. § 2923.125 means only a license of the type that is specified
in that section. A reference in any provision of this Code to a concealed
handgun license issued under R.C. § 2923.1213, a license to carry a concealed
handgun issued under R.C. § 2923.1213, or a license to carry a concealed
handgun on a temporary emergency basis means only a license of the type that is
specified in R.C. § 2923.1213. A reference in any provision of this Code to a
concealed handgun license issued by another state or a license to carry a
concealed handgun issued by another state means only a license issued by
another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a reciprocity
agreement under R.C. § 109.69.
   (f)   DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
      (1)   Any of the following, except as provided in division (c)(2) of this
definition:
         A.   Any automatic or sawed-off firearm, zip-gun or ballistic knife;
         B.   Any explosive device or incendiary device;
         C.   Nitroglycerin, nitrocellulose, nitrostarch, PETN, cyclonite, TNT,
picric acid and other high explosives; amatol, tritonal, tetrytol, pentolite,
pecretol, cyclotol and other high explosive compositions; plastic explosives;
dynamite, blasting gelatin, gelatin dynamite, sensitized ammonium nitrate,
liquid-oxygen blasting explosives, blasting powder and other blasting agents;
and any other explosive substance having sufficient brisance or power to be
particularly suitable for use as a military explosive, or for use in mining,
quarrying, excavating or demolitions;
         D.   Any firearm, rocket launcher, mortar, artillery piece, grenade,
mine, bomb, torpedo or similar weapon, designed and manufactured for military
purposes, and the ammunition for that weapon;
         E.   Any firearm muffler or suppressor;
         F.   Any combination of parts that is intended by the owner for use in
converting any firearm or other device into a dangerous ordnance; or
         G.   Any captive bolt device that is authorized for use only in
culling excessive deer under § 618.125.
(Ord. 2002-257, passed 10-18-2004)
      (2)   DANGEROUS ORDNANCE does not include any of the following:
         A.   Any firearm, including a military weapon and the ammunition for
that weapon, and regardless of its actual age, that employs a percussion cap or
other obsolete ignition system, or that is designed and safe for use only with
black powder;
         B.   Any pistol, rifle or shotgun, designed or suitable for sporting
purposes, including a military weapon as issued or as modified, and the
ammunition for that weapon, unless the firearm is an automatic or sawed-off
firearm;
         C.   Any cannon or other artillery piece that, regardless of its
actual age, is of a type in accepted use prior to 1887, has no mechanical,
hydraulic, pneumatic or other system for absorbing recoil and returning the
tube into battery without displacing the carriage, and is designed and safe for
use only with black powder;
         D.   Black powder, priming quills and percussion caps possessed and
lawfully used to fire a cannon of a type defined in division (2)C. of this
definition during displays, celebrations, organized matches or shoots, and
target practice, and smokeless and black powder, primers and percussion caps
possessed and lawfully used as a propellant or ignition device in small-arms or
small-arms ammunition;
         E.   Dangerous ordnance that is inoperable or inert and cannot readily
be rendered operable or activated, and that is kept as a trophy, souvenir,
curio or museum piece; and
         F.   Any device that is expressly excepted from the definition of a
destructive device pursuant to the Gun Control Act of 1968, 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)
(4), as amended, and regulations issued under that Act.
   (g)   DEADLY WEAPON. Any instrument, device or thing capable of inflicting
death, and designed or specially adapted for use as a weapon, or possessed,
carried or used as a weapon.
   (h)   EXPLOSIVE. Any chemical compound, mixture or device, the primary or
common purpose of which is to function by explosion. EXPLOSIVE includes all
materials that have been classified as division 1.1, division 1.2, division 1.3
or division 1.4 explosives by the United States Department of Transportation in
its regulations and includes but is not limited to dynamite, black powder,
pellet powders, initiating explosives, blasting caps, electric blasting caps,
safety fuses, fuse igniters, squibs, cordeau detonant fuses, instantaneous
fuses, and igniter cords and igniters. EXPLOSIVES does not include FIREWORKS,
as defined in R.C. § 3743.01, or any substance or material otherwise meeting
the definition of EXPLOSIVE set forth in this section that is manufactured,
sold, possessed, transported, stored or used in any activity described in R.C.
§ 3743.80, provided the activity is conducted in accordance with all applicable
laws, rules and regulations, including but not limited to the provisions of
R.C. § 3743.80 and the rules of the Fire Marshal adopted pursuant to R.C. §
3737.82.
   (i)   EXPLOSIVE DEVICE. Any device designed or specially adapted to cause
physical harm to persons or property by means of an explosion, and consisting
of an explosive substance or agency and a means to detonate it. EXPLOSIVE
DEVICE includes without limitation any bomb, any explosive demolition device,
any blasting cap or detonator containing an explosive charge and any pressure
vessel that has been knowingly tampered with or arranged so as to explode.
   (j)   FIREARM.
      (1)   Any deadly weapon capable of expelling or propelling one or more
projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible propellant. FIREARM
includes an unloaded firearm, and any firearm that is inoperable but that can
readily be rendered operable.
      (2)   When determining whether a firearm is capable of expelling or
propelling one or more projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible
propellant, the trier of fact may rely upon circumstantial evidence, including,
but not limited to, the representations and actions of the individual
exercising control over the firearm.
   (k)   HANDGUN. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm that has a short stock and is designed to be held and
fired by the use of a single hand; and
      (2)   Any combination of parts from which a firearm of a type described
in division (h)(1) of this definition can be assembled.
   (l)   INCENDIARY DEVICE. Any firebomb, and any device designed or specially
adapted to cause physical harm to persons or property by means of fire, and
consisting of an incendiary substance or agent and a means to ignite it.
   (m)   MISDEMEANOR PUNISHABLE BY IMPRISONMENT FOR A TERM EXCEEDING ONE YEAR.
The phrase does not include any of the following:
      (1)   Any federal or state offense pertaining to antitrust violations,
unfair trade practices, restraints of trade, or other similar offenses relating
to the regulation of business practices;
      (2)   Any misdemeanor offense punishable by a term of imprisonment of two
years or less.
   (n)   SAWED-OFF FIREARM. A shotgun with a barrel less than 18 inches long,
or a rifle with a barrel less than 16 inches long, or a shotgun or rifle less
than 26 inches long overall. SAWED-OFF FIREARM does not include any firearm
with an overall length of at least 26 inches that is approved for sale by the
Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives under the "Gun
Control Act of 1968", 82 Stat. 1213, 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(3), but that is found
by the Bureau not to be regulated under the "National Firearms Act", 68A Stat.
725 (1934), 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a).
   (o)   SEMI-AUTOMATIC FIREARM. Any firearm designed or specially adapted to
fire a single cartridge and automatically chamber a succeeding cartridge ready
to fire, with a single function of the trigger.
   (p)   VALID CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE or VALID LICENSE TO CARRY A CONCEALED
HANDGUN. A concealed handgun license that is currently valid, that is not under
a suspension under R.C. § 2923.128(A)(1), under R.C. § 2923.1213, or under a
suspension provision of the state other than this state in which the license
was issued, and that has not been revoked under R.C. § 2923.128(B)(1), under
R.C. § 2923.1213, or under a revocation provision of the state other than this
state in which the license was issued.
   (q)   ZIP-GUN. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm of crude and extemporized manufacture;
      (2)   Any device, including without limitation a starter’s pistol, not
designed as a firearm, but that is specially adapted for use as a firearm; and
      (3)   Any industrial tool, signaling device or safety device, not
designed as a firearm, but that as designed is capable of use as such, when
possessed, carried or used as a firearm.
(R.C. § 2923.11)
§ 672.02 CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly carry or have, concealed on the person’s
person or concealed ready at hand, any of the following:
      (1)   A deadly weapon other than a handgun;
      (2)   A handgun other than a dangerous ordnance; or
      (3)   A dangerous ordnance.
   (b)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license shall do any
of the following:
      (1)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, before or at the time a law enforcement officer
asks if the person is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to disclose
that the person then is carrying a concealed handgun, provided that it is not a
violation of this division if the person fails to disclose that fact to an
officer during the stop and the person already has notified another officer of
that fact during the same stop;
      (2)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to keep the person’s hands in
plain sight at any time after any law enforcement officer begins approaching
the person while stopped and before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless
the failure is pursuant to and in accordance with directions given by a law
enforcement officer;
      (3)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose, if the
person is carrying a concealed handgun, and if the person is approached by any
law enforcement officer while stopped, knowingly remove or attempt to remove
the loaded handgun from the holster, pocket or other place in which the person
is carrying it, knowingly grasp or hold the loaded handgun, or knowingly have
contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with the person’s hands or
fingers at any time after the law enforcement officer begins approaching and
before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the person removes, attempts
to remove, grasps, holds or has contact with the loaded handgun pursuant to and
in accordance with directions given by the law enforcement officer; and
      (4)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any
lawful order of any law enforcement officer given while the person is stopped,
including, but not limited to, a specific order to the person to keep the
person’s hands in plain sight.
   (c)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         A.   An officer, agent or employee of this or any other state or the
United States, or to a law enforcement officer, who is authorized to carry
concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry handguns and
is acting within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s or employee’s duties;
         B.   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry
handguns, and who is subject to and in compliance with the requirements of R.C.
§ 109.801, unless the appointing authority of the person has expressly
specified that the exemption provided in this division (c)(1)B. does not apply
to the person;
         C.   A person’s transportation or storage of a firearm, other than a
firearm described in R.C. § 2923.11(G) to (M), in a motor vehicle for any
lawful purpose if the firearm is not on the actor’s person; and
         D.   A person’s storage or possession of a firearm, other than a
firearm described in R.C. § 2923.11(G) to (M), in the actor’s own home for any
lawful purpose.
      (2)   Division (a)(2) of this section does not apply to any person who
has been issued a concealed handgun license that is valid at the time of the
alleged carrying or possession of a handgun or who, at the time of the alleged
carrying or possession of a handgun, is an active duty member of the armed
forces of the United States and is carrying a valid military identification
card and documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets
or exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), unless
the person knowingly is in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (a)(1) of this
section of carrying or having control of a weapon other than a handgun and
other than a dangerous ordnance, that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by
law from having the weapon, and that any of the following applies:
      (1)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for
defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in or was going to or from the
actor’s lawful business or occupation, which business or occupation was of a
character or was necessarily carried on in a manner or at a time or place as to
render the actor particularly susceptible to criminal attack, such as would
justify a prudent person in going armed;
      (2)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for
defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in a lawful activity and had
reasonable cause to fear a criminal attack upon the actor, a member of the
actor’s family, or the actor’s home, such as would justify a prudent person in
going armed; and
      (3)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for any
lawful purpose and while in the actor’s own home.
   (e)   (1)   No person who is charged with a violation of this section shall
be required to obtain a concealed handgun license as a condition for the
dismissal of the charge.
      (2)   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty to, or
has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (b)(1) of this section as it
existed prior to June 13, 2022, the person may file an application under R.C. §
2953.35 requesting the expungement of the record of conviction.
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of carrying concealed
weapons. Except as otherwise provided in this division (f)(1) or divisions (f)
(2), (f)(6), and (f)(7) of this section, carrying concealed weapons in
violation of division (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
Except as otherwise provided in this division (f)(1) or divisions (f)(2), (f)
(6), and (f)(7) of this section, if the offender previously has been convicted
of a violation of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance or of any offense of violence, if the weapon involved is a
firearm that is either loaded or for which the offender has ammunition ready at
hand, or if the weapon involved is dangerous ordnance, carrying concealed
weapons in violation of division (a) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. Except as otherwise provided in
divisions (f)(2), (f)(6), and (f)(7) of this section, if the offense is
committed aboard an aircraft, or with purpose to carry a concealed weapon
aboard an aircraft, regardless of the weapon involved, carrying concealed
weapons in violation of division (a) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A person shall not be arrested for a violation of division (a)(2)
of this section solely because the person does not promptly produce a valid
concealed handgun license. If a person is arrested for a violation of division
(a)(2) of this section and is convicted of or pleads guilty to the violation,
the offender shall be punished as follows:
         A.   The offender shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor if both of
the following apply:
            1.   Within ten days after the arrest, the offender presents a
concealed handgun license, which license was valid at the time of the arrest to
the law enforcement agency that employs the arresting officer; and
            2.   At the time of the arrest, the offender was not knowingly in a
place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
         B.   The offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined
$500 if all of the following apply:
            1.   The offender previously had been issued a concealed handgun
license, and that license expired within the two years immediately preceding
the arrest;
            2.   Within 45 days after the arrest, the offender presents a
concealed handgun license to the law enforcement agency that employed the
arresting officer, and the offender waives in writing the offender’s right to a
speedy trial on the charge of the violation that is provided in R.C. § 2945.71;
and
            3.   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
not knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
         C.   If divisions (f)(2)A. and (f)(2)B. and (f)(6) of this section do
not apply, the offender shall be punished under division (f)(1) or (f)(7) of
this section.
      (3)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (b)(1) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (4)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (b)(2) or (b)
(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(b)(2) or (b)(4) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. In
addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of division (b)(2) or (b)(4) of this section, the offender’s concealed handgun
license shall be suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2).
      (5)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (b)(3) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (6)   If a person being arrested for a violation of division (a)(2) of
this section is an active duty m ember of the armed forces of the United States
and is carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of
successful completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training
requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), and if at the time of the
violation the person was not knowingly in a place described in R.C. 2923.126
(B), the officer shall not arrest the person for a violation of that division.
If the person is not able to promptly produce a valid military identification
card and documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets
or exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1) and if
the person is not in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B), the officer shall
issue a citation and the offender shall be assessed a civil penalty of not more
than $500. The citation shall be automatically dismissed and the civil penalty
shall not be assessed if both of the following apply:
         A.   Within ten days after the issuance of the citation, the offender
presents a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), which were both valid at the time of the
issuance of the citation to the law enforcement agency that employs the citing
officer.
         B.   At the time of the citation, the offender was not knowingly in a
place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
      (7)   If a person being arrested for a violation of division (a)(2) of
this section is knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B)(5) and is
not authorized to carry a handgun or have a handgun concealed on the person’s
person or concealed ready at hand under that division, the penalty shall be as
follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person
produces a valid concealed handgun license within ten days after the arrest and
has not previously been convicted or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(a)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a minor misdemeanor;
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (a)
(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
         C.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of division
(a)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree;
         D.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of
division (a)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, or convicted of or pleaded guilty to any offense of
violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for
which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is a
dangerous ordnance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (g)   If a law enforcement officer stops a person to question the person
regarding a possible violation of this section, for a traffic stop, or for any
other law enforcement purpose, if the person surrenders a firearm to the
officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the officer,
and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this section
or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise prohibited by
law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not contraband, the officer
shall return the firearm to the person at the termination of the stop. If a
court orders a law enforcement officer to return a firearm to a person pursuant
to the requirement set forth in this division (g), R.C. § 2923.163(B) applies.
   (h)   For purposes of this section, “deadly weapon” or “weapon” does not
include any knife, razor, or cutting instrument if the instrument was not used
as a weapon.
(R.C. § 2923.12)
Statutory reference:
   Carrying concealed handguns, licensing through County Sheriff, see R.C. §§
2923.124 et seq.
   Concealed carry by a qualifying adult, see R.C. § 2923.111
   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance on school
premises, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.122
   Conveyance, possession or control of deadly weapon or dangerous ordinance in
a courthouse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.123
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offense, see R.C.
§ 2923.131
   Possession of firearm in liquor permit premises, felony offense, see R.C. §
2923.121
§ 672.025 POSSESSION OF DEADLY WEAPON WHILE UNDER DETENTION.
   (a)   DETENTION and DETENTION FACILITY have the same meanings as in R.C. §
2921.01.
   (b)   No person under detention at a detention facility shall possess a
deadly weapon.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possession of a deadly
weapon while under detention.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(2) of this section,
possession of a deadly weapon while under detention is a felony to be
prosecuted under state law.
      (2)   If the offender, at the time of the commission of the offense, was
under detention as an alleged or adjudicated delinquent child or unruly child
and if at the time the offender commits the act for which the offender was
under detention it would not be a felony if committed by an adult, possession
of a deadly weapon while under detention is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2923.131)
Statutory reference:
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offenses, see R.C.
§ 2923.131
§ 672.03 USING WEAPONS WHILE INTOXICATED.
   (a)   No person, while under the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse,
shall carry or use any firearm or dangerous ordnance.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using weapons while
intoxicated, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2923.15)
§ 672.04 IMPROPERLY HANDLING FIREARMS IN A MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly discharge a firearm while in or on a motor
vehicle.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded firearm in a
motor vehicle in such a manner that the firearm is accessible to the operator
or any passenger without leaving the vehicle.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a firearm in a motor
vehicle, unless the person may lawfully possess that firearm under applicable
law of this state or the United States, the firearm is unloaded and the firearm
is carried in one of the following ways:
      (1)   In a closed package, box or case;
      (2)   In a compartment that can be reached only by leaving the vehicle;
      (3)   In plain sight and secured in a rack or holder made for the
purpose; or
      (4)   If the firearm is at least 24 inches in overall length as measured
from the muzzle to the part of the stock furthest from the muzzle and if the
barrel is at least 18 inches in length, either in plain sight with the action
open or the weapon stripped, or, if the firearm is of a type on which the
action will not stay open or which cannot easily be stripped, in plain sight.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded handgun in a
motor vehicle if, at the time of that transportation or possession, any of the
following applies:
      (1)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them; or
      (2)   The person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine
contains a concentration of alcohol, a listed controlled substance or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance prohibited for persons operating a
vehicle, as specified in R.C. § 4511.19(A), regardless of whether the person at
the time of the transportation or possession as described in this division (d)
is the operator of or a passenger in the motor vehicle.
   (e)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license or who is an
active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is carrying a
valid military identification card and documentation of successful completion
of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements described
in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), who is the driver or an occupant of a motor vehicle
that is stopped as a result of a traffic stop or a stop for another law
enforcement purpose or is the driver or an occupant of a commercial motor
vehicle that is stopped by an employee of the motor carrier enforcement unit
for the purposes defined in R.C. § 5503.34, and who is transporting or has a
loaded handgun in the motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle in any manner,
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Before or at the time a law enforcement officer asks if the person
is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to disclose that the person
then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the motor vehicle, provided that it
is not a violation of this division if the person fails to disclose that fact
to an officer during the stop and the person already has notified another
officer of that fact during the same stop;
      (2)   Before or at the time an employee of the motor carrier enforcement
unit asks if the person is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to
disclose that the person then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the
commercial motor vehicle, provided that it is not a violation of this division
if the person fails to disclose that fact to an employee of the unit during the
stop and the person already has notified another employee of the unit of that
fact during the same stop;
      (3)   Knowingly fail to remain in the motor vehicle while stopped, or
knowingly fail to keep the person’s hands in plain sight at any time after any
law enforcement officer begins approaching the person while stopped and before
the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the failure is pursuant to and in
accordance with directions given by a law enforcement officer;
      (4)   Knowingly have contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with
the person’s hands or fingers in the motor vehicle at any time after the law
enforcement officer begins approaching and before the law enforcement officer
leaves, unless the person has contact with the loaded handgun pursuant to and
in accordance with directions given by the law enforcement officer; or
      (5)   Knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any lawful order of any
law enforcement officer given while the motor vehicle is stopped, including but
not limited to a specific order to the person to keep the person’s hands in
plain sight.
   (f)   (1)   Divisions (a), (b), (c) and (e) of this section do not apply to
any of the following:
         A.   An officer, agent or employee of this or any other state or the
United States, or a law enforcement officer, when authorized to carry or have
loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles and acting within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s or employee’s duties; and
         B.   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry or have loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles, and who is
subject to and in compliance with the requirements of R.C. § 109.801, unless
the appointing authority of the person has expressly specified that the
exemption provided in this division (f)(1)B. does not apply to the person.
      (2)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a person if all of
the following circumstances apply:
         A.   The person discharges a firearm from a motor vehicle at a coyote
or groundhog, the discharge is not during the deer gun hunting season as set by
the Chief of the Division of Wildlife of the Department of Natural Resources,
and the discharge at the coyote or groundhog, but for the operation of this
section, is lawful;
         B.   The motor vehicle from which the person discharges the firearm is
on real property that is located in an unincorporated area of a township and
that is either zoned for agriculture or is used for agriculture;
         C.   The person owns the real property described in division (f)(2)B.
of this section, is the spouse or a child of another person who owns that real
property, is a tenant of another person who owns that real property, or is the
spouse or a child of a tenant of another person who owns that real property;
and
         D.   The person does not discharge the firearm in any of the following
manners:
            1.   While under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
alcohol and a drug of abuse;
            2.   In the direction of a street, highway or other public or
private property used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking;
            3.   At or into an occupied structure that is a permanent or
temporary habitation; or
            4.   In the commission of any violation of law, including, but not
limited to, a felony that includes, as an essential element, purposely or
knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death of or physical harm to
another and that was committed by discharging a firearm from a motor vehicle.
      (3)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a person if all of
the following apply:
         A.   The person possesses a valid all-purpose vehicle permit issued
under R.C. § 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife.
         B.   The person discharges a firearm at a wild quadruped or game bird
as defined in R.C. § 1531.01 during the open hunting season for the applicable
wild quadruped or game bird;
         C.   The person discharges a firearm from a stationary all-purpose
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 1531.01 from private or publicly owned lands or
from a motor vehicle that is parked on a road that is owned or administered by
the Division of Wildlife.
         D.   The person does not discharge the firearm in any of the following
manners:
            1.   While under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
alcohol and a drug of abuse;
            2.   In the direction of a street, a highway or other public or
private property that is used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking;
            3.   At or into an occupied structure that is a permanent or
temporary habitation; and
            4.   In the commission of any violation of law, including, but not
limited to, a felony that includes, as an essential element, purposely or
knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death of or physical harm to
another and that was committed by discharging a firearm from a motor vehicle.
      (4)   Divisions (b) and (c) of this section do not apply to a person if
all of the following circumstances apply:
         A.   At the time of the alleged violation of either of those
divisions, the person is the operator of or a passenger in a motor vehicle;
         B.   The motor vehicle is on real property that is located in an
unincorporated area of a township and that is either zoned for agriculture or
is used for agriculture;
         C.   The person owns the real property described in division (f)(4)B.
of this section, is the spouse or a child of another person who owns that real
property, is a tenant of another person who owns that real property, or is the
spouse or a child of a tenant of another person who owns that real property;
and
         D.   The person, prior to arriving at the real property described in
division (f)(4)B. of this section, did not transport or possess a firearm in
the motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by division (b) or (c) of this section
while the motor vehicle was being operated on a street, highway or other public
or private property used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking.
      (5)   Divisions (b) and (c) of this section do not apply to a person who
transports or possesses a handgun in a motor vehicle if, at the time of that
transportation or possession, both of the following apply:
         A.   The person transporting or possessing the handgun has been issued
a concealed handgun license that is valid at the time in question or the person
is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         B.   The person transporting or possessing the handgun is not
knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
      (6)   Divisions (b) and (c) of this section do not apply to a person if
all of the following apply:
         A.   The person possesses a valid all-purpose vehicle permit issued
under R.C. § 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife.
         B.   The person is on or in an all-purpose vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 1531.01 or a motor vehicle during the open hunting season for a wild
quadruped or game bird.
         C.   The person is on or in an all-purpose vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 1531.01 on private or publicly owned lands or on or in a motor vehicle that
is parked on a road that is owned or administered by the Division of Wildlife.
   (g)   (1)   The affirmative defenses authorized in R.C. § 2923.12(D)(1) and
(D)(2) are affirmative defenses to a charge under division (b) or (c) of this
section that involves a firearm other than a handgun.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (b) or (c)
of this section of improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle that the
actor transported or had the firearm in the motor vehicle for any lawful
purpose and while the motor vehicle was on the actor’s own property, provided
that this affirmative defense is not available unless the person, immediately
prior to arriving at the actor’s own property, did not transport or possess the
firearm in a motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by division (b) or (c) of
this section while the motor vehicle was being operated on a street, highway or
other public or private property used by the public for vehicular traffic.
   (h)   (1)   No person who is charged with a violation of division (b), (c)
or (d) of this section shall be required to obtain a concealed handgun license
as a condition for the dismissal of the charge.
      (2)   A.   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty
to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (e) of this section as it
existed prior to September 30, 2011, and the conduct that was the basis of the
violation no longer would be a violation of division (e) of this section on or
after September 30, 2011, or if a person is convicted of, was convicted of,
pleads guilty to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (e)(1) or
(e)(2) of this section as it existed prior to June 13, 2022, the person may
file an application under R.C. § 2953.35 requesting the expungement of the
record of conviction.
         B.   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty to,
or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (b) or (c) of this section as
the division existed prior to September 30, 2011 and if the conduct that was
the basis of the violation no longer would be a violation of division (b) or
(c) of this section on or after September 30, 2011 due to the application of
division (f)(5) of this section as it exists on and after September 30, 2011,
the person may file an application under R.C. § 2953.35 requesting the
expungement of the record of conviction.
   (i)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of improperly handling
firearms in a motor vehicle. A violation of division (a) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division
(c) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. A violation of
division (d) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law and, if the loaded handgun is concealed on the person's person, it is
also a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of
division (e)(1) or (e)(2) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. A violation of division (e)(4) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division (e)(3) or (e)
(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(e)(3) or (e)(5) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. In
addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of division (e)(3) or (e)(5) of this section, the offender’s concealed handgun
license shall be suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2). A violation of
division (b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (j)   If a law enforcement officer stops a motor vehicle for a traffic stop
or any other purpose, if any person in the motor vehicle surrenders a firearm
to the officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the
officer, and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this
section or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise
prohibited by law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not
contraband, the officer shall return the firearm to the person at the
termination of the stop. If a court orders a law enforcement officer to return
a firearm to a person pursuant to the requirement set forth in this division
(j), R.C. § 2923.163(B) applies.
   (k)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   AGRICULTURE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 519.01.
      (2)   COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4506.25
(A).
      (3)   MOTOR CARRIER ENFORCEMENT UNIT. The Motor Carrier Enforcement Unit
in the Department of Public Safety, Division of State Highway Patrol, that is
created by R.C. § 5503.34.
      (4)   MOTOR VEHICLE, STREET and HIGHWAY. Have the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 4511.01.
      (5)   OCCUPIED STRUCTURE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.01.
      (6)   TENANT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1531.01.
      (7)   UNLOADED.
         A.   With respect to a firearm other than a firearm described in
division D. of this definition, means that no ammunition is in the firearm in
question, no magazine or speed loader containing ammunition is inserted into
the firearm, and one of the following applies:
            1.   There is no ammunition in a magazine or speed loader that is
in the vehicle in question and that may be used with the firearm in question.
            2.   Any magazine or speed loader that contains ammunition and that
may be used with the firearm in question is stored in a compartment within the
vehicle in question that cannot be accessed without leaving the vehicle or is
stored in a container that provides complete and separate enclosure.
         B.   For the purposes of division A.2. of this definition, a
“container that provides complete and separate enclosure” includes, but is not
limited to, any of the following:
            1.   A package, box, or case with multiple compartments, as long as
the loaded magazine or speed loader and the firearm in question either are in
separate compartments within the package, box, or case, or, if they are in the
same compartment, the magazine or speed loader is contained within a separate
enclosure in that compartment that does not contain the firearm and that closes
using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop closing mechanism, or other
fastener that must be opened to access the contents or the firearm is contained
within a separate enclosure of that nature in that compartment that does not
contain the magazine or speed loader;
            2.   A pocket or other enclosure on the person of the person in
question that closes using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop
closing mechanism, or other fastener that must be opened to access the
contents.
         C.   For the purposes of divisions A. and B. of this definition,
ammunition held in stripper- clips or in en-bloc clips is not considered
ammunition that is loaded into a magazine or speed loader.
         D.   “Unloaded” means, with respect to a firearm employing a
percussion cap, flintlock, or other obsolete ignition system, when the weapon
is uncapped or when the priming charge is removed from the pan.
   (l)   Divisions A. and B. of the definition of UNLOADED in division (k) of
this section do not affect the authority of a person who has been issued a
concealed handgun license that is valid at the time in question to have one or
more magazines or speed loaders containing ammunition anywhere in a vehicle,
without being transported as described in those divisions, as long as no
ammunition is in a firearm, other than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as
permitted under any other provision of this chapter. A person who has been
issued a concealed handgun license that is valid at the time in question may
have one or more magazines or speed loaders containing ammunition anywhere in a
vehicle without further restriction, as long as no ammunition is in a firearm,
other than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as permitted under any
provision of this chapter.
(R.C. § 2923.16)
Statutory reference:
   Return of surrendered firearms by law enforcement, see R.C. § 2923.163
§ 672.05 LICENSE OR PERMIT TO POSSESS DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
   (a)   Upon application to the Sheriff of the county or Safety Director or
Police Chief of the municipality where the applicant resides or has the
applicant’s principal place of business, and upon payment of the fee specified
in division (b) of this section, a license or temporary permit shall be issued
to qualified applicants to acquire, possess, carry or use a dangerous ordnance
for the following purposes:
      (1)   Contractors, wreckers, quarriers, mine operators and other persons
regularly employing explosives in the course of a legitimate business, with
respect to explosives and explosive devices acquired, possessed, carried or
used in the course of the business.
      (2)   Farmers, with respect to explosives and explosive devices acquired,
possessed, carried or used for agricultural purposes on lands farmed by them.
      (3)   Scientists, engineers and instructors, with respect to a dangerous
ordnance acquired, possessed, carried or used in the course of bona fide
research or instruction.
      (4)   Financial institutions and armored car company guards, with respect
to automatic firearms lawfully acquired, possessed, carried or used by any such
person while acting within the scope of the person’s duties.
      (5)   In the discretion of the issuing authority, any responsible person,
with respect to a dangerous ordnance lawfully acquired, possessed, carried or
used for a legitimate research, scientific, educational, industrial or other
proper purpose.
   (b)   Application for a license or temporary permit under this section shall
be in writing under oath to the Sheriff of the county or Safety Director or
Police Chief of the municipality where the applicant resides or has the
applicant’s principal place of business. The application shall be accompanied
by an application fee of $50 when the application is for a license, and an
application fee of $5 when the application is for a temporary permit. The fees
shall be paid into the General Revenue Fund of the county or municipality. The
application shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name, age, address, occupation and business address of the
applicant, if the applicant is a natural person, or the name, address and
principal place of business of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation.
      (2)   A description of the dangerous ordnance for which a permit is
requested.
      (3)   A description of the places where and the manner in which the
dangerous ordnance is to be kept, carried and used.
      (4)   A statement of the purposes for which the dangerous ordnance is to
be acquired, possessed, carried or used.
      (5)   Any other information as the issuing authority may require in
giving effect to this section.
   (c)   Upon investigation, the issuing authority shall issue a license or
temporary permit only if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The applicant is not otherwise prohibited by law from acquiring,
having, carrying or using a dangerous ordnance.
      (2)   The applicant is 21 years of age or over, if the applicant is a
natural person.
      (3)   It appears that the applicant has sufficient competence to safely
acquire, possess, carry or use the dangerous ordnance, and that proper
precautions will be taken to protect the security of the dangerous ordnance and
ensure the safety of persons and property.
      (4)   It appears that the dangerous ordnance will be lawfully acquired,
possessed, carried and used by the applicant for a legitimate purpose.
   (d)   The license or temporary permit shall identify the person to whom it
is issued, identify the dangerous ordnance involved and state the purposes for
which the license or temporary permit is issued, state the expiration date, if
any, and list the restrictions on the acquisition, possession, carriage or use
of the dangerous ordnance as the issuing authority considers advisable to
protect the security of the dangerous ordnance and ensure the safety of persons
and property.
   (e)   A temporary permit shall be issued for the casual use of explosives
and explosive devices, and other consumable dangerous ordnance, and shall
expire within 30 days of its issuance. A license shall be issued for the
regular use of consumable dangerous ordnance, or for any non-consumable
dangerous ordnance, which license need not specify an expiration date, but the
issuing authority may specify such expiration date, not earlier than one year
from the date of issuance, as it considers advisable in view of the nature of
the dangerous ordnance and the purposes for which the license is issued.
   (f)   The dangerous ordnance specified in a license or temporary permit may
be obtained by the holder anywhere in the state. Pursuant to R.C. § 2923.18(F),
the holder of a license may use the dangerous ordnance anywhere in the state.
The holder of a temporary permit may use the dangerous ordnance only within the
territorial jurisdiction of the issuing authority.
   (g)   The issuing authority shall forward to the State Fire Marshal a copy
of each license or temporary permit issued pursuant to this section, and a copy
of each record of a transaction in a dangerous ordnance and of each report of a
lost or stolen dangerous ordnance, given to the local law enforcement authority
as required by R.C. § 2923.20(A)(6) and (A)(7) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance. The State Fire Marshal will keep a permanent file of all
licenses and temporary permits issued pursuant to this section, and of all
records of transactions in, and losses or thefts of a dangerous ordnance
forwarded by local law enforcement authorities pursuant to this section.
(R.C. § 2923.18)
§ 672.06 FAILURE TO SECURE DANGEROUS ORDNANCE OR FIREARM.
   (a)   No person, in acquiring, possessing, carrying or using any dangerous
ordnance, shall negligently fail to take proper precautions:
      (1)   To secure the dangerous ordnance against theft, or against its
acquisition or use by any unauthorized or incompetent person; and
      (2)   To ensure the safety of persons and property.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to a secure
dangerous ordnance, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 2923.19)
§ 672.07 UNLAWFUL TRANSACTIONS IN WEAPONS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Recklessly sell, lend, give or furnish any firearm to any person
prohibited by R.C. § 2923.13 or 2923.15, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, from acquiring or using any firearm, or recklessly sell,
lend, give or furnish any dangerous ordnance to any person prohibited by R.C. §
2923.13, 2923.15 or 2923.17, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
from acquiring or using any dangerous ordnance;
      (2)   Possess any firearm or dangerous ordnance with purpose to dispose
of it in violation of division (a)(1) of this section;
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b) of this section,
knowingly solicit, persuade, encourage, or entice a federally licensed firearms
dealer or private seller to transfer a firearm or ammunition to any person in a
manner prohibited by state or federal law;
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b) of this section, with
an intent to deceive, knowingly provide materially false information to a
federally licensed firearms dealer or private seller;
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b) of this section,
knowingly procure, solicit, persuade, encourage, or entice a person to act in
violation of division (a)(3) or (a)(4) of this section;
      (6)   When transferring any dangerous ordnance to another, negligently
fail to require the transferee to exhibit the identification, license or permit
showing the transferree to be authorized to acquire the dangerous ordnance
pursuant to R.C. § 2923.17, or negligently fail to take a complete record of
the transaction and forthwith forward a copy of the record to the Sheriff of
the county or Safety Director or Police Chief of the municipality where the
transaction takes place; or
      (7)   Knowingly fail to report to law enforcement authorities forthwith
the loss or theft of any firearm or dangerous ordnance in the person’s
possession and under his or her control.
   (b)   Divisions (a)(3), (a)(4), and (a)(5) of this section do not apply to
any of the following:
      (1)   A law enforcement officer who is acting within the scope of the
officer's duties;
      (2)   A person who is acting in accordance with directions given by a law
enforcement officer described in division (b)(1) of this section.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful transactions in
weapons. A violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), or (a)(5) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A
violation of division (a)(6) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. A violation of division (a)(7) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
   (d)   As used in this section:
      (1)   AMMUNITION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.401.
      (2)   FEDERALLY LICENSED FIREARMS DEALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 5502.63.
      (3)   MATERIALLY FALSE INFORMATION. Means information regarding the
transfer of a firearm or ammunition that portrays an illegal transaction as
legal or a legal transaction as illegal.
      (4)   PRIVATE SELLER. Means a person who sells, offers for sale, or
transfers a firearm or ammunition and who is not a federally licensed firearms
dealer.
(R.C. § 2923.20)
§ 672.071 FACSIMILE FIREARMS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   FIREARM. Has the same meaning as used in §
672.01(h).
      (2)   REPLICA or FACSIMILE OF A FIREARM. Any device or object made of
plastic, wood, metal or any other material which is a replica or toy version
of, or is otherwise recognizable as a pistol, revolver, shotgun, sawed-off
shotgun, rifle, machine gun, rocket launcher or any other firearm. REPLICA or
FACSIMILE OF A FIREARM shall include, but is not limited to, toy guns, props,
hobby models (either in kit form or fully assembled), starter pistols, air
guns, inoperative firearms or any other device which might reasonably be
perceived to be a real firearm.
   (b)   No person shall display or market for sale any replica or facsimile of
a firearm in the city. The provisions of this division (b) shall not apply to
any replica or facsimile firearm which, because of its distinct color,
exaggerated size or other design features, cannot reasonably be perceived to be
a real firearm.
   (c)   Except in self-defense, no person shall draw, exhibit or brandish a
replica or facsimile of a firearm in a rude, angry or threatening manner, with
the intent to frighten, vex, harass or annoy any person or with the intent to
commit an act that is a crime under the laws of the city, state or federal
government, against any other person.
   (d)   No person shall draw, exhibit or brandish a replica or facsimile of a
firearm, or simulate a firearm, in the presence of a law enforcement officer,
firefighter, emergency medical technician or paramedic engaged in the
performance of his or her duties, when the person committing such act knows or
has reason to know that such law enforcement officer, firefighter, emergency
medical technician or paramedic is engaged in the performance of his or her
duties.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of the
unlawful sale of a replica or facsimile of a firearm, a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of
brandishing a replica or facsimile of a firearm, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of
brandishing a replica or facsimile of a firearm in the presence of a public
safety officer, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Res. 2000-153, passed 6-19-2000)
§ 672.075 DISPLAY FOR SALE OF DANGEROUS WEAPONS.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall manufacture, sell or exhibit for sale, openly or
in showcases or show windows, daggers, stilettos, brass or iron knuckles or
billies, nor display any signs, posters, cartoons or display cards suggesting
the sale of any daggers, stilettos, brass or iron knuckles or billies.
      (2)   This division (a) does not apply to any such weapons designated for
use by, and when used by, a law enforcement officer.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(1964 Code, § 549.12)
§ 672.08 IMPROPERLY FURNISHING FIREARMS TO A MINOR (REPEALED).
Editor’s note:
   Section 672.08 was repealed as part of the 1995-A updating and revision of
these Codified Ordinances because a violation of substantially equivalent state
law (R.C. § 2923.21) was made a felony by the Ohio General Assembly by Sub.
H.B. No. 4, effective November 9, 1995.
§ 672.085 UNDERAGE PURCHASE OF A FIREARM OR HANDGUN.
   (a)   No person under 18 years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase
a firearm.
   (b)   No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase
a handgun; provided, that this division (b) does not apply to the purchase or
attempted purchase of a handgun by a person 18 years of age or older and under
21 years of age, if either of the following applies:
      (1)   The person is a law enforcement officer and has received firearms
training approved by the Ohio Peace Officer Training Council or equivalent
firearms training; or
      (2)   The person is an active or reserve member of the armed services of
the United States or the Ohio National Guard, or was honorably discharged from
military service in the active or reserve armed services of the United States
or the Ohio National Guard, and the person has received firearms training from
the armed services or the national guard or equivalent firearms training.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of underage
purchase of a firearm, a delinquent act that would be a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law if it could be committed by an adult. Whoever
violates division (b) of this section is guilty of underage purchase of a
handgun, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 2923.211)
§ 672.09 POINTING AND DISCHARGING FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS.
   (a)   Except as provided in divisions (c) and (d) of this section, no person
shall discharge any air gun, rifle, shotgun, revolver, pistol or other firearm,
or make use of any sling or arrow, within the corporate limits of the
municipality.
   (b)   No person shall, intentionally and without malice, point or aim a
firearm at or toward another or discharge a firearm so pointed or aimed.
   (c)   This section does not extend to cases in which firearms, slings or
arrows are used in self-defense, in the discharge of official duty or in
justifiable homicide.
   (d)   This section does not extend to cases in which BB guns and other air
guns, or slings or arrows, are used in the confines of dwellings, provided the
use is under adult supervision and is approved by the Police Chief.
   (e)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
§ 672.095 DISCHARGE OF A FIREARM ON OR NEAR PROHIBITED PREMISES.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Without permission from the proper officials and subject to
division (b)(1) of this section, discharge a firearm upon or over a cemetery or
within 100 yards of a cemetery;
      (2)   Subject to division (b)(2) of this section, discharge of a firearm
on a lawn, park, pleasure ground, orchard or other ground appurtenant to a
schoolhouse, church or inhabited dwelling, the property of another or a
charitable institution; or
      (3)   Discharge a firearm upon or over a public road or highway.
   (b)   (1)   Division (a)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
while on the person’s own land, discharges a firearm.
      (2)   Division (a)(2) of this section does not apply to a person who owns
any type of property described in that division and who, while on the person’s
own enclosure, discharges a firearm.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of discharge
of a firearm on or near prohibited premises. A violation of division (a)(1) or
(a)(2) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. A violation of
division (a)(3) of this section shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(2) of this section, a
violation of division (a)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree; and
      (2)   If the violation created a substantial risk of physical harm to any
person, caused serious physical harm to property, caused physical harm to any
person, or caused serious physical harm to any person, a violation of division
(a)(3) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2923.162)
§ 672.10 FIREWORKS.
(EDITOR'S NOTE: Pursuant to Ordinance 2022-166, passed July 18, 2022, the
Council of the City of Solon expressly opted out of the provisions set forth in
H.B. 172, and reaffirmed the ban on discharging, igniting or exploding
fireworks as set forth in
Chapter 672 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Solon. As a result of
this opt-out, this ordinance bans the discharge, ignition, or explosion of
fireworks purchased pursuant to Ohio Revised Code Section 3743.45 at any time
of the day, month or year).
   (a)   Definitions. Unless otherwise provided, for the purpose of this
chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   1.3G FIREWORKS. Display fireworks consistent with regulations of
the United States Department of Transportation as expressed using the
designation division 1.3 in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
      (2)   1.4G FIREWORKS. Consumer fireworks consistent with regulations of
the United States Department of Transportation as expressed using the
designation division 1.4 in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
      (3)   BEER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4301.01.
      (4)   BOOBY TRAP. A small tube that has a string protruding from both
ends that has a friction-sensitive composition and that is ignited by pulling
the ends of the string.
      (5)   CIGARETTE LOAD. A small wooden peg that is coated with a small
quantity of explosive composition and that is ignited in a cigarette.
      (6)   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
      (7)   DISCHARGE SITE. An area immediately surrounding the mortars used to
fire aerial shells.
      (8)   FIREWORKS. Any composition or device prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, deflagration or
detonation, except ordinary matches and except as provided in R.C. § 3743.80.
      (9)   FIREWORKS INCIDENT. Any action or omission that occurs at a
fireworks exhibition that results in injury or death, or a substantial risk of
injury or death, to any person, and that involves either of the following:
         A.   The handling or other use, or the results of the handling or
other use, of fireworks or associated equipment or other materials; or
         B.   The failure of any person to comply with any applicable
requirement imposed by this section or R.C. Chapter 3743, or any applicable
rule adopted under this section or R.C. Chapter 3743.
      (10)   FIREWORKS INCIDENT SITE. A discharge site or other location at a
fireworks exhibition where a fireworks incident occurs, a location where an
injury or death associated with a fireworks incident occurs, or a location
where evidence of a fireworks incident or an injury or death associated with a
fireworks incident is found.
      (11)   FIREWORKS PLANT. All buildings and other structures in which the
manufacturing of fireworks, or the storage or sale of manufactured fireworks by
a manufacturer, takes place.
      (12)   FOUNTAIN DEVICE. Means a specific type of 1.4G firework that meets
all of the following criteria:
         A.   It is nonaerial and nonreport producing.
         B.   It is recognized and manufactured in accordance with sections
3.1.1 and 3.5 of APA standard 87-1 (2001 edition).
         C.   It is a ground-based or hand-held sparkler with one or more tubes
containing a nonexplosive pyrotechnic mixture that produces a shower of sparks
upon ignition, with or without additional effects that may include a colored
flame, audible crackling effect, audible whistle effect, or smoke.
         D.   It contains not more than 75 grams of the nonexplosive
pyrotechnic mixture in any individual tube and not more than 500 grams or less
for multiple tubes.
      (13)   HIGHWAY. Any public street, road, alley, way, lane or other public
thoroughfare.
      (14)   INTOXICATING LIQUOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4301.01.
      (15)   LICENSED BUILDING. A building on the licensed premises of a
licensed manufacturer or wholesaler of fireworks that is approved for occupancy
by the building official having jurisdiction.
      (16)   LICENSED EXHIBITOR OF FIREWORKS or LICENSED EXHIBITOR. A person
licensed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.50 through 3743.55.
      (17)   LICENSED FOUNTAIN DEVICE RETAILER or LICENSED RETAILER. Means a
person licensed pursuant to R.C. § 3743.26.
      (18)   LICENSED MANUFACTURER OF FIREWORKS or LICENSED MANUFACTURER. A
person licensed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.02 through 3743.08.
      (19)   LICENSED PREMISES. The real estate upon which a licensed
manufacturer or wholesaler of fireworks conducts business.
      (20)   LICENSED WHOLESALER OF FIREWORKS or LICENSED WHOLESALER. A person
licensed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.15 through 3743.21.
      (21)   LIST OF LICENSED EXHIBITORS. The list required by R.C. § 3743.51
(C).
      (22)   LIST OF LICENSED MANUFACTURERS. The list required by R.C. §
3743.03(C).
      (23)   LIST OF LICENSED WHOLESALERS. The list required by R.C. § 3743.16
(C).
      (24)   MANUFACTURING OF FIREWORKS. The making of fireworks from raw
materials, none of which in and of themselves constitute fireworks, or the
processing of fireworks.
      (25)   NAVIGABLE WATERS. Any body of water susceptible of being used in
its ordinary condition as a highway of commerce over which trade and travel is
or may be conducted in the customary modes, but does not include a body of
water that is not capable of navigation by barges, tugboats, and other large
vessels.
      (26)   NOVELTIES and TRICK NOISEMAKERS.
         A.   Devices that produce a small report intended to surprise the
user, including, but not limited to, booby traps, cigarette loads, party
poppers and snappers;
         B.   Snakes or glow worms;
         C.   Smoke devices; and
         D.   Trick matches.
      (27)   PARTY POPPER. A small plastic or paper item that contains not more
than 16 milligrams of friction-sensitive explosive composition that is ignited
by pulling a string protruding from the item, and from which paper streamers
are expelled when the item is ignited.
      (28)   PROCESSING OF FIREWORKS. The making of fireworks from materials
all or part of which in and of themselves constitute fireworks, but does not
include the mere packaging or repackaging of fireworks.
      (29)   RAILROAD. Any railway or railroad that carries freight or
passengers for hire, but does not include auxiliary tracks, spurs and sidings
installed and primarily used in serving a mine, quarry or plant.
      (30)   RETAIL SALE or SELL AT RETAIL. A sale of fireworks to a purchaser
who intends to use the fireworks and not to resell them.
      (31)   SMOKE DEVICE. A tube or sphere that contains pyrotechnic
composition that, upon ignition, produces white or colored smoke as the primary
effect.
      (32)   SNAKE or GLOW WORM. A device that consists of a pressed pellet of
pyrotechnic composition that produces a large snake-like ash upon burning,
which ash expands in length as the pellet burns.
      (33)   SNAPPER. A small paper-wrapped item that contains a minute
quantity of explosive composition coated on small bits of sand and that, when
dropped, implodes.
      (34)   STORAGE LOCATION. A single parcel or contiguous parcels of real
estate approved by the Ohio Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. § 3743.04(I) or R.C.
§ 3743.17(F) that are separate from a licensed premises containing a retail
showroom, and which parcel or parcels a licensed manufacturer or wholesaler of
fireworks may use only for the distribution, possession, and storage of
fireworks in accordance with this chapter.
      (35)   TRICK MATCH. A kitchen or book match that is coated with a small
quantity of explosive composition and that, upon ignition, produces a small
report or a shower of sparks.
      (36)   WHOLESALE SALE or SELL AT WHOLESALE. A sale of fireworks to a
purchaser who intends to resell the fireworks so purchased.
      (37)   WIRE SPARKLER. A sparkler consisting of a wire or stick coated
with a nonexplosive pyrotechnic mixture that produces a shower of sparks upon
ignition and that contains no more than 100 grams of this mixture.
(R.C. § 3743.01)
   (b)   Manufacturing.
      (1)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall knowingly fail to
comply with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. §
3743.05 or the requirements of R.C. § 3743.06.
      (2)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall fail to maintain
complete inventory, wholesale sale and retail records as required by R.C. §
3743.07, or to permit an inspection of these records or the premises of a
fireworks plant or the wholesaler pursuant to R.C. § 3743.08.
      (3)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to R.C. § 3743.08(B)(1) within
the specified period of time.
      (4)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to R.C. § 3743.08(B)(2) until
the nonconformities are eliminated, corrected or otherwise remedied or the 72-
hour period specified in those divisions has expired, whichever occurs first.
      (5)   No person shall smoke or shall carry a pipe, cigarette or cigar, or
a match, lighter, other flame-producing item or open flame on, or shall carry a
concealed source of ignition into, the premises of a fireworks plant, except as
smoking is authorized in specified lunchrooms or restrooms by a manufacturer
pursuant to R.C. § 3743.06(C).
      (6)   No person shall have possession or control of, or be under the
influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer or controlled substance while on
the premises of a fireworks plant.
      (7)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall negligently fail to
furnish a safety pamphlet to a purchaser of 1.4G fireworks as required by R.C.
§ 3743.47(A).
      (8)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall negligently fail to
have safety glasses available for sale as required by R.C. § 3743.47(B).
(R.C. § 3743.60(E) - (L))
   (c)   Wholesaling.
      (1)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall knowingly fail to comply
with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. § 3743.18 or
the requirements of R.C. § 3743.19.
      (2)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall fail to maintain complete
inventory, wholesale sale and retail records as required by R.C. § 3743.20, or
to permit an inspection of these records or the premises of a fireworks plant
or the wholesaler pursuant to R.C. § 3743.21.
      (3)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to R.C. § 3743.21(B)(1) within
the specified period of time.
      (4)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to R.C. § 3743.21(B)(2) until
the nonconformities are eliminated, corrected or otherwise remedied or the 72-
hour period specified in those divisions has expired, whichever occurs first.
      (5)   No person shall smoke or shall carry a pipe, cigarette or cigar, or
a match, lighter, other flame-producing item or open flame on, or shall carry a
concealed source of ignition into, the premises of a wholesaler of fireworks,
except as smoking is authorized in specified lunchrooms or restrooms by a
wholesaler pursuant to R.C. § 3743.19(D).
      (6)   No person shall have possession or control of, or be under the
influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer or controlled substance while on
the premises of a wholesaler of fireworks.
(R.C. § 3743.61(E) - (J))
   (d)   Purchasing and transporting.
      (1)   No person who purchases fireworks in this municipality shall obtain
possession of the fireworks in this municipality unless the person complies
with R.C. §§ 3743.44 to 3743.46.
      (2)   Except for the purchase of 1.4G fireworks made under R.C. §
3743.45, no person who resides in another state and who purchases fireworks in
this state shall obtain possession of fireworks in this state other than from a
licensed manufacturer or wholesaler, or fail, when transporting 1.3G fireworks,
to transport them directly out of this state within 72 hours after the time of
their purchase.
      (3)   No person who purchases fireworks in this state under R.C. §
3743.45 shall give or sell to any other person in this municipality fireworks
that the person has acquired in this state.
(R.C. § 3743.63)
   (e)   Prohibited activities by exhibitors.
      (1)   An exhibitor of fireworks licensed under R.C. §§ 3743.50 through
3743.55 who wishes to conduct a public fireworks exhibition shall apply for
approval to conduct the exhibition to the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer
and to the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the
designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
having jurisdiction over the premises.
      (2)   The approval required by division (e)(1) of this section shall be
evidenced by the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief
or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police
Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer, signing a permit for the
exhibition. Any exhibitor of fireworks who wishes to conduct a public fireworks
exhibition may obtain a copy of the form from the State Fire Marshal or, if
available, from the Fire Chief, a fire prevention officer, the Police Chief or
other similar chief law enforcement officer, or a designee of the Police Chief
or other similar chief law enforcement officer.
      (3)   Before a permit is signed and issued to a licensed exhibitor of
fireworks, the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in consultation with the
Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of
the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, shall inspect
the premises on which the exhibition will take place and shall determine that,
in fact, the applicant for the permit is a licensed exhibitor of fireworks.
Each applicant shall show his or her license as an exhibitor of fireworks to
the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer.
      (4)   The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and the Police Chief or
other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police
Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, shall give approval to
conduct a public fireworks exhibition only if satisfied, based on the
inspection, that the premises on which the exhibition will be conducted allow
the exhibitor to comply with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal
pursuant to R.C. § 3743.53(B) and (E) and that the applicant is, in fact, a
licensed exhibitor of fireworks. The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in
consultation with the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement
officer or with the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, may inspect the premises immediately prior to the
exhibition to determine if the exhibitor has complied with the rules, and may
revoke a permit for noncompliance with the rules.
      (5)   If the Council has prescribed a fee for the issuance of a permit
for a public fireworks exhibition, the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer
and Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or their
designee, shall not issue a permit until the exhibitor pays the requisite fee.
      (6)   Each exhibitor shall provide an indemnity bond in the amount of at
least $1,000,000 with surety satisfactory to the Fire Chief or fire prevention
officer and to the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
or the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement
officer, conditioned for the payment of all final judgments that may be
rendered against the exhibitor on account of injury, death or loss to person or
property emanating from the fireworks exhibitor, or proof of insurance coverage
of at least $1,000,000 for liability arising from injury, death or loss of
persons or property emanating from the fireworks exhibition. The Council may
require the exhibitor to provide an indemnity bond or proof of insurance
coverage in amounts greater than those required by this division (e)(6). The
Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and Police Chief or other similar chief
law enforcement officer, or their designee, shall not issue a permit until the
exhibitor provides the bond or proof of the insurance coverage required by this
division (e)(6) or by the Council.
      (7)   Each permit for a fireworks exhibition issued by the Fire Chief or
fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief
law enforcement officer, shall contain a distinct number, designate the
municipality, and identify the certified fire safety inspector, Fire Chief or
fire prevention officer who will be present before, during and after the
exhibition, where appropriate. A copy of each permit issued shall be forwarded
by the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, or designee of the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, issuing it to the State Fire Marshal. A
permit is not transferable or assignable.
      (8)   The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, or designee of the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, shall keep a record of issued permits
for fireworks exhibitions. In this list, the Fire Chief, fire prevention
officer, Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or
designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
shall list the name of the exhibitor, his or her license number, the premises
on which the exhibition will be conducted, the date and time of the exhibition,
and the number and political subdivision designation of the permit issued to
the exhibitor for the exhibition.
      (9)   The Council shall require that a certified fire safety inspector,
Fire Chief or fire prevention officer be present before, during and after the
exhibition, and shall require the certified fire safety inspector, Fire Chief
or fire prevention officer to inspect the premises where the exhibition is to
take place and determine whether the exhibition is in compliance with this
section and R.C. Chapter 3743.
(R.C. § 3743.54)
      (10)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall fail to comply with the
applicable requirements of the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant
to R.C. § 3743.53(B) and (E) or to comply with R.C. § 3743.53(C) and (D).
      (11)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall conduct a fireworks
exhibition unless a permit has been secured for the exhibition pursuant to R.C.
§ 3743.54 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or if a permit so
secured is revoked by a Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in consultation
with a Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or with a
designee of a Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
pursuant to those sections.
      (12)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall acquire fireworks for use
at a fireworks exhibition other than in accordance with R.C. §§ 3743.54 and
3743.55, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (13)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks or other person associated with
the conduct of a fireworks exhibition shall have possession or control of, or
be under the influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer or controlled
substance while on the premises on which the exhibition is being conducted.
      (14)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall permit an employee to
assist the licensed exhibitor in conducting fireworks exhibitions unless the
employee is registered with the State Fire Marshal under R.C. § 3743.56.
(R.C. § 3743.64)
   (f)   Possession, sale, discharge and advertising; falsification.
      (1)   No person shall possess fireworks in this municipality or shall
possess for sale or sell fireworks in this municipality, except a licensed
manufacturer of fireworks as authorized by R.C. §§ 3743.02 to 3743.08, a
licensed wholesaler of fireworks as authorized by R.C. §§ 3743.15 to 3743.21, a
shipping permit holder as authorized by R.C. § 3743.40, a licensed fountain
device retailer as authorized by R.C. § 3743.27, a person as authorized by R.C.
§§ 3743.44 and 3743.45, or a licensed exhibitor of fireworks as authorized by
R.C. §§ 3743.50 to 3743.55, or as authorized by any municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to any of these statutes, and except as provided in
R.C. § 3743.80 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (f)(8), R.C. §§ 3743.45 and 3743.80
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and except for licensed
exhibitors of fireworks authorized to conduct a fireworks exhibition pursuant
to R.C. §§ 3743.50 through 3743.55 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, no person shall discharge, ignite, or explode any fireworks in this
municipality.
      (3)   No person shall use in a theater or public hall what is technically
known as fireworks showers, or a mixture containing potassium chlorate and
sulphur.
      (4)   No person shall sell fireworks of any kind to a person under 18
years of age. No person under 18 years of age shall enter a fireworks sales
showroom unless that person is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or other
responsible adult. No person under 18 years of age shall touch or possess
fireworks on a licensed premises without the consent of the licensee. A
licensee may eject any person from a licensed premises that is in any way
disruptive to the safe operation of the premises.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C § 7343.44, no person, other
than a licensed manufacturer, licensed wholesaler, licensed exhibitor or
shipping permit holder shall possess 1.3G fireworks in this municipality. (R.C.
§ 3743.65(A) - (E))
(Ord. 2022-166, passed 7-18-2022)
(EDITOR'S NOTE: Pursuant to Ordinance 2022-166, passed July 18, 2022, the
Council of the City of Solon expressly opted out of the provisions set forth in
H.B. 172, and reaffirmed the ban on discharging, igniting or exploding
fireworks as set forth in Chapter 672 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of
Solon. As a result of this opt-out, this ordinance bans the discharge,
ignition, or explosion of fireworks purchased pursuant to Ohio Revised Code
Section 3743.45 at any time of the day, month or year).
   (g)   Transporting and shipping.
      (1)   No person shall transport fireworks in this municipality except in
accordance with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. §
3743.58.
      (2)   As used in this division (g), FIREWORKS includes only 1.3G and 1.4G
fireworks. No person shall ship fireworks into this municipality by mail,
parcel post or common carrier unless the person possesses a valid shipping
permit issued under R.C. § 3743.40, and the fireworks are shipped directly to
the holder of a license issued under R.C. § 3743.03, 3743.16 or 3743.51.
      (3)   No person shall ship fireworks within this municipality by mail,
parcel post or common carrier unless the fireworks are shipped directly to the
holder of a license issued under R.C. § 3743.01, 3743.16 or 3743.51.
(R.C. § 3743.66)
   (h)   Exceptions. This section does not prohibit or apply to the following:
      (1)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
in emergency situations of pyrotechnic signaling devices and distress signals
for marine, aviation or highway use;
      (2)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of fusees, torpedoes or other signals necessary for the safe operation of
railroads;
      (3)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of blank cartridges in connection with theaters or shows, or in connection with
athletics as signals for ceremonial purposes;
      (4)   The manufacture for, the transportation, storage, possession or use
by, or the sale to the armed forces of the United States and the militia of
this state, as recognized by the Adjutant General of Ohio, of pyrotechnic
devices;
      (5)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices in which paper or plastic
caps containing 0.25 grains or less of explosive material are used, provided
that they are constructed so that a hand cannot come into contact with a cap
when it is in place for explosion, or apply to the manufacture, sale,
possession, transportation, storage or use of those caps;
      (6)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of novelties and trick noisemakers, auto burglar alarms or model rockets and
model rocket motors designed, sold and used for the purpose of propelling
recoverable aero models;
      (7)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of wire sparklers; and
      (8)   The conduct of radio-controlled special effect exhibitions that use
an explosive black powder charge of not more than one-quarter pound per charge,
and that are not connected in any manner to propellant charges; provided, that
the exhibition complies with all of the following:
         A.   No explosive aerial display is conducted in the exhibition;
         B.   The exhibition is separated from spectators by not less than 200
feet; and
         C.   The person conducting the exhibition complies with regulations of
the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms of the United States Department of
the Treasury and the United States Department of Transportation with respect to
the storage and transport of the explosive black powder used in the exhibition.
(R.C. § 3743.80)
   (i)   Forfeiture and disposal. Fireworks manufactured, sold, possessed,
transported or used in violation of this section shall be forfeited by the
offender. The Fire Marshal’s office or certified fire safety inspector’s office
shall dispose of seized fireworks pursuant to the procedures specified in R.C.
§§ 2981.11 to 2981.13 for the disposal of forfeited property by law enforcement
agencies, and the Fire Marshal or that office is not liable for claims for the
loss of or damages to the seized fireworks.
(R.C. § 3743.68(B))
   (j)   Penalty.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (j)(2) or (j)(3) of this
section, whoever violates any provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of R.C. § 3743.60(I) or 3743.61(I), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, a violation of division (b)(5) of this section
or division (c)(5) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (e)(10) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to any other penalties that may be
imposed on a licensed exhibitor of fireworks under this division and unless the
third sentence of this division applies, the person’s license as an exhibitor
of fireworks or as an assistant exhibitor of fireworks shall be suspended. If
the violation of division (e)(10) of this section results in serious physical
harm to persons or serious physical harm to property, the person’s license as
an exhibitor of fireworks or as an assistant exhibitor of fireworks shall be
revoked.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (f)(6) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, a
person may be convicted at the same trial or proceeding of a violation of
division (f)(6) and a violation of R.C. § 2917.11(B), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that constitutes the basis of the charge of the
violation of division (f)(6).
      (5)   Whoever violates division (b)(7), (b)(8), (c)(7), or (c)(8) is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (f)(7) is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3743.99(C), (D), (F) - (H))
§ 672.11 SALE OF KNIVES TO MINORS.
   (a)   No person shall sell, furnish or give to a minor, or buy for a minor,
a knife commonly known as a switchblade knife, or any other weapon of like
nature, and no minor shall own or have charge or control of such weapon.
   (b)   No person shall sell, furnish or give to a minor, or buy for a minor,
and no minor shall possess, a knife having a blade of two and one-half inches
or more, except where the use thereof is incidental to, necessary for, and in
proximity to, the preparation of food or household or business purposes.
   (c)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(1964 Code, § 549.11)
§ 672.12 ENDANGERING AIRCRAFT AND AIRPORT OPERATIONS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   AIR GUN. A hand pistol or rifle that propels its projectile by
means of releasing compressed air, carbon dioxide or other gas.
      (2)   AIRPORT OPERATIONAL SURFACE. Any surface of land or water that is
developed, posted or marked so as to give an observer reasonable notice that
the surface is designed and developed for the purpose of storing, parking,
taxiing or operating aircraft, or any surface of land or water that is actually
being used for any of those purposes.
      (3)   FIREARM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2923.11.
      (4)   SPRING-OPERATED GUN. A hand pistol or rifle that propels a
projectile not less than four or more than five millimeters in diameter by
means of a spring.
   (b)   No person shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly throw an object at, or drop an object upon, any moving
aircraft; or
      (2)   Knowingly shoot with a bow and arrow, or knowingly discharge a
firearm, air gun or spring-operated gun, at or toward any aircraft.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly or recklessly shoot with a bow and arrow, or
shall knowingly or recklessly discharge a firearm, air gun or spring-operated
gun, upon or over any airport operational surface. This division (c) does not
apply to the following:
      (1)   An officer, agent or employee of this or any other state or of the
United States, or a law enforcement officer, authorized to discharge firearms
and acting within the scope of his or her duties; or
      (2)   A person who, with the consent of the owner or operator of the
airport operational surface or the authorized agent of either, is lawfully
engaged in any hunting or sporting activity or is otherwise lawfully
discharging a firearm.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of endangering
aircraft, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation creates any risk
of physical harm to any person, or if the aircraft that is the subject of the
violation is occupied, endangering aircraft is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of endangering
airport operations, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the violation
creates a risk of physical harm to any person or substantial risk of serious
harm to any person, endangering airport operations is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law. In addition to any other penalty or sanction
imposed for the violation, the hunting license or permit of a person who
violates division (c) of this section while hunting shall be suspended or
revoked pursuant to R.C. § 1533.68.
(R.C. § 2909.08(A) - (E))
§ 672.13 POSSESSING CRIMINAL TOOLS.
   (a)   No person shall possess or have under his or her control any
substance, device, instrument or article, with purpose to use it criminally.
   (b)   Each of the following constitutes prima facie evidence of criminal
purpose:
      (1)   Possession or control of any dangerous ordnance, or the materials
or parts for making a dangerous ordnance, in the absence of circumstances
indicating the dangerous ordnance, materials or parts are intended for a
legitimate use;
      (2)   Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument or
article designed or specially adapted for criminal use; and
      (3)   Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument or
article commonly used for criminal purposes, under circumstances indicating the
item is intended for criminal use.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing criminal tools.
Except as otherwise provided in this division (c), possessing criminal tools is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the circumstances indicate that the
substance, device, instrument or article involved in the offense was intended
for use in the commission of a felony, possessing criminal tools is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2923.24)
§ 672.14 POSSESSION OF AN OBJECT INDISTINGUISHABLE FROM A FIREARM IN A SCHOOL
SAFETY ZONE.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly possess an object in a school safety zone if
both of the following apply:
      (1)   The object is indistinguishable from a firearm, whether or not the
object is capable of being fired; and
      (2)   The person indicates that the person possesses the object and that
it is a firearm, or the person knowingly displays or brandishes the object and
indicates that it is a firearm.
   (b)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         A.   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or the
United States who is authorized to carry deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance
and is acting within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s duties;
         B.   A law enforcement officer who is authorized to carry deadly
weapons or dangerous ordnance;
         C.   A security officer employed by a board of education or governing
body of a school during the time that the security officer is on duty pursuant
to that contract of employment;
         D.   1.   Any person not described in divisions (b)(1)A. to (b)(1)C.
of this section who has written authorization from the board of education or
governing body of a school to convey deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance into
a school safety zone or to possess a deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance in a
school safety zone and who conveys or possesses the deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance in accordance with that authorization, provided both of the following
apply:
               a.   Either the person has successfully completed the
curriculum, instruction, and training established under R.C. § 5502.703, or the
person has received a certificate of having satisfactorily completed an
approved basic peace officer training program or is a law enforcement officer;
               b.   The board or governing body has notified the public, by
whatever means the affected school regularly communicates with the public, that
the board or governing body has authorized one or more persons to go armed
within a school operated by the board or governing authority.
            2.   A district board or school governing body that authorizes a
person under division (b)(1)D. of this section shall require that person to
submit to an annual criminal records check conducted in the same manner as R.C.
§ 3319.39 or R.C. § 3319.391.
         E.   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance, and who is subject to and in
compliance with the requirements of R.C. § 109.801, unless the appointing
authority of the person has expressly specified that the exemption provided in
division (b)(1)E. of this section does not apply to the person.
      (2)   This section does not apply to premises upon which home schooling
is conducted. This section also does not apply to a school administrator,
teacher or employee who possesses an object that is indistinguishable from a
firearm for legitimate school purposes during the course of employment, a
student who uses an object that is indistinguishable from a firearm under the
direction of a school administrator, teacher or employee, or any other person
who, with the express prior approval of a school administrator, possesses an
object that is indistinguishable from a firearm for a legitimate purpose,
including the use of the object in a ceremonial activity, a play, re-enactment
or other dramatic presentation, school safety training, or a ROTC activity or
another similar use of the object.
      (3)   This section does not apply to a person who conveys or attempts to
convey a handgun into, or possesses a handgun in, a school safety zone if, at
the time of that conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession of the
handgun, all of the following apply:
         A.   The person does not enter into a school building or onto school
premises and is not at a school activity;
         B.   The person has been issued a concealed handgun license that is
valid at the time of the conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession or the
person is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         C.   The person is in the school safety zone in accordance with 18
U.S.C. § 922(q)(2)(B); and
         D.   The person is not knowingly in a place described in R.C. §
2923.126(B)(1) or (B)(3) to (B)(8).
      (4)   This section does not apply to a person who conveys or attempts to
convey a handgun into, or possesses a handgun in, a school safety zone if at
the time of that conveyance, attempted conveyance or possession of the handgun
all of the following apply:
         A.   The person has been issued a concealed handgun license that is
valid at the time of the conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession or the
person is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         B.   The person leaves the handgun in a motor vehicle.
         C.   The handgun does not leave the motor vehicle.
         D.   If the person exits the motor vehicle, the person locks the motor
vehicle.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal possession of an
object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone. Except as
otherwise provided in this division (c), illegal possession of an object
indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of this section, illegal possession of an object indistinguishable from a
firearm in a school safety zone is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (d)   (1)   In addition to any other penalty imposed upon a person who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section, and subject to
division (d)(2) of this section, if the offender has not attained 19 years of
age, regardless of whether the offender is attending or is enrolled in a school
operated by a board of education or for which the Director of Education and
Workforce prescribes minimum standards under R.C. § 3301.07, the court shall
impose upon the offender a class four suspension of the offender's probationary
driver's license, restricted license, driver's license, commercial driver's
license, temporary instruction permit or probationary commercial driver's
license that then is in effect from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4)
and shall deny the offender the issuance of any permit or license of that type
during the period of the suspension. If the offender is not a resident of this
state, the court shall impose a class four suspension of the nonresident
operating privilege of the offender from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02
(A)(4).
      (2)   If the offender shows good cause why the court should not suspend
one of the types of licenses, permits or privileges specified in division (d)
(1) of this section or deny the issuance of one of the temporary instruction
permits specified in division (d)(1) of this section, the court in its
discretion may choose not to impose the suspension, revocation or denial
required in division (d)(1) of this section, but the court, in its discretion,
instead may require the offender to perform community service for a number of
hours determined by the court.
   (e)   As used in this section, OBJECT THAT IS INDISTINGUISHABLE FROM A
FIREARM means an object made, constructed or altered so that, to a reasonable
person without specialized training in firearms, the object appears to be a
firearm.
(R.C. § 2923.122(C) - (G))
Statutory reference:
   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance in a school
safety zone, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.122(A), (B)
§ 672.15 CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSES; POSSESSION OF A REVOKED OR SUSPENDED
LICENSE; ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS; POSTING OF SIGNS PROHIBITING POSSESSION.
   (a)   Possession of a revoked or suspended concealed handgun license.
      (1)   No person, except in the performance of official duties, shall
possess a concealed handgun license that was issued and that has been revoked
or suspended.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (a) is guilty of possessing a
revoked or suspended concealed handgun license, a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 2923.1211(B), (C))
   (b)   Additional restrictions. Pursuant to R.C. § 2923.126:
      (1)   A concealed handgun license that is issued under R.C. § 2923.125
shall expire five years after the date of issuance. A licensee who has been
issued a license under that section shall be granted a grace period of 30 days
after the licensee’s license expires during which the licensee’s license
remains valid. Except as provided in divisions (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this
section, a licensee who has been issued a concealed handgun license under R.C.
§ 2923.125 or 2923.1213 may carry a concealed handgun anywhere in this state if
the license is valid when the licensee is in actual possession of a concealed
handgun. The licensee shall give notice of any change in the licensee’s
residence address to the sheriff who issued the license within 45 days after
that change.
      (2)   A valid concealed handgun license does not authorize the licensee
to carry a concealed handgun in any manner prohibited under R.C. § 2923.12(B)
or in any manner prohibited under R.C. § 2923.16. A valid license does not
authorize the licensee to carry a concealed handgun into any of the following
places:
         A.   A police station, sheriff’s office, or state highway patrol
station, premises controlled by the bureau of criminal identification and
investigation; a state correctional institution, jail, workhouse, or other
detention facility; any area of an airport passenger terminal that is beyond a
passenger or property screening checkpoint or to which access is restricted
through security measures by the airport authority or a public agency; or an
institution that is maintained, operated, managed, and governed pursuant to
R.C. § 5119.14(A) or R.C. § 5123.03(A)(1);
         B.   A school safety zone if the licensee’s carrying the concealed
handgun is in violation of R.C. § 2923.122;
         C.   A courthouse or another building or structure in which a
courtroom is located if the licensee's carrying the concealed handgun is in
violation of R.C. § 2923.123;
         D.   Any premises or open air arena for which a D permit has been
issued under R.C. Chapter 4303, if the licensee’s carrying the concealed
handgun is in violation of R.C. § 2923.121;
         E.   Any premises owned or leased by any public or private college,
university or other institution of higher education, unless the handgun is in a
locked motor vehicle or the licensee is in the immediate process of placing the
handgun in a locked motor vehicle or unless the licensee is carrying the
concealed handgun pursuant to a written policy, rule, or other authorization
that is adopted by the institution’s board of trustees or other governing body
and that authorizes specific individuals or classes of individuals to carry a
concealed handgun on the premises;
         F.   Any church, synagogue, mosque or other place of worship, unless
the church, synagogue, mosque or other place of worship posts or permits
otherwise;
         G.   Any building that is a government facility of this state or a
political subdivision of this state and that is not a building that is used
primarily as a shelter, restroom, parking facility for motor vehicles, or rest
facility and is not a courthouse or other building or structure in which a
courtroom is located that is subject to division (b)(2)C. of this section,
unless the governing body with authority over the building has enacted a
statute, ordinance, or policy that permits a licensee to carry a concealed
handgun into the building; or
         H.   A place in which federal law prohibits the carrying of handguns.
      (3)   A.   Nothing in this division (b) shall negate or restrict a rule,
policy or practice of a private employer that is not a private college,
university or other institution of higher education concerning or prohibiting
the presence of firearms on the private employer’s premises or property,
including motor vehicles owned by the private employer. Nothing in this
division (b) shall require a private employer of that nature to adopt a rule,
policy or practice concerning or prohibiting the presence of firearms on the
private employer’s premises or property, including motor vehicles owned by the
private employer.
         B.   1.   A private employer shall be immune from liability in a civil
action for any injury, death or loss to person or property that allegedly was
caused by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto the premises or
property of the private employer, including motor vehicles owned by the private
employer, unless the private employer acted with malicious purpose. A private
employer is immune from liability in a civil action for any injury, death or
loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by or related to the
private employer’s decision to permit a licensee to bring, or prohibit a
licensee from bringing, a handgun onto the premises or property of the private
employer.
            2.   A political subdivision shall be immune from liability in a
civil action, to the extent and in the manner provided in R.C. Chapter 2744,
for any injury, death or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused
by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto any premises or property
owned, leased or otherwise under the control of the political subdivision. As
used in this division (b), POLITICAL SUBDIVISION has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2744.01.
            3.   An institution of higher education shall be immune from
liability in a civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or
property that allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a
handgun onto the premises of the institution, including motor vehicles owned by
the institution, unless the institution acted with malicious purpose. An
institution of higher education is immune from liability in a civil action for
any injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by
or related to the institution’s decision to permit a licensee or class of
licensees to bring a handgun onto the premises of the institution.
            4.   A nonprofit corporation shall be immune from liability in a
civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that
allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto the
premises of the nonprofit corporation, including any motor vehicle owned by the
nonprofit corporation, or to any event organized by the nonprofit corporation,
unless the nonprofit corporation acted with malicious purpose. A nonprofit
corporation is immune from liability in a civil action for any injury, death,
or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by or related to the
nonprofit corporation’s decision to permit a licensee to bring a handgun onto
the premises of the nonprofit corporation or to any event organized by the
nonprofit corporation.
         C.   1.   a.   Except as provided in division (b)(3)C.2. of this
section and R.C. § 2923.1214, the owner or person in control of private land or
premises, and a private person or entity leasing land or premises owned by the
state, the United States, or a political subdivision of the state or the United
States, may post a sign in a conspicuous location on that land or on those
premises prohibiting persons from carrying firearms or concealed firearms on or
onto that land or those premises. Except as otherwise provided in this division
(b), a person who knowingly violates a posted prohibition of that nature is
guilty of criminal trespass in violation of R.C. § 2911.21(A)(4) and is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If a person knowingly violates a posted
prohibition of that nature and the posted land or premises primarily was a
parking lot or other parking facility, the person is not guilty of criminal
trespass under R.C. § 2911.21 or under any other criminal law of this state or
criminal law, ordinance, or resolution of a political subdivision of this
state, and instead is subject only to a civil cause of action for trespass
based on the violation.
               b.   If a person knowingly violates a posted prohibition of the
nature described in this division and the posted land or premises is a child
care center, type A family child care home, or type B family child care home,
unless the person is a licensee who resides in a type A family child care home
or type B family child care home, the person is guilty of aggravated trespass
in violation of R.C. § 2911.211. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the person
previously has been convicted of a violation of this division or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any offense of
violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for
which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is
dangerous ordnance, the offender is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
            2.   A landlord may not prohibit or restrict a tenant who is a
licensee and who on or after September 9, 2008 enters into a rental agreement
with the landlord for the use of residential premises, and the tenant’s guest
while the tenant is present, from lawfully carrying or possessing a handgun on
those residential premises.
            3.   As used in division (b)(3)C. of this section:
               a.   RESIDENTIAL PREMISES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5321.01, except RESIDENTIAL PREMISES does not include a dwelling unit that is
owned or operated by a college or university.
               b.   LANDLORD, TENANT and RENTAL AGREEMENT. Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 5321.01.
      (4)   A person who holds a valid concealed handgun license issued by
another state that is recognized by the Attorney General pursuant to a
reciprocity agreement entered into pursuant to R.C. § 109.69 or a person who
holds a valid concealed handgun license under the circumstances described in
R.C. § 109.69(B) has the same right to carry a concealed handgun in this state
as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license under R.C. § 2923.125
and is subject to the same restrictions that apply to a person who has been
issued a license under that section that is valid at the time in question.
      (5)   A.   A peace officer has the same right to carry a concealed
handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license
under R.C. § 2923.125, provided that the officer when carrying a concealed
handgun under authority of this division is carrying validating identification.
For purposes of reciprocity with other states, a peace officer shall be
considered to be a licensee in this state.
         B.   An active duty member of the armed forces of the United States
who is carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of
successful completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training
requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1) has the same right to carry a
concealed handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun
license under R.C. § 2923.125 and is subject to the same restrictions as
specified in this division (b).
         C.   A tactical medical professional who is qualified to carry
firearms while on duty under R.C. § 109.771 has the same right to carry a
concealed handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun
license under R.C. § 2923.125.
         D.   A fire investigator who is qualified to carry firearms while on
duty under R.C. § 109.774 has the same right to carry a concealed handgun in
this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license under R.C. §
2923.125.
      (6)   A.   A qualified retired peace officer who possesses a retired
peace officer identification card issued pursuant to division (b)(6)B. of this
section and a valid firearms requalification certification issued pursuant to
division (b)(6)C. of this section has the same right to carry a concealed
handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license
under R.C. § 2923.125 and is subject to the same restrictions that apply to a
person who has been issued a license issued under that section that is valid at
the time in question. For purposes of reciprocity with other states, a
qualified retired peace officer who possesses a retired peace officer
identification card issued pursuant to division (b)(6)B. of this section and a
valid firearms requalification certification issued pursuant to division (b)
(6)C. of this section shall be considered to be a licensee in this state.
         B.   1.   Each public agency of this state or of a political
subdivision of this state that is served by one or more peace officers shall
issue a retired peace officer identification card to any person who retired
from service as a peace officer with that agency, if the issuance is in
accordance with the agency’s policies and procedures and if the person, with
respect to the person’s service with that agency, satisfies all of the
following:
               a.   The person retired in good standing from service as a peace
officer with the public agency, and the retirement was not for reasons of
mental instability;
               b.   Before retiring from service as a peace officer with that
agency, the person was authorized to engage in or supervise the prevention,
detection, investigation or prosecution of, or the incarceration of any person
for, any violation of law and the person had statutory powers of arrest;
               c.   At the time of the person’s retirement as a peace officer
with that agency, the person was trained and qualified to carry firearms in the
performance of the peace officer’s duties; and
               d.   Before retiring from service as a peace officer with that
agency, the person was regularly employed as a peace officer for an aggregate
of 15 years or more, or, in the alternative, the person retired from service as
a peace officer with that agency, after completing any applicable probationary
period of that service, due to a service-connected disability, as determined by
the agency.
            2.   A retired peace officer identification card issued to a person
under division (b)(6)B.1. of this section shall identify the person by name,
contain a photograph of the person, identify the public agency of this state or
of the political subdivision of this state from which the person retired as a
peace officer and that is issuing the identification card, and specify that the
person retired in good standing from service as a peace officer with the
issuing public agency and satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (b)
(6)B.1.a. to (b)(6)B.1.d. of this section. In addition to the required content
specified in this division (b), a retired peace officer identification card
issued to a person under division (b)(6)B.1. of this section may include the
firearms requalification certification described in division (b)(6)C. of this
section, and if the identification card includes that certification, the
identification card shall serve as the firearms requalification certification
for the retired peace officer. If the issuing public agency issues credentials
to active law enforcement officers who serve the agency, the agency may comply
with division (b)(6)B.1. of this section by issuing the same credentials to
persons who retired from service as a peace officer with the agency and who
satisfy the criteria set forth in divisions (b)(6)B.1.a. to (b)(6)B.1.d. of
this section, provided that the credentials so issued to retired peace officers
are stamped with the word “RETIRED.”
            3.   A public agency of this state or of a political subdivision of
this state may charge persons who retired from service as a peace officer with
the agency a reasonable fee for issuing to the person a retired peace officer
identification card pursuant to division (b)(6)B.1. of this section.
         C.   1.   If a person retired from service as a peace officer with a
public agency of this state or of a political subdivision of this state and the
person satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (b)(6)B.1.a. to (b)
(6)B.1.d. of this section, the public agency may provide the retired peace
officer with
the opportunity to attend a firearms requalification program that is approved
for purposes of firearms requalification required under R.C. § 109.801. The
retired peace officer may be required to pay the cost of the course.
            2.   If a retired peace officer who satisfies the criteria set
forth in divisions (b)(6)B.1.a. to (b)(6)B.1.d. of this section attends a
firearms requalification program that is approved for purposes of firearms
requalification required under R.C. § 109.801, the retired peace officer’s
successful completion of the firearms requalification program requalifies the
retired peace officer for purposes of division (b)(6) of this section for five
years from the date on which the program was successfully completed, and the
requalification is valid during that five-year period. If a retired peace
officer who satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (b)(6)B.1.a. to (b)
(6)B.1.d. of this section satisfactorily completes such a firearms
requalification program, the retired peace officer shall be issued a firearms
requalification certification that identifies the retired peace officer by
name, identifies the entity that taught the program, specifies that the retired
peace officer successfully completed the program, specifies the date on which
the course was successfully completed, and specifies that the requalification
is valid for five years from that date of successful completion. The firearms
requalification certification for a retired peace officer may be included in
the retired peace officer identification card issued to the retired peace
officer under division (b)(6)B. of this section.
            3.   A retired peace officer who attends a firearms requalification
program that is approved for purposes of firearms requalification required
under R.C. § 109.801 may be required to pay the cost of the program.
      (7)   For the purpose of division (b) of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         A.   FIRE INVESTIGATOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 109.71
         B.   GOVERNING BODY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 154.01.
         C.   GOVERNMENT FACILITY OF THIS STATE or A POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OF
THIS STATE. Any of the following:
            1.   A building or part of a building that is owned or leased by
the government of this state or a political subdivision of this state and where
employees of the government of this state or the political subdivision
regularly are present for the purpose of performing their official duties as
employees of the state or political subdivision; or
            2.   The office of a Deputy Registrar serving pursuant to R.C.
Chapter 4503 that is used to perform deputy registrar functions.
         D.   NONPROFIT CORPORATION. Means any private organization that is
exempt from federal income taxation pursuant to subsection 501(a) and described
in subsection 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         E.   QUALIFIED RETIRED PEACE OFFICER. A person who satisfies all of
the following:
            1.   The person satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (b)
(6)B.1.a. to (b)(6)B.1.d. of this section;
            2.   The person is not under the influence of alcohol or another
intoxicating or hallucinatory drug or substance; and
            3.   The person is not prohibited by federal law from receiving
firearms.
         F.   RETIRED PEACE OFFICER IDENTIFICATION CARD. An identification card
that is issued pursuant to division (b)(6)B. of this section to a person who is
a retired peace officer.
         G.   TACTICAL MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
109.71.
         H.   VALIDATING IDENTIFICATION. Means photographic identification
issued by the agency for which an individual serves as a peace officer that
identifies the individual as a peace officer of the agency.
(R.C. § 2923.126)
   (c)   Posting of signs prohibiting possession. Each person, board, or entity
that owns or controls any place or premises identified in R.C. § 2923.126(B) as
a place into which a valid license does not authorize the licensee to carry a
concealed handgun, or a designee of such a person, board, or entity, shall post
in the following one or more conspicuous locations in the premises a sign that
contains a statement in substantially the following form: "Unless otherwise
authorized by law, pursuant to the Ohio Revised Code, no person shall knowingly
possess, have under the person's control, convey, or attempt to convey a deadly
weapon or dangerous ordnance onto these premises."
(R.C. § 2923.1212)
§ 672.16 DEFACED FIREARMS.
   (a)   No person shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Change, alter, remove or obliterate the name of the manufacturer,
model, manufacturer’s serial number or other mark of identification on a
firearm; or
      (2)   Possess a firearm knowing or having reasonable cause to believe
that the name of the manufacturer, model, manufacturer’s serial number or other
mark of identification on the firearm has been changed, altered, removed or
obliterated.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) of this section is guilty of
defacing identification marks of a firearm. Except as otherwise provided in
this division (b), defacing identification marks of a firearm is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of division (a)(1) of this section, defacing
identification marks of a firearm is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of
possessing a defaced firearm. Except as otherwise provided in this division (b)
(2), possessing a defaced firearm is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
division (a)(2) of this section, possessing a defaced firearm is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (c)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any firearm on which no
manufacturer’s serial number was inscribed at the time of its manufacture.
(R.C. § 2923.201)
CHAPTER 698: PENALTIES AND SENTENCING
Section
   
698.01   Definitions
   
698.02   Penalties for misdemeanor
   
698.03   Imposing sentence for misdemeanor
   
698.04   Organizational penalties
   
698.05   Multiple sentences
   
698.06   Modification of sentence (Repealed)
   
698.07   Suspension of driver’s license
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Burden and degree of proof, see R.C. § 2901.05
   Classification of offenses, see §
606.03
   Criminal law jurisdiction, see §
606.055
   Criteria for probation; conditions for probation, see R.C. § 2951.02
   Culpable mental states, see §
606.02
   Definition of “imprisoned,” see R.C. § 1.05
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Degree of offense; charge and verdict; prior conviction, see R.C. § 2945.75
   General provisions; administration and enforcement, see
Ch. 606
   Limitation on prosecutions, see §
606.06
   Obstructing justice, see §
606.15
   Organizational criminal liability, see §
606.08
   Payment of costs and expenses on change of venue, see R.C. § 2931.31
   Personal accountability for organizational conduct, see §
606.09
   Procedure on change of venue, see R.C. § 2931.29
   Requirements for criminal liability, see §
606.07
   Rules of construction, see §
606.05
   Satisfaction of fine; credit for time served, see R.C. § 2947.14
   Sentencing for sexually oriented offenses; sexual predators; registration,
see §
666.99
   Transfer of prisoner on change of venue, see R.C. § 2931.30
   Treatment of drug dependent persons in lieu of conviction, see R.C. §
2951.041
   Venue, see R.C. § 2901.12
§ 698.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   DANGEROUS OFFENDER. A person who has committed an offense, whose
history, character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or she will
be a danger to others, and whose conduct has been characterized by a pattern of
repetitive, compulsive or aggressive behavior with heedless indifference to the
consequences.
   (b)   REPEAT OFFENDER. A person who has a history of persistent criminal
activity and whose character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or
she will commit another offense. It is prima facie evidence that a person is a
REPEAT OFFENDER if any of the following applies:
      (1)   Having been convicted of one or more offenses of violence, as
defined in R.C. § 2901.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent offense of
violence;
      (2)   Having been convicted of one or more sexually oriented offenses, as
defined in R.C. § 2950.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent sexually
oriented offense;
      (3)   Having been convicted of one or more theft offenses, as defined in
R.C. § 2913.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for one or more
of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent theft offense;
      (4)   Having been convicted of one or more felony drug abuse offenses, as
defined in R.C. § 2925.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent felony drug
abuse offense;
      (5)   Having been convicted of two or more felonies, and having been
imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such offense, the person commits a
subsequent offense; or
      (6)   Having been convicted of three or more offenses of any type or
degree other than traffic offenses, alcoholic intoxication offenses or minor
misdemeanors, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such
offense, the person commits a subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 2935.36(E))
§ 698.02 PENALTIES FOR MISDEMEANOR.
   (a)   Considerations in misdemeanor sentencing.
      (1)   A court that sentences an offender for a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor violation of any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, or of any
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised Code, shall be guided
by the overriding purposes of misdemeanor sentencing. The overriding purposes
of misdemeanor sentencing are to protect the public from future crime by the
offender and others and to punish the offender. To achieve those purposes, the
sentencing court shall consider the impact of the offense upon the victim and
the need for changing the offender’s behavior, rehabilitating the defender and
making restitution to the victim of the offense, the public, or the victim and
the public.
      (2)   A sentence imposed for a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation
of an Ohio Revised Code provision or for a violation of a municipal ordinance
that is subject to division (a)(1) of this section shall be reasonably
calculated to achieve the two overriding purposes of misdemeanor sentencing set
forth in division (a)(1) of this section, commensurate with and not demeaning
to the seriousness of the offender’s conduct and its impact upon the victim,
and consistent with sentences imposed for similar offenses committed by similar
offenders.
      (3)   A court that imposes a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor
or minor misdemeanor violation of an Ohio Revised Code provision or for a
violation of a municipal ordinance that is subject to division (a)(1) of this
section shall not base the sentence upon the race, ethnic background, gender or
religion of the offender.
      (4)   Divisions (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section shall not apply to any
offense that is disposed of by a traffic violations bureau of any court
pursuant to Traffic Rule 13 and shall not apply to any violation of any
provision of the Ohio Revised Code that is a minor misdemeanor and that is
disposed of without a court appearance. Divisions (a)(1) to (a)(3) of this
section do not affect any penalties established by the municipality for a
violation of its ordinances that are not substantially equivalent to a
misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised
Code.
(R.C. § 2929.21)
   (b)   Misdemeanor jail terms.
      (1)   Except as provided in §
666.99 or
698.03 of this code or R.C. § 2929.22 or 2929.23 or division (b)(5) of this
section and unless another term is required or authorized pursuant to law, if
the sentencing court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor
elects or is required to impose a jail term on the offender pursuant to this
chapter, the court shall impose a definite jail term that shall be one of the
following:
         A.   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than 180 days;
         B.   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than 90 days;
         C.   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than 60 days; or
         D.   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than 30 days.
      (2)   A.   A court that sentences an offender to a jail term under
division (b) of this section may permit the offender to serve the sentence in
intermittent confinement or may authorize a limited release of the offender as
provided in division (d)(2) of this section. The court retains jurisdiction
over every offender sentenced to jail to modify the jail sentence imposed at
any time, but the court shall not reduce any mandatory jail term.
         B.   1.   If a prosecutor, as defined in R.C. § 2935.01, has filed a
notice with the court that the prosecutor wants to be notified about a
particular case and if the court is considering modifying the jail sentence of
the offender in that case, the court shall notify the prosecutor that the court
is considering modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case. The
prosecutor may request a hearing regarding the court’s consideration of
modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, and, if the
prosecutor requests a hearing, the court shall notify the eligible offender of
the hearing.
            2.   If the prosecutor requests a hearing regarding the court’s
consideration of modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, the
court shall hold the hearing before considering whether or not to release the
offender from the offender’s jail sentence.
      (3)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under division (b)
of this section and the court assigns the offender to a County Jail that has
established a County Jail Industry Program pursuant to R.C. § 5147.30, the
court shall specify, as part of the sentence, whether the offender may be
considered for participation in the program. During the offender’s term in the
County Jail, the court retains jurisdiction to modify its specification
regarding the offender’s participation in the County Jail Industry Program.
      (4)   If a person sentenced to a jail term pursuant to division (b) of
this section, the court may impose as part of the sentence pursuant to R.C. §
2929.28 a reimbursement sanction, and, if the local detention facility in which
the term is to be served is covered by a policy adopted pursuant to R.C. §§
307.93, 341.14, 341.19, 341.21, 341.23, 753.02, 753.04, 753.16, 2301.56 or
2947.19 and 2929.37, both of the following apply:
         A.   The court shall specify both of the following as part of the
sentence:
            1.   If the person is presented with an itemized bill pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.37 for payment of the costs of confinement, the person is required
to pay the bill in accordance with that section; and
            2.   If the person does not dispute the bill described in division
(b)(4)A.1. of this section and does not pay the bill by the times specified in
R.C. § 2929.37, the Clerk of the Court may issue a certificate of judgment
against the person as described in that section.
         B.   The sentence automatically includes any certificate of judgment
issued as described in division (b)(4)A.2. of this section.
      (5)   A.   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
misdemeanor violation of R.C. § 2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241 or 2907.25, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and to a specification of the
type described in R.C. § 2941.1421 and if the court imposes a jail term on the
offender for the misdemeanor violation, the court may impose upon the offender
an additional definite jail term as follows:
            1.   Subject to division (b)(5)A.2. of this section, an additional
definite jail term of not more than 60 days; and
            2.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one or more misdemeanor or felony violations of R.C. § 2907.22,
2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241 or 2907.25, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and also was convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1421 regarding one or more
of those violations, an additional definite jail term of not more than 120
days.
         B.   In lieu of imposing an additional definite jail term under
division (b)(5)A. of this section, the court may directly impose on the
offender a sanction that requires the offender to wear a real-time processing,
continual tracking electronic monitoring device during the period of time
specified by the court. The period of time specified by the court shall equal
the duration of an additional jail term that the court could have imposed upon
the offender under division (b)(5)A. of this section. A sanction imposed under
this division (b)(5)B. shall commence on the date specified by the court,
provided that the sanction shall not commence until after the offender has
served the jail term imposed for the misdemeanor violation of R.C. § 2907.23,
2907.24, 2907.241 or 2907.25, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, and any residential sanction imposed for the violation under
division (d) of this section or R.C. § 2929.26. A sanction imposed under this
division (b)(5)B. shall be considered to be a community control sanction for
purposes of division (c) of this section or R.C. § 2929.25, and all provisions
of this Code and the Ohio Revised Code that pertain to community control
sanctions shall apply to a sanction imposed under this division (b)(6)B.,
except to the extent that they would by their nature be clearly inapplicable.
The offender shall pay all costs associated with a sanction imposed under this
division (b)(5)B., including the cost of the use of the monitoring device.
      (6)   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor
violation of R.C. § 2903.13 and also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1423 that charges that the
victim of the violation was a woman whom the offender knew was pregnant at the
time of the violation, the court shall impose on the offender a mandatory jail
term that is a definite term of at least 30 days.
      (7)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under this division
(b), the sentencing court retains jurisdiction over the offender and the jail
term. Upon motion of either party or upon the court’s own motion, the court, in
the court’s sole discretion and as the circumstances warrant, may substitute
one or more community control sanctions under division (d) or (e) of this
section for any jail days that are not mandatory jail days.
(R.C. § 2929.24)
   (c)   Misdemeanor community control sanctions.
      (1)   A.   Except as provided in §§
666.99 and
698.03 of this code or R.C. §§ 2929.22 and 2929.23 or when a jail term is
required by law, in sentencing an offender for a misdemeanor, other than a
minor misdemeanor, the sentencing court may do either of the following:
            1.   Directly impose a sentence that consists of one or more
community control sanctions authorized by divisions (d), (e) or (f) of this
section. The court may impose any other conditions of release under a community
control sanction that the court considers appropriate. If the court imposes a
jail term upon the offender, the court may impose any community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions in addition to the jail
term; or
            2.   Impose a jail term under division (b) of this section from the
range of jail terms authorized under that division for the offense, suspend all
or a portion of the jail term imposed, and place the offender under a community
control sanction or combination of community control sanctions authorized under
divisions (d), (e) or (f) of this section.
         B.   The duration of all community control sanctions imposed upon an
offender and in effect for an offender at any time shall not exceed five years.
         C.   At sentencing, if a court directly imposes a community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions pursuant to division (c)
(1)A.1. of this section, the court shall state the duration of the community
control sanctions imposed and shall notify the offender that if any of the
conditions of the community control sanctions are violated the court may do any
of the following:
            1.   Impose a longer time under the same community control sanction
if the total time under all of the offender’s community control sanctions does
not exceed the five-year limit specified in division (c)(1)B. of this section;
            2.   Impose a more restrictive community control sanction under
division (d), (e) or (f) of this section, but the court is not required to
impose any particular sanction or sanctions; or
            3.   Impose a definite jail term from the range of jail terms
authorized for the offense under division (b) of this section.
      (2)   If a court sentences an offender to any community control sanction
or combination of community control sanctions pursuant to division (c)(1)A.1.
of this section, the sentencing court retains jurisdiction over the offender
and the period of community control for the duration of the period of community
control. Upon the motion of either party or on the court’s own motion, the
court, in the court’s sole discretion and as the circumstances warrant, may
modify the community control sanctions or conditions of release previously
imposed, substitute a community control sanction or condition of release for
another community control sanction or condition of release previously imposed,
or impose an additional community control sanction or condition of release.
      (3)   A.   If a court sentences an offender to any community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions authorized under
division (d), (e) or (f) of this section, the court shall place the offender
under the general control and supervision of the court or of a Department of
Probation in the jurisdiction that serves the court for purposes of reporting
to the court a violation of any of the conditions of the sanctions imposed. If
the offender resides in another jurisdiction and a department of probation has
been established to serve the municipal court or county court in that
jurisdiction, the sentencing court may request the municipal court or the
county court to receive the offender into the general control and supervision
of that department of probation for purposes of reporting to the sentencing
court a violation of any of the conditions of the sanctions imposed. The
sentencing court retains jurisdiction over any offender whom it sentences for
the duration of the sanction or sanctions imposed.
         B.   The sentencing court shall require as a condition of any
community control sanction that the offender abide by the law and not leave the
state without the permission of the court or the offender’s probation officer.
In the interests of doing justice, rehabilitating the offender and ensuring the
offender’s good behavior, the court may impose additional requirements on the
offender. The offender’s compliance with the additional requirements also shall
be a condition of the community control sanction imposed upon the offender.
      (4)   A.   If the court imposing sentence upon an offender sentences the
offender to any community control sanction or combination of community control
sanctions authorized under division (d), (e) or (f) of this section, and the
offender violates any of the conditions of the sanctions, the public or private
person or entity that supervises or administers the program or activity that
comprises the sanction shall report the violation directly to the sentencing
court or to the Department of Probation or probation officer with general
control and supervision over the offender. If the public or private person or
entity reports the violation to the Department of Probation or probation
officer, the department or officer shall report the violation to the sentencing
court.
         B.   Except as provided in division (c)(4)C. of this section, if an
offender violates any condition of a community control sanction, the sentencing
court may impose upon the violator one or more of the following penalties:
            1.   A longer time under the same community control sanction if the
total time under all of the community control sanctions imposed on the violator
does not exceed the five-year limit specified in division (c)(1)B. of this
section;
            2.   A more restrictive community control sanction; or
            3.   A combination of community control sanctions, including a jail
term.
         C.   If an offender was acting pursuant to R.C. § 2925.11(B)(2)(b), or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a related provision under
R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14, or R.C. § 2925.141, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and in so doing violated the conditions of a
community control sanction based on a minor drug possession offense, as defined
in R.C. § 2925.11, or violated R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. §
2925.141, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the sentencing
court shall not impose any of the penalties described in division (c)(4)B. of
this section based on the violation.
         D.   If the court imposes a jail term upon a violator pursuant to
division (c)(4)B. of this section, the total time spent in jail for the
misdemeanor offense and the violation of a condition of the community control
sanction shall not exceed the maximum jail term available for the offense for
which the sanction that was violated was imposed. The court may reduce the
longer period of time that the violator is required to spend under the longer
sanction or the more restrictive sanction imposed under division (c)(4)B. of
this section by all or part of the time the violator successfully spent under
the sanction that was initially imposed.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c), if an offender,
for a significant period of time, fulfills the conditions of a community
control sanction imposed pursuant to division (d), (e) or (f) of this section
in an exemplary manner, the court may reduce the period of time under the
community control sanction or impose a less restrictive community control
sanction. Fulfilling the conditions of a community control sanction does not
relieve the offender of a duty to make restitution under division (f) of this
section.
(R.C. § 2929.25)
   (d)   Community residential sanction.
      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law, the court
imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor misdemeanor, may
impose upon the offender any community residential sanction or combination of
community residential sanctions under this division (d). Community residential
sanctions include but are not limited to the following:
         A.   A term of up to 180 days in a halfway house or a term in a
halfway house not to exceed the longest jail term available for the offense,
whichever is shorter, if the political subdivision that would have
responsibility for paying the costs of confining the offender in a jail has
entered into a contract with the halfway house for use of the facility for
misdemeanor offenders; or
         B.   If the offender is an eligible offender, as defined in R.C. §
307.932, a term of up to 60 days in a community alternative sentencing center
or district community alternative sentencing center established and operated in
accordance with that section, in the circumstances specified in that section,
with one of the conditions of the sanction being that the offender successfully
complete the portion of the sentence to be served in the center.
      (2)   A sentence to a community residential sanction under division (d)
(1)B. of this section shall be in accordance with R.C. § 307.932. In all other
cases, the court that sentences an offender to a community residential sanction
under this division (d) may do either or both of the following:
         A.   Permit the offender to serve the offender’s sentence in
intermittent confinement, overnight, on weekends or at any other time or times
that will allow the offender to continue at the offender’s occupation or care
for the offender’s family; and/or
         B.   Authorize the offender to be released so that the offender may
seek or maintain employment, receive education or training, receive treatment,
perform community service, or otherwise fulfill an obligation imposed by law or
by the court. A release pursuant to this division (d) shall be only for the
duration of time that is needed to fulfill the purpose of the release and for
travel that reasonably is necessary to fulfill the purposes of release.
      (3)   The court may order that a reasonable portion of the income earned
by the offender upon a release pursuant to division (d)(2) of this section be
applied to any financial sanction imposed under division (f) of this section.
      (4)   No court shall sentence any person to a prison term for a
misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor, or to a jail term for a minor misdemeanor.
      (5)   If a court sentences a person who has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a misdemeanor to a community residential sanction as described in
division (d)(1) of this section, at the time of reception and at other times
the person in charge of the operation of the halfway house, community
alternative sentencing center, district community alternative sentencing
center, or other place at which the offender will serve the residential
sanction determines to be appropriate, the person in charge of the operation of
the halfway house, community alternative sentencing center, district community
alternative sentencing center, or other place may cause the convicted offender
to be examined and tested for tuberculosis, HIV infection, hepatitis, including
but not limited to hepatitis A, B and C, and other contagious diseases. The
person in charge of the operation of the halfway house, community alternative
sentencing center, district community alternative sentencing center, or other
place at which the offender will serve the residential sanction may cause a
convicted offender in the halfway house, community alternative sentencing
center, district community alternative sentencing center, or other place who
refuses to be tested or treated for tuberculosis, HIV infection, hepatitis,
including but not limited to hepatitis A, B and C, or another contagious
disease to be tested and treated involuntarily.
      (6)   The municipality may enter into a contract with a halfway house for
use of the halfway house to house misdemeanor offenders under a sanction
imposed under division (d)(1)A. of this section.
(R.C. § 2929.26)
   (e)   Nonresidential sanction where jail term is not mandatory.
      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law, the court
imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor misdemeanor, may
impose upon the offender any nonresidential sanction or combination of
nonresidential sanctions authorized under this division (e). Nonresidential
sanctions include but are not limited to the following:
         A.   A term of day reporting;
         B.   A term of house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous
alcohol monitoring or both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol
monitoring, a term of electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring
without house arrest, or a term of house arrest without electronic monitoring
or continuous alcohol monitoring;
         C.   A term of community service of up to 500 hours for misdemeanor of
the first degree or 200 hours for a misdemeanor of the second, third or fourth
degree;
         D.   A term in a drug treatment program with a level of security for
the offender as determined necessary by the court;
         E.   A term of intensive probation supervision;
         F.   A term of basic probation supervision;
         G.   A term of monitored time;
         H.   A term of drug and alcohol use monitoring, including random drug
testing;
         I.   A curfew term;
         J.   A requirement that the offender obtain employment;
         K.   A requirement that the offender obtain education or training;
         L.   Provided the court obtains the prior approval of the victim, a
requirement that the offender participate in victim-offender mediation;
         M.   If authorized by law, suspension of the offender’s privilege to
operate a motor vehicle, immobilization or forfeiture of the offender’s motor
vehicle, a requirement that the offender obtain a valid motor vehicle
operator’s license, or any other related sanction; or
         N.   A requirement that the offender obtain counseling if the offense
is a violation of R.C. § 2919.25 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance or a violation of R.C. § 2903.13 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance involving a person who was a family or household member at
the time of the violation, if the offender committed the offense in the
vicinity of one or more children who are not victims of the offense, and if the
offender or the victim of the offense is a parent, guardian, custodian or
person in loco parentis of one or more of those children. This division (e)
does not limit the court in requiring that the offender obtain counseling for
any offense or in any circumstance not specified in this division (e).
      (2)   If the court imposes a term of community service pursuant to
division (e)(1)C. of this section, the offender may request that the court
modify the sentence to authorize the offender to make a reasonable
contribution, as determined by the court, to the General Fund of the county,
municipality or other local entity that provides funding to the court. The
court may grant the request if the offender demonstrates a change in
circumstances from the date the court imposes the sentence or that the
modification would otherwise be in the interests of justice. If the court
grants the request, the offender shall make a reasonable contribution to the
court, and the clerk of the court shall deposit that contribution into the
General Fund of the county, municipality or other local entity that provides
funding to the court. If more than one entity provides funding to the court,
the clerk shall deposit a percentage of the reasonable contribution equal to
the percentage of funding the entity provides to the court in that entity’s
General Fund.
      (3)   In addition to the sanctions authorized under division (e)(1) of
this section, the court imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a
minor misdemeanor, upon an offender who is not required to serve a mandatory
jail term may impose any other sanction that is intended to discourage the
offender or other persons from committing a similar offense if the sanction is
reasonably related to the overriding purposes and principles of misdemeanor
sentencing.
      (4)   The court imposing a sentence for a minor misdemeanor may impose a
term of community service in lieu of all or part of a fine. The term of
community service imposed for a minor misdemeanor shall not exceed 30 hours.
After imposing a term of community service, the court may modify the sentence
to authorize a reasonable contribution, as determined by the court, to the
appropriate General Fund as provided in division (e)(2) of this section.
(R.C. § 2929.27)
   (f)   Financial sanctions.
      (1)   In addition to imposing court costs pursuant to R.C. § 2947.23, the
court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor, including a minor
misdemeanor, may sentence the offender to any financial sanction or combination
of financial sanctions authorized under this division (f) and, if the offender
is being sentenced for a criminal offense as defined in R.C. § 2930.01, shall
sentence the offender to make restitution pursuant to this division (f) and
R.C. § 2929.281. If the court, in its discretion or as required by this
division (f), imposes one or more financial sanctions, the financial sanctions
that may be imposed pursuant to this division (f) include, but are not limited
to, the following:
         A.   Restitution.
            1.   Unless the misdemeanor offense could be disposed of by the
traffic violations bureau serving the court under Traffic Rule 13, restitution
by the offender to the victim of the offender's crime or the victim's estate,
in an amount based on the victim's economic loss. The court may not impose
restitution as a sanction pursuant to this division if the offense could be
disposed of by the traffic violations bureau serving the court under Traffic
Rule 13. If the court requires restitution, the court shall order that the
restitution be made to the victim in open court or to the adult probation
department that serves the jurisdiction or the clerk of the court on behalf of
the victim.
            2.   The court shall determine the amount of restitution to be paid
by the offender. The victim, victim's representative, victim's attorney, if
applicable, the prosecutor or the prosecutor's designee, and the offender may
provide information relevant to the determination of the amount of restitution.
The amount the court orders as restitution shall not exceed the amount of the
economic loss suffered by the victim as a direct and proximate result of the
commission of the offense. If the court imposes restitution for the cost of
accounting or auditing done to determine the extent of economic loss, the court
may order restitution for any amount of the victim's costs of accounting or
auditing provided that the amount of restitution is reasonable and does not
exceed the value of property or services stolen or damaged as a result of the
offense. If the court decides to or is required to impose restitution, the
court shall hold an evidentiary hearing on restitution if the offender, victim,
victim's representative, victim's attorney, if applicable, or victim's estate
disputes the amount of restitution. The court shall determine the amount of
full restitution by a preponderance of the evidence.
            3.   All restitution payments shall be credited against any
recovery of economic loss in a civil action brought by the victim or the
victim's estate against the offender. No person may introduce evidence of an
award of restitution under this division (f) in a civil action for purposes of
imposing liability against an insurer under R.C. § 3937.18.
            4.   The court may order that the offender pay a surcharge, of not
more than 5% of the amount of the restitution otherwise ordered, to the entity
responsible for collecting and processing restitution payments.
            5.   The victim, victim's attorney, if applicable, or the attorney
for the victim's estate may request that the prosecutor in the case file a
motion, or the offender may file a motion, for modification of the payment
terms of any restitution ordered. If the court grants the motion, it may modify
the payment terms as it determines appropriate but shall not reduce the amount
of restitution ordered, except as provided in R.C. § 2929.281(A).
         B.   Fines. A fine of the type described in divisions (f)(1)B.1. and
(f)(1)B.2. of this section payable to the appropriate entity as required by
law:
            1.   A fine in the following amount:
               a.   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than
$1,000;
               b.   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than $750;
               c.   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than $500;
               d.   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than $250;
or
               e.   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than $150.
            2.   A state fine or cost as defined in R.C. § 2949.111.
         C.   Reimbursement.
            1.   Reimbursement by the offender of any or all of the costs of
sanctions incurred by the government, including, but not limited to, the
following:
               a.   All or part of the costs of implementing any community
control sanction, including a supervision fee under R.C. § 2951.021 and the
costs of global positioning system device monitoring;
               b.   All or part of the costs of confinement in a jail or other
residential facility, including, but not limited to, a per diem fee for room
and board, the costs of medical and dental treatment, and the costs of
repairing property damaged by the offender while confined; and
               c.   All or part of the cost of purchasing and using an
immobilizing or disabling device, including a certified ignition interlock
device, or a remote alcohol monitoring device that a court orders an offender
to use under R.C. § 4510.13.
            2.   The amount of reimbursement under division (f)(1)C.1. of this
section shall not exceed the total amount of reimbursement the offender is able
to pay and shall not exceed the actual cost of the sanctions. The court may
collect any amount of reimbursement the offender is required to pay under that
division. If the court does not order reimbursement under that division,
confinement costs may be assessed pursuant to a repayment policy adopted under
R.C. § 2929.37. In addition, the offender may be required to pay the fees
specified in R.C. § 2929.38 in accordance with that section.
      (2)   A.   If the court determines a hearing is necessary, the court may
hold a hearing to determine whether the offender is able to pay the financial
sanction imposed pursuant to this division (f) or court costs or is likely in
the future to be able to pay the sanction or costs.
         B.   If the court determines that the offender is indigent and unable
to pay the financial sanction or court costs, the court shall consider imposing
and may impose a term of community service under division (e)(1) of this
section in lieu of imposing a financial sanction or court costs. If the court
does not determine that the offender is indigent, the court may impose a term
of community service under division (e)(1) of this section in lieu of or in
addition to imposing a financial sanction under this division (f) and in
addition to imposing court costs. The court may order community service for a
minor misdemeanor pursuant to division (e)(4) of this section in lieu of or in
addition to imposing a financial sanction under this section and in addition to
imposing court costs. If a person fails to pay a financial sanction or court
costs, the court may order community service in lieu of the financial sanction
or court costs.
      (3)   A.   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon the
offender pursuant to division (f)(1)C. of this section to pay the costs
incurred by a county pursuant to any sanction imposed under division (d), (e)
or (f) of this section or in operating a facility used to confine offenders
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (d) of this section to the County
Treasurer. The County Treasurer shall deposit the reimbursements in the
county’s General Fund. The county shall use the amounts deposited in the Fund
to pay the costs incurred by the county pursuant to any sanction imposed under
division (d), (e) or (f) of this section or in operating a facility used to
confine offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (d) of this
section.
         B.   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon the offender
pursuant to division (f)(1)C. of this section to pay the costs incurred by a
municipal corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed under division (d), (e)
or (f) of this section or in operating a facility used to confine offenders
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (d) of this section to the
Treasurer of the municipal corporation. The Treasurer shall deposit the
reimbursements in the municipal corporation’s General Fund. The municipal
corporation shall use the amounts deposited in the Fund to pay the costs
incurred by the municipal corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed under
division (d), (e) or (f) of this section or in operating a facility used to
confine offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (d) of this
section.
         C.   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed pursuant to
division (f)(1)C. of this section for the costs incurred by a private provider
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (d), (e) or (f) of this section
to the provider.
      (4)   A.   In addition to any other fine that is or may be imposed under
this section, the court imposing sentence upon an offender for misdemeanor
domestic violence or menacing by stalking may impose a fine of not less than
$70 nor more than $500, which shall, except as provided in divisions (f)(4)B.
and (f)(4)C. of this section, be transmitted to the Treasurer of Ohio to be
credited to the address confidentiality program fund created by R.C. § 111.48.
         B.   A court that imposes a fine under division (f)(4)A. of this
section may retain up to 25% of amounts collected in satisfaction of the fine
to cover administrative costs.
         C.   A court that imposes a fine under division (f)(4)A. of this
section may assign up to 25% of amounts collected in satisfaction of the fine
to reimburse the prosecuting attorney for costs associated with prosecution of
the offense.
      (5)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this division (f)(5), a
financial sanction imposed under division (f)(1) of this section is a judgment
in favor of the state or the political subdivision that operates the court that
imposed the financial sanction, and the offender subject to the financial
sanction is the judgment debtor. A financial sanction of reimbursement imposed
pursuant to division (f)(1)C.1.a. of this section upon an offender is a
judgment in favor of the entity administering the community control sanction,
and the offender subject to the financial sanction is the judgment debtor. A
financial sanction of reimbursement imposed pursuant to division (f)(1)C.1.b.
of this section upon an offender confined in a jail or other residential
facility is a judgment in favor of the entity operating the jail or other
residential facility, and the offender subject to the financial sanction is the
judgment debtor. A financial sanction of restitution imposed pursuant to
division (f)(1)A. of this section is an order in favor of the victim of the
offender’s criminal act that can be collected through a certificate of judgment
as described in division (f)(5)B.1. of this section, through execution as
described in division (f)(5)B.2. of this section or through an order as
described in division (f)(5)B.3. of this section and the offender shall be
considered for purposes of the collection as a judgment debtor.
         B.   Once a financial sanction is imposed as a judgment or order under
this division (f), the victim, private provider, state or political subdivision
may do any of the following:
            1.   Obtain from the clerk of the court in which the judgment was
entered, at no charge, a certificate of judgment that shall be in the same
manner and form as a certificate of judgment issued in a civil action;
            2.   Obtain execution of the judgment or order through any
available procedure, including any of the procedures identified in R.C. §
2929.18(D)(1) and (D)(2) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance; or
            3.   Obtain an order for the assignment of wages of the judgment
debtor under R.C. § 1321.33 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (6)   The civil remedies authorized under division (f)(5) of this section
for the collection of the financial sanction supplement, but do not preclude,
enforcement of the criminal sentence.
      (7)   Each court imposing a financial sanction upon an offender under
this division (f) may designate the Clerk of the Court or another person to
collect the financial sanction. The Clerk, or another person authorized by law
or the court to collect the financial sanction may do the following:
         A.   Enter into contracts with one or more public agencies or private
vendors for the collection of amounts due under the sanction. Before entering
into a contract for the collection of amounts due from an offender pursuant to
any financial sanction imposed pursuant to this division (f), a court shall
comply with R.C. §§ 307.86 to 307.92;
         B.   Permit payment of all or any portion of the sanction in
installments, by financial transaction device if the court is a county court or
a municipal court operated by a county, or by any other reasonable method, in
any time, and on any terms that the court considers just. If the court is a
county court or a municipal court operated by a county, the acceptance of
payments by any financial transaction device shall be governed by the policy
adopted by the Board of County Commissioners of the county pursuant to R.C. §
301.28. If the court is a municipal court not operated by a county, the Clerk
may pay any fee associated with processing an electronic transfer out of public
money or may charge the fee to the offender.
         C.   To defray administrative costs, charge a reasonable fee to an
offender who elects a payment plan rather than a lump sum payment of any
financial sanction.
      (8)   No financial sanction imposed under this division (f) shall
preclude a victim from bringing a civil action against the offender.
      (9)   If the court imposes restitution, fines, fees, or incarceration
costs on a business or corporation, it is the duty of the person authorized to
make disbursements from assets of the business or corporation to pay the
restitution, fines, fees, or incarceration costs from those assets.
(R.C. § 2929.28)
§ 698.03 IMPOSING SENTENCE FOR MISDEMEANOR.
   (a)   (1)   Unless a mandatory jail term is required to be imposed by R.C. §
1547.99(G), 4510.14(B) or 4511.19(G), or any other provision of the Revised
Code, or any municipal ordinance, a court that imposes a sentence under this
chapter upon an offender for a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor has discretion
to determine the most effective way to achieve the purposes and principles of
sentencing set forth in §
698.02.
      (2)   Unless a specific sanction is required to be imposed or is
precluded from being imposed by the section setting forth an offense or the
penalty for an offense or by any provision of §
666.99 or 698.02 of this code or R.C. §§ 2929.23 to 2929.28, a court that
imposes a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor may impose on the
offender any sanction or combination of sanctions under §
698.02(b) to (f). The court shall not impose a sentence that imposes an
unnecessary burden on local government resources.
   (b)   (1)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, the
court shall consider all of the following factors:
         A.   The nature and circumstances of the offense or offenses;
         B.   Whether the circumstances regarding the offender and the offense
or offenses indicate that the offender has a history of persistent criminal
activity and that the offender’s character and condition reveal a substantial
risk that the offender will commit another offense;
         C.   Whether the circumstances regarding the offender and the offense
or offenses indicate that the offender’s history, character and condition
reveal a substantial risk that the offender will be a danger to others and that
the offender’s conduct has been characterized by a pattern of repetitive,
compulsive or aggressive behavior with heedless indifference to the
consequences;
         D.   Whether the victim’s youth, age, disability or other factor made
the victim particularly vulnerable to the offense or made the impact of the
offense more serious;
         E.   Whether the offender is likely to commit future crimes in
general, in addition to the circumstances described in divisions (b)(1)B. and
(b)(1)C. of this section.
         F.   Whether the offender has an emotional, mental, or physical
condition that is traceable to the offender’s service in the armed forces of
the United States and that was a contributing factor in the offender’s
commission of the offense or offenses; and
         G.   The offender’s military service record.
      (2)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, in
addition to complying with division (b)(1) of this section, the court may
consider any other factors that are relevant to achieving the purposes and
principles of sentencing set forth in §
698.02(a).
   (c)   Before imposing a jail term as a sentence for a misdemeanor, a court
shall consider the appropriateness of imposing a community control sanction or
a combination of community control sanctions under §
698.02(c), (d), (e), and (f). A court may impose the longest jail term
authorized under §
698.02(b) only upon offenders who commit the worst forms of the offense or upon
offenders whose conduct and response to prior sanctions for prior offenses
demonstrate that the imposition of the longest jail term is necessary to deter
the offender from committing a future criminal offense.
   (d)   (1)   A sentencing court shall consider any relevant oral and written
statement made by the victim, the victim's representative, the victim's
attorney, if applicable, the defendant, the defense attorney, and the
prosecuting authority regarding sentencing for a misdemeanor. This division
does not create any rights to notice other than those rights authorized by R.C.
Chapter 2930.
      (2)   At the time of sentencing for a misdemeanor or as soon as possible
after sentencing, the court shall notify the victim of the offense of the
victim’s right to file an application for an award of reparations pursuant to
R.C. §§ 2743.51 to 2743.72.
(R.C. § 2929.22)
§ 698.04 ORGANIZATIONAL PENALTIES.
   (a)   Regardless of the other penalties provided in §
698.02, an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to §
606.09 shall be fined by the court as follows:
      (1)   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than $5,000;
      (2)   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than $4,000;
      (3)   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than $3,000;
      (4)   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than $2,000;
      (5)   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than $1,000;
      (6)   For a misdemeanor not specifically classified, not more than
$2,000; and
      (7)   For a minor misdemeanor not specifically classified, not more than
$1,000.
   (b)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not specifically
classified, and the section defining the offense or penalty plainly indicates a
purpose to impose the penalty provided for violation upon organizations, then
that penalty shall be imposed in lieu of the penalty provided in this section.
   (c)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not specifically
classified, and the penalty provided includes a higher fine than that provided
in this section, then the penalty imposed shall be pursuant to the penalty
provided for violation of the section defining the offense.
   (d)   This section does not prevent the imposition of available civil
sanctions against an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to §
606.09, either in addition to or in lieu of a fine imposed pursuant to this
section.
(R.C. § 2929.31)
§ 698.05 MULTIPLE SENTENCES.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, R.C. § 2929.14(C)
or 2971.03(D) or (E), a prison term, jail term or sentence of imprisonment
shall be served concurrently with any other prison term, jail term or sentence
of imprisonment imposed by a court of this municipality, the state, another
state or the United States. Except as provided in division (b)(2) of this
section, a jail term or sentence of imprisonment for misdemeanor shall be
served concurrently with a prison term or sentence of imprisonment for felony
served in a state or federal correctional institution.
   (b)   (1)   A jail term or sentence of imprisonment for a misdemeanor shall
be served consecutively to any other prison term, jail term or sentence of
imprisonment when the trial court specifies that it is to be served
consecutively or when it is imposed for a misdemeanor violation of R.C. §
2907.322, 2921.34 or 2923.131. When consecutive sentences are imposed for
misdemeanors under this division (b), the term to be served is the aggregate of
the consecutive terms imposed, except that the aggregate term to be served
shall not exceed 18 months.
      (2)   A jail term or sentence of imprisonment imposed for a misdemeanor
violation of R.C. § 4510.14, 4510.16, 4510.21 or 4511.19, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be served consecutively to a prison term
that is imposed for a felony violation of R.C. § 2903.06, 2903.08 or 4511.19 or
a felony violation of R.C. § 2903.04 involving the operation of a vehicle by
the offender and that is served in a state correctional institution when the
trial court specifies that it is to be served consecutively. When consecutive
jail terms or sentences of imprisonment and prison terms are imposed for one or
more misdemeanors and one or more felonies under this division, the term to be
served is the aggregate of the consecutive terms imposed, and the offender
shall serve all terms imposed for a felony before serving any term imposed for
a misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2929.41)
§ 698.06 MODIFICATION OF SENTENCE (REPEALED).
Editor’s note:
   Section 698.06 was repealed as part of the 2003 updating and revision of
these Codified Ordinances because substantially equivalent state law (R.C. §
2929.51) was repealed by the Ohio General Assembly.
§ 698.07 SUSPENSION OF DRIVER’S LICENSE.
   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4510.07 or in any other provision of
the Revised Code, whenever an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of any provision of this code of ordinances that is substantially
equivalent to a provision of the Revised Code, and a court is permitted or
required to suspend a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit for a violation of that provision, a court, in addition to any other
penalties authorized by law, may suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privileges for the period
of time the court determines appropriate, but the period of suspension imposed
for the violation of the provision of this code of ordinances shall not exceed
the period of suspension that is permitted or required to be imposed for the
violation of the provision of the Revised Code to which the provision of this
code of ordinances is substantially equivalent.
(R.C. § 4510.05)
PART EIGHT - BUSINESS REGULATION AND TAXATION CODE
         TITLE TWO - Business Regulation
            Chap.
804.   Amusement Devices
            Chap.
808.   Cable Service and Competitive Video Service
            Chap.
818.   Firing Ranges
            Chap.
820.   Garage Sales
            Chap.
836.   Landscape Contractors
            Chap.
840.   Model and Speculation Homes
            Chap.
846.   Peddlers, Solicitors and Canvassers
            Chap.
848.   Private Property Used for Public Entertainment
            Chap.
858.   Sanitary Landfills
            Chap.
860.   Sewer Installers
            Chap.
864.   Taxicabs
            Chap.
868.   Topsoil Removal
            Chap.
869.   Operation and Licensing of Sexually Oriented Businesses
         TITLE FOUR - Taxation
            Chap.
890.   Municipal Income Tax Effective Through December 31, 2015
            Chap.
891.   Municipal Income Tax Effective Beginning January 1, 2016
            Chap.
892.   Hotel Tax
            Chap.
894.   Admissions Tax
TITLE TWO - BUSINESS REGULATION
            Chap.
804.   Amusement Devices
            Chap.
808.   Cable Service and Competitive Video Service
            Chap.
818.   Firing Ranges
            Chap.
820.   Garage Sales
            Chap.
836.   Landscape Contractors
            Chap.
840.   Model and Speculation Homes
            Chap.
846.   Peddlers, Solicitors and Canvassers
            Chap.
848.   Private Property Used for Public Entertainment
            Chap.
858.   Sanitary Landfills
            Chap.
860.   Sewer Installers
            Chap.
864.   Taxicabs
            Chap.
868.   Topsoil Removal
            Chap.
869.   Operation and Licensing of Sexually Oriented Businesses
CHAPTER 804: AMUSEMENT DEVICES
Section
   
804.01   Definitions
   
804.02   Permit required
   
804.03   Permit application
   
804.04   Permit issuance; fee; display; renewal; transfer
   
804.05   Number permitted; additional requirements for accessory uses; location
requirements
   
804.06   Permit expiration, suspension or revocation
   
804.07   Forms; rules and regulations; appeals; variances
   
804.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Disturbing the peace, see §
648.09
   Gambling, see
Ch. 630
   Tampering with coin machines, see §
642.13
   Use of slugs, see §
642.16
§ 804.01 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, AMUSEMENT DEVICE means a machine or device which
operates or may be operated for use as a game, contest or amusement of any
description, or which may be used for any such game, contest or amusement.
However, juke boxes, State of Ohio lottery ticket dispensing machines, arcade
or video games not used in association with gambling, billiards, and cigarette
or other vending machines are excluded from this definition.
(Ord. 1982-87, passed 11-1-1982; Ord. 2025-112, passed 6-2-2025)
§ 804.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person, firm, association, corporation or other entity shall possess,
keep, maintain, use, exhibit or operate, or permit to be possessed, kept,
maintained, used, exhibited or operated, in or upon any premises in his or her
possession or under his or her control in any retail or commercial district of
this city, an amusement device, without first obtaining a permit or renewal
thereof from the Chief Building Official.
(Ord. 1983-14, passed 2-7-1983)
§ 804.03 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (a)   Application for an amusement device permit shall be made to the Chief
Building Official or his or her authorized representative on forms to be
prescribed by him or her, and shall state the name and address of the
applicant, if an individual, or if a partnership, association or other entity,
the names, residences and occupations of each member of the partnership,
association or other entity, and if a corporation, the home of its officers and
such other information as the Chief Building Official may require. In addition,
a floor plan shall be provided in a form and detail satisfactory to the Chief
Building Official, showing the proposed placement of amusement devices on the
applicant’s premises in conformance with the criteria governing their placement
and operation.
   (b)   The Chief Building Official shall transmit the permit application and
the floor plan to the Police Chief and Fire Chief, for further inspection and
investigation of the applicant’s fitness to obtain an amusement device permit.
   (c)   “Fitness” of the applicant shall consist of the compliance by the
applicant with all laws of the city and state pertaining to the operation of
the applicant’s business.
(Ord. 1983-14, passed 2-7-1983)
§ 804.04 PERMIT ISSUANCE; FEE; DISPLAY; RENEWAL; TRANSFER.
   (a)   The Chief Building Official shall issue an amusement device permit if
the applicant for such permit is found to have the requisite fitness to obtain
such permit, upon the compliance with all pertinent city and state codes of the
applicant’s floor plan for the placement and location of amusement devices and
upon payment of the proper fee.
   (b)   The annual fee for the permit shall be $50 per amusement device for
the first two devices placed upon the applicant’s business premises and $25 per
each additional amusement device upon such premises.
   (c)   Each permit shall be displayed in a readily visible location upon the
business premises.
   (d)   Applications for the renewal of an amusement device permit shall be
upon a form prescribed by the Chief Building Official and may be filed with him
or her after October 1 but before December 1 of the year preceding the calendar
year for which the renewal is sought. The Chief Building Official shall not
renew a permit until he or she shall have determined that the applicant remains
eligible to receive a renewal of the permit, and that the premises referred to
in the permit is in compliance with all applicable provisions of this Business
Regulation and Taxation Code or other laws of the city and state pertaining to
business operation. In the event of nonrenewal, the Chief Building Official
shall state his or her reason for nonrenewal in writing.
   (e)   Each amusement device permit represents permission for the use of one
amusement device only and shall not be transferable to a replacement amusement
device.
(Ord. 1990-34, passed 2-19-1990)
§ 804.05 NUMBER PERMITTED; ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ACCESSORY USES; LOCATION
REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   The number of devices permitted in any business establishment shall be
limited to two, unless a special use permit for amusement devices as a main or
accessory use has been granted by the Planning Commission in conformance with
the pertinent provisions of the Zoning Code.
   (b)   In its review and consideration of any application for a special use
permit for amusement devices, the Commission shall determine whether the
proposed use detracts from or interferes with the normal and customary
operation of the main use.
   (c)   Amusement devices shall be located on a business premises in such a
manner so as not to impair ingress or egress to the premises and so as not to
interfere with the necessary or customary circulation of customers and
employees. The devices shall also be located in a manner that shall discourage
excessive congregation of persons around the devices. The devices shall also be
located in conformity with the floor plan approved in accordance with the
issuance of an amusement device permit and, where applicable, a special use
permit.
(Ord. 1982-87, passed 11-1-1982)
§ 804.06 PERMIT EXPIRATION, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (a)   Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall
expire upon any of the following conditions:
      (1)   Discontinuance of the permit holder’s business;
      (2)   Removal of a permitted amusement device from the business premises,
which is not replaced within 30 days by another amusement device of similar
size; or
      (3)   Transfer or sale of the business to another individual,
partnership, corporation or other entity.
   (b)   All permits issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter are
subject to suspensions or revocation by the Chief Building Official upon any of
the following conditions:
      (1)   Willful misrepresentation by the permit holder or his or her agent
in applying for the permit;
      (2)   Conviction of the permit holder for any felony or misdemeanor
involving force, violence, disorderly conduct, moral turpitude or gambling, or
involving any violation of this chapter or other provisions of this Business
Regulation and Taxation Code or other laws of the city and state pertaining to
business operation; or
      (3)   The existence of a nuisance to customers, other businesses or the
public stemming from the operation of amusement devices on the permit holder’s
premises. The definition of NUISANCE for the purpose of this division (b)(3)
shall include the violation of any provision of these Codified Ordinances or
the Ohio Revised Code pertaining to force, violence, disorderly conduct, moral
turpitude or gambling.
   (c)   Prior to any action suspending or revoking any permit, the Chief
Building Official shall give the permit holder written notice of such action,
affording an opportunity to the permit holder, which shall not be less than ten
days except in cases of emergency, to correct any such deficiencies forming the
basis for the suspension or revocation. However, this shall not apply to any
determination by the Chief Building Official of nonrenewal of a permit.
(Ord. 1983-14, passed 2-7-1983)
§ 804.07 FORMS; RULES AND REGULATIONS; APPEALS; VARIANCES.
   (a)   The Chief Building Official is authorized and directed to promulgate
such forms, rules and regulations as are necessary for the efficient
administration of this chapter.
   (b)   Appeals from any determination made by the Police Chief, Fire Chief or
Chief Building Official pursuant to this chapter, or requests for variances
from the terms of this chapter, may be taken to the Board of Zoning Appeals in
the manner provided in §§ 1290.04 and 1294.01 of these Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. 1983-14, passed 2-7-1983)
§ 804.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree and shall be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more
than six months, or both, for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 1982-87, passed 11-1-1982)
CHAPTER 808: CABLE SERVICE AND COMPETITIVE VIDEO SERVICE
Section
   
808.01   Title
   
808.02   Definitions
   
808.03   Scope
   
808.04   Necessity of franchise or competitive video service agreement
   
808.05   Grant of authority and general provisions
   
808.06   Specific construction standards
   
808.07   Area covered/provision of service
   
808.08   Emergency and safety alert monitor system
   
808.09   Access channels
   
808.10   Audit and inspection
   
808.11   Fees for operation of cable service and competitive video service
   
808.12   Customer service standards
   
808.13   Indemnification
   
808.14   Liability insurance
   
808.15   Rights of individuals protected
   
808.16   Assignment
   
808.17   Specific rights and remedies
   
808.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Interrupting or impairing television service, see R.C. § 2909.04
   “Property” defined to include cable television service, see §
606.01
   Regulation of political broadcasts, see R.C. § 3599.09
   “Services” defined to include cable television service, see §
642.01
§ 808.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Cable Service and
Competitive Video Service Chapter.
(Ord. 2007-106, passed 5-21-2007)
§ 808.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   AFFILIATE. Any person that directly or indirectly owns or controls the
provider, any person that a provider directly or indirectly owns or controls,
or any person under common ownership or control with a provider.
   (b)   CABLE OPERATOR. Any person or group of persons who has executed a
franchise agreement and:
      (1)   Who provides cable service over a cable system and directly or
through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable
system; or
      (2)   Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system.
   (c)   CABLE SERVICE. The one-way transmission to subscribers of video
programming, or other programming service; and, subscriber interaction, if any,
which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other
programming service. For the purposes of this definition, VIDEO PROGRAMMING is
programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming
provided by, a television broadcast station; and OTHER PROGRAMMING SERVICE is
information that a cable operator makes available to all subscribers generally.
   (d)   CABLE SYSTEM. A facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission
paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is
designed to provide cable service, which includes video programming and which
is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not
include:
      (1)   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of
one or more television broadcast stations;
      (2)   A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-
of-way;
      (3)   A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or part,
to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, except that
such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of 47
U.S.C. § 541(c)) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of
video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is
solely to provide interactive on-demand services;
      (4)   An open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. § 573;
      (5)   Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating
its electric utility system; or
      (6)   The facilities of a competitive video service provider under this
chapter.
   (e)   CITY. The City of Solon, Ohio.
   (f)   COMPETITIVE VIDEO SERVICE. Video programming provided by a competitive
video service provider and provided through cable, telephone access, IP-based
video service, fiber optic video, wireless and/or any other wire-based medium
located at least in part in the public rights-of-way without regard to
delivering technology, including Internet protocol technology. This definition
does not include video programming provided by a commercial mobile service
provider defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d) or video programming delivered over the
public Internet.
   (g)   COMPETITIVE VIDEO SERVICE AGREEMENT. The agreement executed by the
city and a competitive video service provider pursuant to
Chapter 808 of the Solon Codified Ordinances.
   (h)   COMPETITIVE VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER. An entity providing video services
that has not executed a franchise agreement with the city as of the effective
date of this chapter and is not a cable operator, or an affiliate, successor or
assignee of such cable operator.
   (i)   COUNCIL. The elected City Council for the City of Solon, Ohio.
   (j)   FACILITIES. The provider’s existing facilities and facilities to be
installed within the streets that will be constructed, operated, maintained,
repaired and upgraded to provide IP video service and other IP-based services.
Said facilities are a part of and an extension to the provider’s existing
telecommunications facilities and equipment. Should the upgraded equipment be
capable of providing IP video services, then the process outlined in §
808.03(e) shall apply to any such installation.
   (k)   FRANCHISE. An initial authorization, or renewal thereof (including a
renewal of an authorization which has been granted subject to 47 U.S.C. § 546),
issued by the franchising authority, whether such authorization is designated
as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement
or otherwise, which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system
by a cable operator in the city.
   (l)   FRANCHISE AREA. The City of Solon, Ohio.
   (m)   FRANCHISING AGREEMENT. The agreement executed by the franchising
authority and a cable operator pursuant to
Chapter 808 of the Solon Codified Ordinances.
   (n)   FRANCHISING AUTHORITY. The City of Solon, Ohio.
   (o)   GROSS REVENUES. All consideration of any kind or nature, including
without limitation, cash, credits, property and in-kind contributions (services
or goods) received by the provider from the provision of service within the
franchise area.
      (1)   Included items: Subject to division (2) of this definition, the
term GROSS REVENUES shall include the following:
         A.   All charges and fees paid by subscribers for the provision of
service, including fees attributable to service when sold individually or as
part of a package or bundle; and
         B.   All revenue derived from the provider’s service pursuant to
compensation arrangements for advertising attributable to the local service
area.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, the term GROSS REVENUES shall not
include the following:
         A.   Sales of goods and merchandise to the extent that the provider
does not retain the revenue collected;
         B.   Sales and use tax, franchise fees and other governmental charges
and fees collected by the provider;
         C.   Late payment fees;
         D.   Maintenance charges;
         E.   Revenue from the sale of capital assets or surplus equipment not
used by the purchaser to receive services from the seller of those assets or
surplus equipment; or
         F.   Charges, other than those described above, that are aggregated or
bundled with amounts billed to services subscribers including, but not limited
to, any revenues received by a provider or its affiliates for
telecommunications services, information services, or the provision of
directory or Internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner
advertisement and electronic publishing.
   (p)   PERSON. An individual, partnership, association, joint stock company,
trust, corporation or governmental entity.
   (q)   PROVIDER. Either a cable operator or a competitive video service
provider.
   (r)   SERVICE. Either a cable service or competitive video service.
   (s)   SUBSCRIBER. Any person who lawfully subscribes to a service provided
by a provider, whether or not a fee is paid for such service.
   (t)   SYSTEM. Either a cable system or the facilities of a video service
provider that are only used to deliver a competitive video service, including,
but not limited to, cable, telephone access, IP-based video service, fiber
optic video, wireless and/or any other wire-based medium.
(Ord. 2007-106, passed 5-21-2007)
§ 808.03 SCOPE.
   (a)   This is an enabling ordinance authorizing the use of the city’s right-
of-way for the provision of cable service and competitive video service in the
city, but it does not take the place of any license or permit that may be
additionally required by law of the provider, either currently or at some later
date.
   (b)   Any provider that is bound by the terms of an existing franchise
agreement that is in effect in the city at the time of the effective date of
this chapter shall remain bound by the terms of the existing franchise
agreement until the term provided by the existing franchise agreement expires,
unless the existing franchise agreement otherwise provides.
   (c)   It shall be the responsibility of the provider to obtain any and all
such licenses or permits necessary to the operation and conduct of its business
activities.
   (d)   Failure of the provider to obtain and conform to the material
provisions of any and all such franchises, licenses or permits, and to make
prescribed payments if required as a condition of their issuance, shall be
considered a violation of this chapter, and subject the provider to the
penalties set forth in §
808.99.
   (e)   The provider shall not erect any boxes or equipment of any kind
without satisfying code requirements and all relevant processes including the
following:
      (1)   The provider shall submit application to the Planning Commission.
Said application shall include 21 copies of the provider’s plan, including
location, box and/or equipment dimensions and landscaping around the box and/or
equipment;
      (2)   If the provider’s site plan is approved by the Planning Commission,
it will then be referred to the City Council for final determination; and
      (3)   The processes identified in divisions (e)(1) through (e)(2) shall
be accomplished within a 60-day period.
(Ord. 2007-106, passed 5-21-2007)
§ 808.04 NECESSITY OF FRANCHISE OR COMPETITIVE VIDEO SERVICE AGREEMENT.
   (a)   A provider wishing to enter into a franchise agreement or competitive
video service agreement with the city shall comply with the following process:
      (1)   Submit an application with application fee of $750 to the Director
of Information Technology. This application fee shall not be set off against
any payment due under §
808.11. The application shall contain the following information, pursuant to
FCC guidelines, in addition to any information required by state and local
laws:
         A.   The applicant’s name;
         B.   The names of the applicant’s officers and directors;
         C.   The business address of the applicant;
         D.   The name and contact information of a designated contact for the
applicant;
         E.   A description of the geographic area that the applicant proposes
to serve;
         F.   The PEG channel capacity and capital support proposed by the
applicant;
         G.   The term of the agreement proposed by the applicant;
         H.   Whether the applicant holds an existing authorization to access
the public rights-of-way in the subject franchise service area as described
under division (b) hereof;
         I.   The amount of the franchise fee the applicant offers to pay; and
         J.   Any additional information required by applicable state or local
laws.
      (2)   The Information Technology Department shall then refer the
application to the Safety and Public Properties Committee for consideration and
either denial or recommendation to Council.
      (3)   Council shall then consider the application, and upon a vote of
approval, the city and provider shall then enter into either a franchise
agreement or competitive video service agreement.
      (4)   Pursuant to paragraph 66 of the Federal Communication Commission’s
March 5, 2007 Report and Order and Further Notice of Proposed Rule Making, the
city shall have a maximum time frame of 90 days for entities with existing
authority to access the public rights-of-way and six months for entities that
do not have authority to access the public rights-of-way. This provision shall
apply to the extent paragraph 66 remains valid and in effect.
   (b)   No person, firm or corporation shall install or maintain a system in
the city unless a franchise agreement or competitive video service agreement
has been entered into between the person, firm or corporation and the city.
   (c)   No provision of this chapter shall be deemed to require the granting
of a franchise agreement or competitive video service agreement when, after
public hearing, the City Council determines that the issuance of the franchise
agreement or competitive video service agreement is not in the public interest.
   (d)   City Council shall have the authority to waive a public hearing when
it is deemed advisable in the public interest.
   (e)   All franchise agreements and competitive video service agreements
granted by ordinance pursuant to this chapter shall be nonexclusive. Council
reserves the right to issue as many permits as it deems advisable in the public
interest.
   (f)   Any franchise agreements or competitive video service agreements
executed pursuant to this chapter may be revoked, after a full due process
hearing, by a simple majority vote of Council upon the recommendation of the
Mayor, for violation of material provisions of this chapter, after giving the
provider 90 days notice in writing of intention to revoke such permit, unless
such violation is corrected during the period of notice, or unless the provider
has made a reasonable attempt to correct the violation during that time.
   (g)   Council shall have the authority to waive any requirements set forth
in this chapter with regard to any applicant wishing to enter into a franchise
agreement or competitive video service agreement with the city. Said waiver
shall apply to all providers in the city.
(Ord. 2007-106, passed 5-21-2007)
§ 808.05 GRANT OF AUTHORITY AND GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Upon executing a franchise agreement with the city and provided that
all applicable permits are applied for and granted, all fees paid and all other
city codes and ordinances are otherwise complied with, a cable operator is
authorized to occupy or use the public rights-of-way within the geographical
boundaries of the city to construct, operate, maintain, repair and upgrade
existing facilities and install new facilities for the purpose of providing
cable service for within the geographical boundaries of the city. The cable
operator may enter private property only as permitted by the owner of such
private property for the purpose of constructing, operating, maintaining,
repairing and upgrading facilities.
   (b)   Upon executing a competitive video service agreement and provided that
all applicable permits are applied for and granted, all fees paid and all other
city codes and ordinances are otherwise complied with, a competitive video
service provider is authorized to occupy or use the public rights-of-way within
the geographical boundaries of the city to construct, operate, maintain, repair
and upgrade existing facilities and install new facilities for the purpose of
providing competitive video service within the geographical boundaries of the
city. The competitive video service provider may enter private property only as
permitted by the owner of such private property for the purpose of
constructing, operating, maintaining, repairing and upgrading facilities.
   (c)   Each provider must comply with all local, state and federal laws, if
applicable, and agree in its respective franchise agreement or competitive
video service agreement to comply with the requirements set forth in
Chapter 808 of the Solon Codified Ordinances.
   (d)   Prior to any non-emergency construction, reconstruction, upgrade,
rebuild or any modification or change relating to the providing of service,
which includes any work which:
      (1)   Could result in an interruption of service lasting more than three
hours;
      (2)   Could result in a material hindrance to traffic on the streets
which is reasonably foreseeable;
      (3)   Could interfere with the delivery of any utility service in the
city; or
      (4)   Could create a public nuisance or safety hazard, the provider
shall, in each case, file plans with the city and receive written approval of
such plans, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld.
   (e)   Any provider who constructs or maintains any system necessary for the
providing of service, shall do so in such a manner so as not to interfere with
the use of the streets in the city. Each provider shall make use of existing
poles and other facilities available to the providers. Each provider shall
notify all affected persons (whether by posting signs, direct mail,
advertisement in newspaper of general circulation, or other means reasonably
calculated to provide general public notice) of proposed construction work at
least one week prior to commencement of that work. Further, each provider shall
fully participate and cooperate in any one-call or similar system for the
exchange of information on the utility location or work to be conducted. Each
provider shall notify in writing all persons affected by proposed underground
work not less than one week prior to commencement of that work. Such notice
shall include the provider’s telephone number and the name of an individual or
department to contact who is able to answer questions and provide information
about the work.
   (f)   Each provider in the city shall abide by all right-of-way provisions
set forth in the Solon Codified Ordinances.
   (g)   Notwithstanding the above grant to use the rights-of-way, no right-of-
way shall be used by any provider if the city, in its sole opinion, determines
that such use is inconsistent with the terms, conditions or provisions by which
such right-of-way was created or dedicated, or presently used.
   (h)   Each provider’s rights are subject to the police powers of the city to
adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety and welfare of the
public.
(Ord. 2007-106, passed 5-21-2007)
§ 808.06 SPECIFIC CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of §
808.05, the following shall also apply to each provider with regard to any and
all construction performed.
   (a)   All construction practices shall be in accordance with all applicable
sections of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, as amended, being
29 USC 651 et seq., as well as all state and local codes, where applicable, as
adopted by the city.
   (b)   All installation of electronic equipment shall be of permanent nature,
durable and installed in accordance with the provisions of the National
Electrical Safety Code of the National Bureau of Standards and National
Electrical Code of the National Electrical Code of the National Board of Fire
Underwriters.
   (c)   Antennas and their supporting structures (towers) shall be painted,
lighted, erected and maintained in accordance with all applicable rules and
regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration and all other applicable
state and city laws, codes and regulations.
   (d)   (1)   All of the provider’s facilities:
         A.   Shall be installed, located, erected, constructed, reconstructed,
replaced, removed, repaired, maintained and operated in accordance with good
engineering practices; and
         B.   All such work must be performed by experienced maintenance and
construction personnel so as not to endanger or interfere with improvements the
city may deem appropriate to make, interfere in any manner with the rights of
any property owner, or unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the provider’s
rights to access and make use of its own or general utility easements in
accordance with the terms of such easements.
   (e)   The provider shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install
and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices preventing facilities
and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injury or nuisance to the
public.
   (f)   Any and all streets, other public property or private property which
are damaged or disturbed as a result of the construction, installation, repair,
replacement, maintenance or operation of the provider’s facilities shall be
promptly repaired and restored by the provider, at its expense, to a condition
as good as that prevailing prior to said disturbance or damage.
   (g)   If any street or portion thereof is vacated or abandoned by the city
during the term of provider’s agreement, or the provider discontinues the use
of all or part of any street during the term of its agreement, the provider
shall, at provider’s expense, promptly remove the affected portion of the
system. After completing the removal, provider shall repair and reconstruct the
street area where such removal has occurred and restore the street to a
condition substantially similar to that existing before the removal took place.
If provider has not completed the required removal and street restoration
within 30 days of receiving notice from the city to do so, the city has the
option to complete the removal and restoration. All removal and restoration
costs and expenses incurred by the city shall be deducted from the provider’s
performance bond. Any removal and restoration costs and expenses incurred in
excess of the performance bond shall be the direct and uncontested liability of
the provider. The provider must promptly pay all removal and restoration costs
and expenses in excess of the performance bond upon receiving evidence of same
from the city.
(Ord. 2007-106, passed 5-21-2007)
§ 808.07 AREA COVERED/PROVISION OF SERVICE.
   (a)   Service generally. Each provider shall extend their service and make
service available to the dwelling units and places of business in the city
within the time periods and in the manner set forth in each provider’s
respective franchise agreement or competitive video service agreement.
   (b)   Service to schools and public buildings. It is the city’s intention
that each accredited primary and secondary school building, each city
government building, and each public library building within the city be
provided with cable service, IP video service or similar service at no cost,
and that the burden of providing such connections be shared by all cable and IP
video service providers in the city in an equitable manner. The providers will
offer one free installation and free monthly IP video service to one outlet at
each public school, city government building, fire station, police station and
library building that is passed by the provider’s system. The provider shall
have the responsibility to offer a free installation and free monthly IP video
service to a share of such schools, governmental or library buildings. The
provider’s share shall be proportionate to the total number of cable operators
or competitive video service providers unless other negotiated compensation has
been provided to the city. The providers will supply the city with a list
showing the responsibility of who will provide and maintain video or cable
service to which school or public building, within 30 days of the providers’
negotiation for such service.
   (c)   Negotiation. The video service provider shall negotiate with other
providers in good faith, as necessary, to determine who will provide video
service to which school or public building, and the Mayor shall have the right
to participate in such negotiations. If providers are unable to reach agreement
as to who will provide free video service to which school, governmental or
library building, the Mayor, or his or her designee, will confer with the
providers and determine the assignments in a reasonable manner. This obligation
will apply to a new provider of video service once that provider’s video
service is available on the section of its system that passes the school or
public building assigned to that provider. Until such time, the incumbent
provider of video service to that location will provide video service to such
school or public building.
(Ord. 2007-106, passed 5-21-2007)
§ 808.08 EMERGENCY AND SAFETY ALERT MONITOR SYSTEM.
   By December 31, 2007, each provider shall carry all federal, state and local
alerts provided over the Federal Emergency Alert System through the provider’s
cable system in the event of a public safety emergency, which at a minimum will
include the concurrent rebroadcast of local broadcast channels.
(Ord. 2007-106, passed 5-21-2007)
§ 808.09 ACCESS CHANNELS.
   (a)   Each provider shall make available to the city without charge at least
three access channels designated exclusively for public, educational and
governmental use (PEG channels).
   (b)   Each provider shall use its best efforts to maintain the PEG channels
so that they are located adjacent to each other on the channel lineup
throughout the term of their respective franchise agreement or competitive
video service agreement, unless otherwise agreed to by the city.
   (c)   Each provider shall provide 90 days’ advance written notice to the
City Council regarding any proposed change to the PEG channel lineup.
   (d)   The public access channel may be shared at each provider’s discretion
with programming from other communities, a provider’s local origination
productions, leased access programming or other programming similar to what has
been activated and provided as of the effective date of this chapter.
   (e)   Unless preempted by federal law, the PEG channels shall be a part of
each provider’s most basic service plan.
   (f)   The PEG channels shall not be placed on any channel that may
experience direct pickup interference from over-the-air broadcast stations.
   (g)   A provider shall not be involved in the administration of the
municipal government or educational access channels unless requested by the
city.
   (h)   In order to develop, promote and distribute PEG access, providers
shall each, with the exception of the city’s current provider, grant the city a
one-time payment of $16,000 or equipment of equivalent or greater value, or an
amount equal to 0.5% of gross revenues as defined in §
808.02(o), at the discretion of the city. The nature of the grant shall be set
forth in the provider’s franchise agreement or competitive video service
agreement.
(Ord. 2007-106, passed 5-21-2007)
§ 808.10 AUDIT AND INSPECTION.
   (a)   The city, its agents and its representatives shall have the authority,
during normal business hours, to arrange for and conduct an inspection of each
provider’s books, records, documents, maps, plans, performance test results,
records of requests for service, and other like materials relevant to the
provision of service in the city.
   (b)   A provider shall be given ten business days’ advance written notice of
the inspection request and a description, to the best of the city’s ability, of
materials the city desires to inspect.
   (c)   Copies of all petitions, applications, communications and reports
submitted by a provider, or on behalf of or relating to a provider, to the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC), the Securities and Exchange Commission
or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having
jurisdiction over matters affecting the provision of service in the city shall
be made available to the city upon request. Copies of responses from the
regulatory agencies to a provider shall likewise be made available to the city
within 15 days of receipt of the response.
   (d)   Each provider shall maintain and make available for review to the city
upon request at all times a current map or set of maps drawn to scale
disclosing the location of the facilities and/or any and all equipment
installed or in place in streets and other public places that is used for the
provision of service in the city.
(Ord. 2007-106, passed 5-21-2007)
§ 808.11 FEES FOR OPERATION OF CABLE SERVICE AND COMPETITIVE VIDEO SERVICE.
   (a)   Each provider shall pay to the city an annual amount equal to 5%, or
an amount set by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), of its gross
revenues as compensation for rights granted under this chapter and under each
provider’s respective franchise agreement or competitive video service
agreement.
   (b)   Payments due to the city under this section shall be computed at the
end of each calendar quarter. Payments shall be due and payable for each month
not later than 30 days from the last day of each quarter. Each payment shall be
accompanied by a brief report showing the basis for the computation and such
other relevant facts as may be required by the city.
   (c)   No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as an accord that the
amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of payment
be construed as a release of any claim the city may have for further or
additional sums payable under the provisions of this section.
   (d)   The city shall have the right to audit and recompute any amounts
determined to be payable in satisfaction of the fees set forth in this section.
Any additional amount due the city as a result of the audit shall be paid by
the provider within 30 days after the provider receives a written notice from
the city. The notice which the city sends to the provider shall include a copy
of the audit report. The provider shall pay the cost of the audit if the city
determines that the annual payment to the city for the preceding year is
thereby increased by more than 5%.
   (e)   In the event that payment is not made on the due date, interest on the
amount due shall accrue from such date at the lesser of:
      (1)   The annual rate of 12%; or
      (2)   The maximum rate permitted by law.
   (f)   Any interest payments made in accordance with this section are the
exclusive obligation of the provider and shall not be passed on directly or
indirectly to the subscribers.
   (g)   No other payments or contributions made by, or the services,
equipment, facilities, support, resources or other activities to be provided or
performed by a provider at the direction of the city or otherwise pursuant to
this chapter or the provider’s respective franchise agreement or competitive
video service agreement, are chargeable against the compensation payments to be
paid to the city pursuant to this section.
   (h)   With the exception of the fees provided for by this section, each of
the payments or contributions made by, or the services, equipment, facilities,
support, resources or other activities to be provided by a provider, are within
the exclusions from the term “franchise fee” as set forth in § 622(g)(2) of the
Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 542(g)(2)).
   (i)   The fees and interest payments provided for by this section are not
deemed to be in the nature of a tax, and are in addition to any and all taxes
of general applicability or other fees or charges which a provider shall be
required to pay to the city or any state or federal agency or authority.
   (j)   A provider shall not apply the compensation or other payments to be
made to the city pursuant to this section as a deduction from, or a credit
against, any city taxes of general applicability (other than income taxes) or
other city fees or charges, each of which shall be deemed to be separate and
distinct obligations of the provider.
   (k)   A provider shall not apply any federal, state, local or any other form
of taxes, governmental fees or charges as a deduction from, or credit against,
any fees or interest required pursuant to this section, each of which shall be
deemed to be separate and distinct obligations of the provider.
(Ord. 2007-106, passed 5-21-2007)
§ 808.12 CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS.
   (a)   Customer service requirements. Each provider shall comply with the
following customer service requirements, or if such regulations are amended by
the FCC, then with such amended requirements.
      (1)   Provider office hours and telephone availability.
         A.   Each provider will maintain a local, toll-free or collect call
telephone access line which will be available to its subscribers 24 hours a
day, seven days a week.
            1.   Trained provider representatives will be available to respond
to customer telephone inquiries during normal business hours.
            2.   After normal business hours, the access line may be answered
by a service or an automated response system, including an answering machine.
Inquiries received after normal business hours must be responded to by a
trained provider representative on the next business day.
         B.   Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a
customer representative, including wait time, shall not exceed 30 seconds when
the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time
shall not exceed 30 seconds. These standards shall be met no less than 90% of
the time under normal operating conditions, measured on a quarterly basis.
         C.   The operator will not be required to acquire equipment or perform
surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards above
unless an historical record of complaints indicates a clear failure to comply.
         D.   Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a
busy signal less than 3% of the time.
         E.   Customer service center and bill payment locations will be open
at least during normal business hours and will be conveniently located.
      (2)   Installations, outages and service calls. Under normal operating
conditions, each of the following four standards will be met no less than 95%
of the time measured on a quarterly basis.
         A.   Standard installations will be performed within seven business
days after an order has been placed. STANDARD INSTALLATIONS are those that are
located up to 125 feet from the existing distribution system.
         B.   Excluding conditions beyond the control of the provider, each
provider will begin working on service interruptions promptly and in no event
later than 24 hours after the interruption becomes known. Each provider must
begin actions to correct other service problems the next business day after
notification of the service problem.
         C.   The appointment window alternatives for installations, service
calls and other installation activities will be either a specific time or, at
maximum, a four-hour time block during normal business hours. The provider may
schedule service calls and other installation activities outside of normal
business hours for the express convenience of the customer.
         D.   A provider may not cancel an appointment with a customer after
the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment.
         E.   If a provider representative is running late for an appointment
with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the
customer will be contacted. The appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary,
at a time which is convenient for the customer.
      (3)   Communications between providers and customers.
         A.   Refunds. Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than
either:
            1.   The customer’s next billing cycle following resolution of the
request or 30 days, whichever is earlier; or
            2.   The return of the equipment supplied by the provider if
service is terminated.
         B.   Credits. Credits for service will be issued no later than the
customer’s next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is
warranted.
      (4)   Definitions.
         A.   NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS. Those hours during which most similar
businesses in the community are open to serve customers. In all cases, NORMAL
BUSINESS HOURS must include some evening hours at least one night per week and/
or some weekend hours.
         B.   NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS. Those service conditions which are
within the control of the cable operator. Those conditions which are not within
the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, natural
disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages and
severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily
within the control of a provider include, but are not limited to, special
promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal
demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the facilities.
         C.   SERVICE INTERRUPTION. The loss of picture or sound on one or more
provider.
   (b)   Parental control option. Each provider shall provide, free of charge,
or for a charge approved by the city or the FCC, parental control devices to
all subscribers who wish to be able to delete any objectionable programming
from the service entering the subscriber’s home.
   (c)   Resolution of complaint by the cable television liaison who shall be
the Mayor’s designee. The cable television liaison shall review complaints
submitted to him or her in writing by subscribers regarding alleged violations
of the customer service standards set forth in this section. The city may also
initiate complaints hereunder. The city’s liaison shall endeavor to informally
resolve all such complaints by contacting a designated liaison with the
provider. Said provider liaison shall work with the city’s liaison and the
provider to informally resolve any complaint not rectified through the
provider’s normal customer service process. In the event any complaint is
unable to be informally resolved, a hearing shall be held by the Information
Technology Department on the complaint with at least ten days’ written notice
to the provider and the complainant. After the hearing, the Information
Technology Department shall make findings and conclusions and issue a
recommendation to Council, who may assess a penalty pursuant to §
808.17. All formal decisions of the Information Technology Department regarding
customer service complaints shall be subject to review by Council, which may
act to affirm, overrule or modify the decision of the Information Technology
Department or any aspect of the decision within 30 days of announcement of the
decision. In the event Council takes no action within such 30-day period, the
decision of the Information Technology Department shall be deemed final.
(Ord. 2007-106, passed 5-21-2007)
§ 808.13 INDEMNIFICATION.
   Each provider shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city for all
damages and penalties incurred as a result of the provider’s conduct or
performance under this chapter and/or their respective franchise agreement or
competitive video service agreement. These damages and penalties shall include,
but shall not be limited to, damages arising out of personal injury, property
damage, copyright infringement, defamation, antitrust, errors and omission,
theft, fire and all other damages arising out of the provider’s exercise under
this chapter or under their respective franchise agreement or competitive video
service agreement, whether or not any act or omission complained of is
authorized, allowed or prohibited by this agreement. Such indemnification shall
include, but not be limited to, reasonable attorney’s fees and costs. Each
provider’s obligations hereunder shall not extend to any claim or loss arising
from the city’s gross negligence or willful misconduct.
(Ord. 2007-106, passed 5-21-2007)
§ 808.14 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   (a)   Each provider shall either provide an adequate statement of self
insurance, subject to the Director of Law’s reasonable approval, or maintain,
throughout the term of this agreement, commercial, general and umbrella
liability insurance with a company authorized to do business in the state with
a rating by Best of not less than “A,” insuring the provider and the city
(wherein the city is named as additional insured) with regard to all damages
mentioned in §
808.12 hereof, in the minimum amounts of:
      (1)   One million dollars for bodily injury or death to any one person;
      (2)   Three million dollars for bodily injury or death resulting from any
one accident;
      (3)   One million dollars for all other types of liability; and
      (4)   Ten million dollars excess liability or umbrella coverage.
   (b)   If a provider’s system is sold or transferred, or if the provider’s
franchise agreement or competitive video service agreement is terminated or
revoked, an insurance tail shall be purchased and filed with the city for the
then applicable amounts. The tail(s) shall provide coverage through the end of
the period established by the applicable statutes of limitation and repose for
all items insured.
   (c)   Prior to providing any service under this chapter, each provider shall
furnish to the city a certificate evidencing that a satisfactory insurance
policy has been obtained. Such insurance policy shall require that the city be
notified 30 days prior to any expiration or cancellation.
   (d)   All insurance policies issued and maintained pursuant to this section
shall contain the following endorsement:
“It is hereby understood and agreed that this insurance policy may not be
canceled by the surety, nor may the intention not to renew be stated by the
surety until 30 days after receipt by the City of Solon, Ohio, by registered
mail, of a written notice of such intention to cancel or not to renew.”
   (e)   Each provider shall notify the city of any pending or threatened
litigation that would be likely to affect its insurance coverage.
(Ord. 2007-106, passed 5-21-2007)
§ 808.15 RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUALS PROTECTED.
   (a)   A provider shall not deny service or access, or otherwise discriminate
against subscribers, programmers or general citizens on the basis of race,
color, religion, creed, national origin, political opinion, sex, sexual
orientation, disability or age. Each provider shall comply at all times with
all other applicable federal, state and city laws and all executive and
administrative orders relating to non-discrimination.
   (b)   Except as may be required by law, the grantee shall not engage in any
monitoring of individual viewing patterns or practices without the express
written permission of the subscriber. The request for such permission shall be
contained in a separate document with a prominent statement that the subscriber
is authorizing the permission in full knowledge of its provisions. Such written
permission shall be for a limited period of time not to exceed one year, which
shall be reviewed at the option of the subscriber. No penalty shall be invoked
for a subscriber’s failure to provide or renew such authorization. The
authorization shall be revocable at any time by the subscriber without penalty
of any kind whatsoever.
   (c)   No information or data obtained by monitoring transmission of a signal
from a subscriber terminal which in any manner, direct or indirect, provides
the identity of the subscriber shall be sold or otherwise made available to any
person other than to the provider and its employees for internal business use,
and also to the subscriber that is the subject of that information, unless the
provider has received specific written authorization from the subscriber to
make such data available.
   (d)   Written permission from the subscriber shall not be required for the
conducting of system-wide or individually addressed electronic sweeps for the
purpose of verifying system integrity or monitoring for the purpose of billing
or for any other non-subscriber purpose. Confidentiality of such information
shall be subject to the provision set forth in division (c) of this section.
(Ord. 2007-106, passed 5-21-2007)
§ 808.16 ASSIGNMENT.
   A provider may not assign or transfer its franchise agreement or competitive
video service agreement or any interest therein, without the prior consent of
the city.
(Ord. 2007-106, passed 5-21-2007)
§ 808.17 SPECIFIC RIGHTS AND REMEDIES.
   (a)   Performance bond. Within 60 days of execution of a franchise agreement
or competitive video service agreement, the provider shall deposit with the
city a surety bond in the amount of $50,000 in a form reasonably acceptable to
the city’s Director of Law (the “performance bond”). The performance bond shall
be conditioned on and ensure the faithful performance by the company of all
terms and conditions of this chapter and any franchise agreement or competitive
video service agreement, and the payment by the provider of any claim, liens,
costs, expenses and taxes due the city that arise by reason of the operation or
maintenance of the facilities for the purposes described in this chapter. The
performance bond shall be maintained at $50,000 during the entire term of the
provider’s agreement with the city, regardless of withdrawals which may be made
under this section. The rights reserved to the city with respect to the
performance bond are in addition to all other rights the city may have under
this chapter or any law. The provider providing such bond must be authorized to
do business in the state.
   (b)   Procedure for notice of breach and imposition of liquidated damages
payments.
      (1)   Whenever the city finds that the provider has allegedly violated
one or more terms, conditions or provisions of this chapter of its respective
agreement with the city, a written notice shall be given to the provider. The
written notice shall describe in reasonable detail the alleged breach so as to
afford the provider an opportunity to remedy the violation(s). The provider
shall have 30 days subsequent to receipt of the breach notice in which to
correct the violation(s) before the city may assess liquidated damages against
the provider and/or assert a claim against the performance bond. The time for
the provider to correct any alleged violations shall be extended by the city if
more than 30 days are required to correct the alleged violation(s); provided,
however, the provider must commence the corrective action within 15 days of
receipt of the notice and thereafter use reasonable diligence, as determined by
the city, to correct the violation(s).
      (2)   Within 15 days after receipt of written notice of the alleged
violation(s), the provider may request to be heard by the city on the issue of
the violation(s) alleged in the notice. The provider’s request for a hearing on
the alleged violation(s) shall be in writing and shall specify with
particularity the matters the provider disputes. Upon receipt of such request,
the city shall notify the provider of the date, time and place of such hearing,
which shall not be scheduled for a date that is less than 30 days from the date
of the provider’s request for a hearing. At the hearing, the provider shall be
permitted to furnish evidence that:
         A.   Demonstrates that corrective action has been, or is being
actively and expeditiously pursued, to remedy the violation or noncompliance;
         B.   Rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance; and/or
         C.   Disputes the amount.
      (3)   Upon completion of the hearing, the city shall issue a written
decision, including findings of fact, determining whether the provider is in
violation of this chapter and/or its agreement. If the city determines that the
provider is in violation of this chapter and/or its agreement following
hearing, or if the provider fails to correct the violation and fails to request
a hearing, then the city may assess liquidated damages of $300,000 per day
against the provider, which shall accrue from the date on which the city first
provided the provider with written notice of the violation(s), and/or may draw
against the performance bond for the liquidated damages.
      (4)   The city shall stay or waive the imposition of any liquidated
damages set forth above upon a finding that any failure or delay is a result of
an act of God or due to circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the
provider.
      (5)   The provider shall not be excused from complying with any of the
terms or conditions of this chapter or its agreement by any failure of the city
upon any one or more occasions to insist upon or to seek compliance with any
such terms or conditions.
(Ord. 2007-106, passed 5-21-2007)
§ 808.99 PENALTY.
   In addition to the provisions of §
808.04(f), with regards to revocation of permits, and §
808.17, whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; any such violation shall constitute a
separate offense of each successive day continued.
(Ord. 2007-106, passed 5-21-2007)
CHAPTER 818: FIRING RANGES
Section
   
818.01   Definitions
   
818.02   Location
   
818.03   Safety standards
   
818.04   Hours of operation
   
818.05   Insurance
   
818.06   Alcoholic beverages
   
818.07   Minors
   
818.08   Identification
   
818.09   Permit; fee
   
818.10   Use of small bore firearms
   
818.11   Nuisance
   
818.12   Applicability
   
818.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Noise control, see
Ch. 634
   Police Department, see
Ch. 240
   Reporting wound inflicted by deadly weapons, see §
606.12
   Weapons and explosives, see
Ch. 672
§ 818.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   FIREARMS. Any weapon expelling a projectile(s) by the action of an
explosive.
   (b)   FIRING RANGE. Any area which is established for the purpose of skeet
shooting, trap shooting, pistol shooting and/or rifle shooting.
   (c)   GUN CLUB. A presently existing formal or informal association or
organization of persons organized for recreational purposes of skeet shooting,
trap shooting, pistol shooting and/or rifle shooting.
(Ord. 1970-6, passed 5-4-1970)
§ 818.02 LOCATION.
   (a)   Firing ranges shall not be located nearer than 1,500 feet from a
dwelling or any other building regularly occupied by persons.
   (b)   Firing ranges which are now in existence and which do not comply with
the foregoing distance limitation shall be relocated to comply herewith or
shall cease to be operated within a period of seven months from the effective
date of this chapter.
(Ord. 1970-6, passed 5-4-1970)
§ 818.03 SAFETY STANDARDS.
   All firing ranges shall be operated and equipped in full compliance with the
safety standards of the National Skeet Shooting Association, the Amateur Trap
Shooting Association or the National Rifle Association and with the safety
standards set forth in this chapter. In case of conflict, the standards of this
chapter shall apply.
(Ord. 1970-6, passed 5-4-1970)
§ 818.04 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No firing at a firing range shall take place before 10:00 a.m. or later than
one-half hour before sunset.
(Ord. 1970-6, passed 5-4-1970)
§ 818.05 INSURANCE.
   Gun clubs using the facilities of a firing range shall provide liability
insurance to insure the clubs, their members and all persons they invite to use
the range against claims for damage to persons or property in an amount not
less than $1,000,000 for each accident.
§ 818.06 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   The use of alcoholic beverages prior to or during the firing of firearms at
a firing range shall be prohibited.
(Ord. 1970-6, passed 5-4-1970)
§ 818.07 MINORS.
   No person under the age of 16 years shall use firearms at a firing range
unless under the direct supervision of a parent or qualified instructor.
(Ord. 1970-6, passed 5-4-1970)
§ 818.08 IDENTIFICATION.
   Each gun club shall be responsible for providing its members and guests with
proper identification which shall be exhibited to proper authorities upon
request.
(Ord. 1970-6, passed 5-4-1970)
§ 818.09 PERMIT; FEE.
   The Police Chief of the city shall issue to the presently existing gun
clubs, whose ranges comply with the safety standards of the National Skeet
Shooting Association, the Amateur Trap Shooting Association and the National
Rifle Association and with the safety standards set forth in this chapter, a
permit to operate such ranges. Permits shall be automatically renewable at the
end of each calendar year and the charge for each such permit shall be $25. The
Police Chief may revoke the permit at any time if he or she finds that the
firing range is being operated contrary to the provisions of this chapter and
the safety standards hereinbefore set forth.
§ 818.10 USE OF SMALL BORE FIREARMS.
   The prudent use of small bore firearms in basements, garages, barns and the
like which are provided with safe and adequate backstops, will also be
permitted if constructed and operated in accordance with the standards of the
National Rifle Association.
(Ord. 1970-6, passed 5-4-1970)
§ 818.11 NUISANCE.
   Any firing range operated contrary to any provisions of this chapter is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance and violative of the public health,
safety and welfare.
(Ord. 1970-6, passed 5-4-1970)
§ 818.12 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to firing ranges established
by the city for the sole use of members of the Police Department.
(Ord. 1970-6, passed 5-4-1970)
§ 818.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not more than $500 or
imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both, for each offense. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
CHAPTER 820: GARAGE SALES
Section
   
820.01   Definitions
   
820.02   Permit required
   
820.03   Permit application and issuance
   
820.04   Traffic supervision during sale
   
820.05   Permit period
   
820.06   Permit display; sign restrictions
   
820.07   Sale hours; merchandise restriction
   
820.08   Permit revocation
   
820.09   Exceptions
   
820.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Advertising on traffic-control devices, see §
414.07
   Littering, see §
660.10
   Sale of weapons and explosives, see §§
672.07
   Sidewalk obstructions, see §
660.10
   Theft, see §
642.02
§ 820.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   GARAGE SALE. A sale of household goods, equipment, utensils,
appliances, personal clothing or effects, or other similar personal property,
including such sales commonly termed BASEMENT SALES, HOUSE SALES or LAWN SALES.
(Ord. 1981-69, passed 6-22-1981)
   (b)   PERSON. Individuals, associations of individuals, partnerships or
corporations who or which conduct sales for a commission or other remuneration.
(Ord. 1981-69, passed 6-22-1981)
   (c)   PUBLIC SALE. Any sale and delivery or offer of sale and delivery of
any household furniture, furnishings, equipment, goods, wares or merchandise
from, in, about or upon any premises, property or residence zoned for or
utilized for residential purposes within this city to which the general public
is invited pursuant to any advertisement or notice by newspaper, mail,
individual flyer or otherwise.
(Ord. 1982-53, passed 5-3-1982)
§ 820.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall conduct, hold or permit a public sale or garage sale without
having an unrevoked valid permit from the city for such purpose, in effect at
the time, and issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1982-53, passed 5-3-1982; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 820.03 PERMIT APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE.
   Permits for a public sale or garage sale shall be issued by the Chief
Building Official or a person acting and authorized to act on his or her behalf
upon the applicant’s complying with the following provisions:
   (a)   Giving his or her name and permanent address;
   (b)   Obtaining the permit required by this chapter;
   (c)   Giving the name and address of all persons who shall be associated or
engaged in such public sale;
   (d)   Giving the name and address of the party for whom the sale is being
held;
   (e)   Giving the date of sales and number of sales in a calendar year; and
   (f)   Payment of the fee provided in §
1424.11.
(Ord. 1981-69, passed 6-22-1981; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 820.04 TRAFFIC SUPERVISION DURING SALE.
   The applicant for a public sale or garage sale permit shall provide
sufficient parking and shall ensure adequate traffic supervision to prevent
traffic congestion at the time and place of the sale.
(Ord. 1981-69, passed 6-22-1981; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 820.05 PERMIT PERIOD.
   (a)   Permits for a public sale or garage sale shall be valid only for the
period of the sale indicated thereon, not to exceed three consecutive days.
   (b)   No more than two sales per year shall be permitted at the same
location.
(Ord. 1981-69, passed 6-22-1981; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 820.06 PERMIT DISPLAY; SIGN RESTRICTIONS.
   (a)   Every person permitted under this chapter shall have his or her permit
in his or her possession at all times when conducting a public sale or garage
sale and shall display the same upon demand of any police officer and/or the
Chief Building Official of the city and upon demand of any person who attends
such public sale.
(Ord. 1982-53, passed 5-3-1982)
   (b)   No more than one sign advertising such sale, not exceeding two feet by
two feet, shall be located on the property where the sale is conducted. No
other signs shall be used off the premises for such sale.
(Ord. 1981-69, passed 6-22-1981; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 820.07 SALE HOURS; MERCHANDISE RESTRICTION.
   No person shall conduct a public sale or garage sale before 9:00 a.m. of any
day or after 7:00 p.m. of any day, or sell any household furniture,
furnishings, equipment or goods which were brought into the residence or onto
the property for the sole purpose of selling the same at such sale by a person
who regularly furnishes such household furniture, furnishings, equipment or
goods at such public sales or garage sales for profit, except as provided in §
820.09.
(Ord. 1981-69, passed 6-22-1981)
§ 820.08 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   A permit for a public sale or garage sale issued pursuant to this chapter
may be revoked by the Chief Building Official for any of the following reasons:
   (a)   Fraud, misrepresentation or any false statement made to the Chief
Building Official in furnishing the information required by §
820.03;
   (b)   Fraud, misrepresentation or any false statement contained in the
application for a permit;
   (c)   A conviction of the permittee for violation of any provision of this
chapter;
   (d)   A conviction of the permittee of any felony or crime involving moral
turpitude; or
   (e)   Conducting a public sale in an unlawful manner or in such manner as to
constitute a breach of the peace.
(Ord. 1981-69, passed 6-22-1981; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 820.09 EXCEPTIONS.
   This chapter shall not apply to any public sale conducted solely for, or on
behalf of, any charitable, educational or religious institution when the person
or persons conducting such sale receive no compensation therefor as to fees
required.
(Ord. 1981-69, passed 6-22-1981)
§ 820.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(Ord. 1981-69, passed 6-22-1981)
CHAPTER 836: LANDSCAPE CONTRACTORS
Section
   
836.01   Landscape contractor defined
   
836.02   Registration required
   
836.03   Application fees
   
836.04   Effective period and revocation of registration
   
836.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Landscape architects, see R.C. §§ 4703.30 et seq.
   Landscaping for industrial structures, see §
1428.12
   Topsoil removal, see
Ch. 868
   Trees in subdivisions, see §
1250.05
§ 836.01 LANDSCAPE CONTRACTOR DEFINED.
   As used in this chapter, LANDSCAPE CONTRACTOR means a person who, on
industrial, commercial or residential property in the city, engages in the
business of any of the following:
   (a)   Regrading land;
   (b)   Installing topsoil and mulch;
   (c)   Planting lawns, shrubs and trees;
   (d)   Installing walkways of stone, brick or slag;
   (e)   Mowing lawns and trimming bushes and trees;
   (f)   Raking leaves; or
   (g)   Replanting trees and bushes.
(Ord. 1986-198, passed 8-17-1987; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 836.02 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business of being a landscape contractor in
the city without first being registered with the city. Landscape contractors
are required to satisfy the city’s contractor’s registration requirements as
outlined in
Chapter 1430 prior to performing any work in the city.
(Ord. 1986-198, passed 8-17-1987; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 836.03 APPLICATION FEES.
   The application for a landscape contractor’s registration shall be
accompanied by a non-refundable fee in accordance with the provisions of §
1424.11.
(Ord. 1986-198, passed 8-17-1987; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 836.04 EFFECTIVE PERIOD AND REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION.
   (a)   A landscape contractor’s registration shall be effective from March 1
to November 30 of each calendar year. A registration for one such time period
is not valid for a subsequent time period.
   (b)   A landscape contractor’s registration is subject to revocation by the
City Engineer or the Chief Building Official upon the following grounds:
      (1)   Fraud or willful and knowing misrepresentation made in applying for
the landscape contractor’s registration or made in the conduct of the landscape
contractor’s business;
      (2)   Failure to pay any fees as required by this chapter;
      (3)   Changing the approved contours for lots or lands without first
obtaining the permission of the Engineering Department;
      (4)   Neglecting to remove company identification signs when the
landscape contractor’s job is completed at a particular property;
      (5)   Removal or installation of drainageways, sewers, swales and the
like without approval of the Engineering Department;
      (6)   Dumping debris and waste materials on vacant lots;
      (7)   Dumping topsoil, humus, waste material and other landscape products
and debris on streets and treelawns or into sewers, swales, drainage ways and
streams in the city;
      (8)   Repeatedly tracking mud onto the streets of the city; or
      (9)   Violating any state laws pertaining to vehicle registration or
business regulation.
(Ord. 1986-198, passed 8-17-1987; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 836.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree and shall be fined not more than $250 or imprisoned not more
than 30 days, or both, for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 1986-198, passed 8-17-1987)
CHAPTER 840: MODEL AND SPECULATION HOMES
Section
   
840.01   Purpose; conversion
   
840.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Access requirements, see §
1424.06
   Address numbers, see §
1424.09
   Care of building sites, see §
1428.10
   Construction in flood-hazard areas, see §
1462.04(d)
   Look-alike homes, see §
1428.09
§ 840.01 PURPOSE; CONVERSION.
   (a)   A MODEL HOME is a building or structure existing or proposed to be
constructed within the confines of a subdivision which offers lots for sale to
the public. The purpose of the model home is to expose to the public the type
of homes that will be constructed within the subdivision and to that end may
have displayed within it maps, pictures, brochures, building materials, other
materials, information and contractors.
   (b)   The model home may be used as a place to conduct the business of the
subdivision and the sale of homes to be constructed within the subdivision as
long as there are lots still being offered for sale to the public.
   (c)   Once structures are erected on 60% of the lots in a subdivision, the
builder and/or developer shall discontinue the use of the model home for this
purpose and will be given 90 days to convert the model home to a speculation
home or spec. home.
   (d)   A SPECULATION HOME or SPEC. HOME, as used herein, means a building or
structure existing or proposed to be constructed for the purpose of being
offered for immediate sale to the public and shall not be used as a model home.
   (e)   A spec. home may be constructed on any residential lot which meets the
requirements of present zoning.
(Ord. 1989-57, passed 9-18-1989)
§ 840.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not more than $500 or
imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both, for each offense. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
CHAPTER 846: PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS
Section
   
846.01   Definitions
   
846.02   License or registration required
   
846.03   Applications; license; fee; registration
   
846.04   Street peddling; adult attendant required
   
846.05   Restrictions; hours; conduct
   
846.06   Resident prohibition by notice
   
846.07   Display of license
   
846.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Billposting, see §
642.29
   Criminal trespass, see §
642.12
   Handbills, see §
642.28
   Littering, see §
660.03
   Transient vendors, see R.C. § 311.37
§ 846.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   CANVASSER. Any person who obtains or seeks to obtain or influence the
opinions of the residents of the city by traveling door to door either by foot,
automobile, truck or any type of conveyance upon the private residences,
including any house, apartment or other dwelling within the city, but does not
obtain or seek to obtain funds for any cause whatsoever;
   (b)   PEDDLER. Any person traveling either by foot, automobile, truck or any
other type of conveyance from place to place, door to door or from street to
street, taking or attempting to take orders for profit by the sale of goods,
wares and merchandise or personal property of any nature whatsoever for
immediate or future delivery or for services to be furnished or performed in
the future. This also includes any person who sells or offers for sale goods,
merchandise or services of any kind or description other than from a fixed and
established place of business, including those persons who sell from vehicles
on the public streets.
   (c)   SOLICITOR. Any person who obtains or seeks to obtain funds for any
cause whatsoever by traveling door to door either by foot, automobile, truck or
any type of conveyance upon the private residences, including any house,
apartment or other dwelling within the city.
(Ord. 2006-294, passed 12-18-2006; Ord. 2008-314, passed 11-17-2008)
§ 846.02 LICENSE OR REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (a)   No peddler or solicitor shall peddle or solicit within the city,
unless he or she is the holder of a valid license issued pursuant to this
chapter.
   (b)   No canvasser shall obtain or seek to obtain or influence the opinions
of the residents of the city until he or she is registered pursuant to this
chapter, except that a canvasser who is engaged in religious proselytizing or
anonymous political speech shall not be required to be so regulated.
(Ord. 2006-294, passed 12-18-2006)
§ 846.03 APPLICATIONS; LICENSE; FEE; REGISTRATION.
   (a)   Any person wanting a license in conformity with this chapter shall
obtain an application for same from the Police Chief, and shall submit the
completed application, along with the appropriate fee, to such office, on a
form supplied by the Chief that shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Full name of the applicant;
      (2)   Date of birth of the applicant;
      (3)   Local address of the applicant, if any;
      (4)   Permanent home address of the applicant verified by state driver’s
license, state identification card or like form of identification;
      (5)   Telephone number of the applicant;
      (6)   Physical description of the applicant, setting forth age, height,
weight, color of hair and eyes and sex;
      (7)   Two photographs of the applicant of appropriate size (approximately
two inches by two inches), one of which shall be attached at all times to the
license or registration, and the other of which shall be for the records of the
Police Department;
      (8)   Social Security number of the applicant;
      (9)   A notarized statement as to whether the applicant has ever been
convicted of a crime and, if so, where and the nature of the offense and the
punishment or penalty imposed therefor, if any;
      (10)   Such other information as the Chief may require in order to
protect the public health, safety and/or general welfare;
      (11)   Name, address and telephone number of the organization
represented;
      (12)   A description of the nature of the business and the goods, wares,
merchandise, property and/or services to be sold; and
      (13)   Dates, times and particular locations where the peddling or
solicitation is to be performed.
   (b)   (1)   All license applications shall be referred to the Police Chief
who shall, within ten days after receipt of the completed application, issue
licenses to the solicitors or peddlers unless he or she finds that:
         A.   The applicant has provided false, misleading or deceptive
information in his or her application; and/or
         B.   The applicant or any solicitor or peddler named on the license
application has been convicted of a felony violation or misdemeanor violation
involving weapons, theft, moral turpitude or violence within the past five
years.
      (2)   Any license issued under this chapter shall be valid for not more
than six months. A separate license shall be required for each individual
solicitor or peddler even though there may be a single employer.
   (c)   (1)   Each applicant shall pay a fee in the amount of $20 per week or
$50 per six months, which fee shall be paid at the time the application is
submitted.
      (2)   Applicants who are agents for nonprofit, charitable, religious,
civic or educational organizations that meet the definition thereof as
contained in R.C. § 2915.01(H), (I) or (J), or have duly registered with the
state under the provisions of R.C. Chapter 1716, shall be exempt from the
licensing requirements of this section upon submittal of:
         A.   The Internal Revenue Service Federal Income Tax Exemption Letter
and/or the State of Ohio Letter of Registration under R.C. Chapter 1716 in
effect at the time of application by such organization; and
         B.   A written statement from such organization listing the
individuals representing such organization in the city.
   (d)   Once issued, a license may be used only in conformity with the laws of
the city and the state; may not be assigned or transferred; must be carried by
the licensee at all times; and may be revoked or suspended by the Police Chief
for any of the following causes:
      (1)   The licensee provided false, misleading or deceptive information in
the license application;
      (2)   The licensee is convicted of a felony or of a misdemeanor involving
fraud or moral turpitude;
      (3)   The licensee violates any provision of this chapter or peddles or
solicits in an unlawful manner; and
      (4)   Upon written complaint being filed with the Police Department, that
the licensee has made himself or herself obnoxious to the public by the use of
indecent, profane or insulting language or has made or perpetrated any
misstatement, deception or fraud in connection with any solicitation or sale,
and if said complaint is found to be true, the license of such solicitor or
peddler shall be revoked.
   (e)   In the event a license application is not approved or in the event any
license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter is revoked, written
notice shall be given to the applicant or licensee by personal service or by
certified mail. The applicant or licensee shall have ten days after the receipt
of such notice to appeal such refusal or revocation. Such appeal shall be
perfected by filing a notice of the appeal with the City Council; thereupon the
applicant shall have not less than ten days notice of the date and place of the
hearing. The City Council shall have the power, after such hearing, to either
affirm, modify or overrule the decision of the Police Chief.
   (f)   Any canvasser not involved in religious proselytizing or anonymous
political speech shall register with the Chief before obtaining or seeking to
obtain or influencing the opinions of the residents of the city. Any canvasser
shall provide the Chief in writing with his or her name, address and telephone
number, the name, address and telephone number of the organization represented
and the dates, times and particular locations where canvassing is to be
performed. No fee shall be charged for the registration of any canvasser. Any
registration hereunder shall be valid for not more than 90 days.
(Ord. 2006-294, passed 12-18-2006; Ord. 2008-314, passed 11-17-2008)
§ 846.04 STREET PEDDLING; ADULT ATTENDANT REQUIRED.
   No person shall vend or peddle from a vehicle in public streets and public
places in the city without a license issued under this chapter, and in pursuit
of such business or activity when children under age 18 collect, congregate,
assemble or gather about such vehicle for the purpose of making purchases
therefrom or in response to such person’s actions, such person so vending or
peddling shall be required to be accompanied by an adult attendant whose sole
duty and occupation shall be to protect and safeguard such children from injury
or hazards of vehicular traffic using such streets and public places. The
attendant shall maintain a constant lookout for approaching vehicles and shall
warn and guard children from injury therefrom.
(Ord. 2006-294, passed 12-18-2006)
§ 846.05 RESTRICTIONS; HOURS; CONDUCT.
   Every person to whom a license to peddle or solicit is issued or
registration is required and every canvasser registered under the terms of this
chapter shall be governed by the following rules and regulations.
   (a)   No person subject to the provisions of this chapter shall peddle,
solicit or canvass except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Monday
through Saturday; nor shall such person peddle, solicit or canvass on Sunday or
any legal state or federal holiday.
   (b)   No peddler, solicitor or canvasser shall enter or attempt to enter a
residence, house, apartment or other dwelling in the city without an express
invitation from an adult occupant of the residence, house, apartment or other
dwelling.
   (c)   No peddler or solicitor shall engage in any peddling or solicitation
other than that specified in the license application.
   (d)   No peddler, solicitor or canvasser shall by any device make unlawful
noises, nor shall any peddler, solicitor or canvasser remain at the residence,
house, apartment or other dwelling in the city without the consent of an adult
occupant of the residence, house, apartment or other dwelling in the city.
(Ord. 2006-294, passed 12-18-2006; Ord. 2008-314, passed 11-17-2008)
§ 846.06 RESIDENT PROHIBITION BY NOTICE.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no peddler, solicitor
or canvasser, or any individual and/or organization exempt from the licensing
requirements under this chapter, while peddling, soliciting or canvassing,
shall call upon, knock at the door or ring the door bell of any residence,
house, apartment or other dwelling in the city upon which there is posted at
the entrance a notice which reads “No Peddlers, Solicitors or Canvassers
Allowed,” or words of similar import, which clearly prohibits peddlers,
solicitors and canvassers on the premises, unless such peddler, solicitor or
canvasser has previously been invited upon the premises by the owner, lessee or
an adult occupant thereof.
(Ord. 2006-294, passed 12-18-2006; Ord. 2008-314, passed 11-17-2008)
§ 846.07 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Any peddler or solicitor shall, at all times while soliciting or peddling,
display said license on the outside of their person in such a manner so as to
be clearly visible to residents. Upon request by any resident, police officer
or city official, a solicitor or peddler shall present said license for further
inspection.
(Ord. 2006-294, passed 12-18-2006)
§ 846.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a fourth
degree misdemeanor on the first offense and shall be guilty of a first degree
misdemeanor for the second or subsequent offenses.
(Ord. 1991-177, passed 5-4-1992; Ord. 2006-294, passed 12-18-2006)
CHAPTER 848: PRIVATE PROPERTY USED FOR PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT
Section
   
848.01   Facilities required
   
848.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Admissions tax, see
Ch. 894
   Amusement devices, see
Ch. 804
   Bingo, see §§
630.06
   Exposure of performers in public, see §§
666.18,
666.19
   Littering, see §
660.03
   Safety of crowds at live entertainment performances, see §
636.18
§ 848.01 FACILITIES REQUIRED.
   No person shall lease, let or permit the use of any land owned by him or her
or under his or her control for money or any other valuable consideration, for
any picnic, athletic game or entertainment, nor shall any person conduct or
participate in any picnic, athletic game or entertainment on any land so
leased, let or used under permit, unless the land is provided with all of the
following facilities:
   (a)   A supply of drinking water, consisting either of a connection to a
main supplied with water by the City of Cleveland Division of Water, or a well
conforming to the regulations established by the Cuyahoga County District Board
of Health. A certificate from such Board, issued not more than 90 days prior to
the holding of any picnic, athletic game or entertainment, shall be prima-facie
evidence of the well’s satisfying the requirements of this division (a);
   (b)   A separate privy for each sex, each privy to be equipped either with a
watertight vault or a septic tank, complying in either case with the above-
mentioned regulations. A certificate from the Board, issued not more than 90
days prior to the holding of any picnic, athletic game or entertainment, shall
be prima-facie evidence of the privy’s satisfying the requirements of this
division (b);
   (c)   Watertight containers for garbage, into which all garbage shall be
placed and which shall be emptied not more than 24 hours after any such picnic,
game or entertainment; and
   (d)   Containers for refuse, into which all refuse other than garbage shall
be placed, and which shall be emptied or burned not more than 24 hours after
any such picnic, game or entertainment.
(Ord. 1942-12, passed 4-20-1942)
§ 848.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
CHAPTER 858: SANITARY LANDFILLS
Section
   
858.01   Definitions
   
858.02   Permit required; application, hearing and issuance
   
858.03   Disposal on own premises
   
858.04   Transporting
   
858.05   Open dumps declared nuisance
   
858.06   Permit conditions and revocation; bond
   
858.07   Landfill operating standards; inspection fee
   
858.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Debris removal, see §
660.15
   Garbage and rubbish on private and public property, see §
660.07
   Noxious or offensive odors, see §
660.04
   Sanitary landfills, see §
660.03
§ 858.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   COMMERCIAL OPERATOR. All persons, firms or corporations who or which
own or operate stores, restaurants, industries, institutions and other similar
places, public or private, charitable or noncharitable, and includes all
persons other than householders, upon the premises of which garbage or other
waste materials, or both, are disposed of.
   (b)   GARBAGE. All putrescible wastes, except human excreta, sewage and
other water-carried wastes, including vegetable and animal offal and carcasses
of dead animals, and shall include all such substances from all public and
private establishments and from all residences.
   (c)   LANDFILL. The deposit of waste materials into a depression or trench,
compaction of the waste material and prompt and daily coverage with a layer of
earth.
   (d)   PREMISES. Land or buildings, or both, or parts of either or both,
occupied by a householder or a commercial operator.
   (e)   PROPER COVERING. A tarpaulin, heavy canvas or other covering, which is
properly secured to the truck or motor vehicle, and which will prevent a loss
of load from the vehicle.
   (f)   WASTE MATERIALS. Ashes, glass, crockery, tin cans, paper, boxes, rags
and old clothing and all other similar nonputrescible wastes. The term shall
not include any material such as earth, sand, brick, stone, plaster or other
similar substances that may be used or accumulated in connection with
construction operations.
(Ord. 1966-166, passed 9-6-1966; Ord. 1978-226, passed 11-6-1978)
§ 858.02 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION, HEARING AND ISSUANCE.
   (a)   No person shall dump or deposit any garbage or other waste materials
of any kind on any public or private property within the city, nor shall any
landfill or structure or device for the disposal of garbage or other waste
materials be established, erected or operated within the city without a permit
duly issued as provided herein.
   (b)   Applications for a landfill permit shall be sworn to and filed with
the Service Director setting forth the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant and all persons or firms who
or which will be engaged in the activity;
      (2)   A description of the land on which such activity shall take place;
      (3)   The nature of the garbage or waste materials and their source;
      (4)   Proposed methods of collection, storage and disposal, including the
number and types of equipment to be used in the activity; and
      (5)   Such other pertinent and additional data as may be deemed necessary
to enable the Planning Commission to determine the nature and scope of the
proposed operation.
   (c)   After the application is received and the Service Director has had an
opportunity to perform any investigation of the facts he or she deems
necessary, the application shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission.
Within a reasonable time after receipt of the application, the Commission shall
conduct a public hearing for the purpose of determining whether the granting of
a permit would violate any provision of this chapter.
   (d)   If, after the public hearing, the Commission finds that the granting
of the permit applied for will not violate any of the provisions of this
chapter and that the applicant and all those interested in the project are
responsible people capable of fulfilling all requirements and standards for the
operation of a landfill, it may grant a permit in accordance with the terms of
this chapter.
(Ord. 1966-166, passed 9-6-1966)
§ 858.03 DISPOSAL ON OWN PREMISES.
   Nothing contained herein shall prevent any person from disposing of his or
her own garbage and waste materials on his or her own premises on which refuse
is created, in such amount and in a manner which does not create a nuisance or
interfere with enjoyment of the property of others in the immediate vicinity.
(Ord. 1966-166, passed 9-6-1966)
§ 858.04 TRANSPORTING.
   No person, firm or corporation shall operate a truck or motor vehicle on the
streets or other public thoroughfares in the city which is loaded or partially
loaded with garbage or waste materials without having such load or partial load
covered with a proper covering. In complying with this section, any person,
firm or corporation shall specifically not be relieved from any obligations
imposed by §§
440.06,
440.10 and
440.12 of the Traffic Code or any other provision of the Codified Ordinances
pertaining to the covering or transportation of garbage or waste materials in
the city.
(Ord. 1978-226, passed 11-6-1978)
§ 858.05 OPEN DUMPS DECLARED NUISANCE.
   Garbage or other waste materials dumped, deposited or burned in the open are
hereby declared to be a nuisance, and any person responsible shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties prescribed in §
858.99.
(Ord. 1966-166, passed 9-6-1966)
§ 858.06 PERMIT CONDITIONS AND REVOCATION; BOND.
   (a)   No permit for a landfill shall be issued under the provisions of this
chapter if it is shown by the application or evidence at a public hearing that
the proposed landfill would:
      (1)   Be located within 1,000 feet from any residence or within any U-
1 Single-Family House District, U-1-A Two-Family House District or U-2 Multi-
family District;
      (2)   Attract rodents or insects;
      (3)   Pollute surface or stream water by seepage or otherwise; or
      (4)   Create a nuisance or health hazard, or be detrimental to the public
health, welfare, safety and comfort.
   (b)   No permit for a landfill shall be issued until such time as the
applicant files a bond with the city with a surety approved by the Commission,
and in a form approved by the Director of Law and in the amount set by the
Commission to insure full compliance with the standards set forth in the permit
and this chapter. Such bond shall remain in full force and effect until a
release is granted by Council after the completion of a landfill operation and
inspection and approval by the City Engineer.
   (c)   The city may at any time revoke the permit in the event the applicant
defaults in the observance or performance of any of the standards set forth in
the permit and this chapter, and such default shall not have been cured within
seven days after the city shall have given to the applicant written notice
specifying such default. The city may at any time revoke this permit if the
operation becomes a nuisance and a detriment to the public health, safety,
welfare and comfort.
(Ord. 1966-166, passed 9-6-1966)
§ 858.07 LANDFILL OPERATING STANDARDS; INSPECTION FEE.
   (a)   Operating standards. Any person issued a permit to operate a landfill
under the provisions of this chapter shall maintain the following operating
standards.
      (1)   Only waste materials, as that term is defined in §
858.01(f), shall be disposed of in the landfill, provided, however, that such
material may include earth, sand, brick, stone, plaster, concrete, masonry,
slag and wood or other similar substances.
      (2)   No garbage, as that term is defined by §
858.01(b), shall be deposited on the site. No waste materials such as
naphthalene and other coal tar products, paint thinners or strippers, solvents,
gasoline, oils or other flammables, cyanides, acids and other chemicals shall
be disposed of in the fill, nor shall any other flammables, explosives or other
materials which may be noxious or odorous in character be deposited in the
fill.
      (3)   No salvage or scavenging activities shall be carried on in
connection with the landfill operation.
      (4)   Adequate fire protection, approved by the Fire Chief, including C02
or Foamite containers, shall be provided at all times.
      (5)   Dust shall be controlled either by sprinkling or by use of calcium
chloride. Paper blowing shall be controlled by the use of portable fencing and
physical policing of the area. Odors shall be controlled by spraying with
commercial chemicals available for such use.
      (6)   Insects and rodents shall be controlled by adequate provisions made
by the landfill operator. If the need should arise, rodents shall be controlled
by a licensed exterminator.
      (7)   At the end of each working day, approximately two feet of earth
cover material shall be placed on the top of all waste materials deposited, and
approximately one foot of earth cover material shall be placed on the side
slopes of waste material to form a cell.
      (8)   Landfill materials shall be received at the operating site each
working day only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. No landfill
operations shall be conducted on Sundays or legal holidays.
      (9)   The operating equipment on the premises shall be such as to ensure
the proper and expeditious operation of the landfill and shall be properly
maintained.
      (10)   Annually, and upon completion of the landfill, the area of the
landfill shall be seeded and a growth of grass provided, except in those areas
where it is contemplated that a building or structure is to be erected
immediately.
      (11)   The top cover of any completed cell shall be so graded as to allow
proper drainage.
   (b)   Inspection fee. To defray the cost of regular inspections of the
landfill site by the city, the applicant shall pay to the city the sum of $100
per month as long as the permit is in effect, subject to revision by the
Commission if experience so requires.
(Ord. 1966-166, passed 9-6-1966)
§ 858.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree and shall be fined not more than $250 or
imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 1978-226, passed 11-6-1978)
CHAPTER 860: SEWER INSTALLERS
Section
   
860.01   Registration required
   
860.02   Examination; certificate of registration issuance; fee
   
860.03   Master plumbers
   
860.04   Bond
   
860.05   Insurance
   
860.06   Sign display
   
860.07   Registration revocation
   
860.08   Inside work exempt
   
860.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Building sewers, see §§
1042.04,
1042.08,
1406.07
   Connection to public sewers, see §
1482.08
   Plastic sewers, see §
1406.07
   Sewers generally, see
Ch. 1042
   Sewers in subdivisions, see §§
1250.04,
1250.15
§ 860.01 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   No person shall hereafter follow, engage in or work at the trade or
occupation of installing sewers in the city until he or she shall have first
become registered in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1962-41, passed 4-16-1962; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 860.02 EXAMINATION; CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION ISSUANCE; FEE.
   Any person desiring a certificate of registration shall first make
application to the Building Department. If satisfied as to the competency of
the applicant, the Chief Building Official or his or her designee shall issue a
certificate of registration to the applicant authorizing him or her to engage
in or work at the trade or occupation of sewer installing in the city. Such
certificate of registration shall be for a period of one year, dating from
January 1 of the year of issuance, and shall expire on December 31 next
following the date of issuance. The fee for such certificate of registration
shall be in accordance with the provisions of §
1424.11.
(Ord. 1996-215, passed 11-18-1996; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 860.03 MASTER PLUMBERS.
   Master plumbers shall be automatically eligible for the registration
provided for herein, upon the payment of the registration fee and compliance
with all other terms of this chapter.
(Ord. 1962-41, passed 4-16-1962; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 860.04 BOND.
   Each person so registered shall execute a bond in the sum of $25,000, which
bond shall also be executed by a reliable surety who shall furnish a current
power of attorney authorizing the person signing such bond as surety to do so.
(Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 860.05 INSURANCE.
   Each registrant shall furnish the city with a certificate of insurance which
shall state thereon the following:
   (a)   That the insurance covers work performed by the insured in the city;
   (b)   The limits of general liability insurance shall be a minimum of
$1,000,000 each occurrence and $2,000,000 general aggregate;
   (c)   Such insurance shall provide that in the event of its cancellation, at
least ten days’ written notice of cancellation will be given to the city; and
   (d)   The insurance policy shall list the city as an additional insured.
(Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 860.06 SIGN DISPLAY.
   No person, firm or corporation shall display any sign or other indication
that they perform work at or engage in the business of installing sewers in the
city, unless such person or one such member of such firm or corporation shall
first have obtained a certificate of registration as required under the terms
of this chapter.
(Ord. 1962-41, passed 4-16-1962; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 860.07 REGISTRATION REVOCATION.
   The registration herein provided for may at any time be revoked by the Chief
Building Official for incompetency, dereliction of duty or fraudulent use
thereof or for any violation of any city codes including the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 1996-215, passed 11-18-1996; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 860.08 INSIDE WORK EXEMPT.
   The terms and conditions of this chapter shall not apply to the installation
or construction of sewers located within residences, buildings or other
structures.
(Ord. 1962-41, passed 4-16-1962)
§ 860.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
CHAPTER 864: TAXICABS
Section
   
864.01   Taxicab defined
   
864.02   Business license required
   
864.03   License application
   
864.04   Inspections; insurance; driver’s license
   
864.05   Issuance of business license
   
864.06   False information
   
864.07   Payment of fare in advance
   
864.08   Accidents
   
864.09   Business license fee
   
864.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Driving, see
Ch. 432,
Ch. 434
   Equipment, see
Ch. 438
   Power to establish stands and fix rates, see R.C. § 715.25
   Power to regulate, see R.C. §§ 715.22, 715.66
   Taxicab stands, see §
452.10
§ 864.01 TAXICAB DEFINED.
   Within the meaning of this chapter, a TAXICAB shall include any motor-driven
vehicle engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire or fare, or
offered for hire or fare to the public for transportation within the city,
except buses operated on regular schedules and regularly established routes,
and except vehicles used exclusively for service at weddings, funerals or
ambulance work.
(Ord. 1958-32, passed 6-16-1958)
§ 864.02 BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate a taxicab business upon the streets of the city
until a license therefor shall first have been granted by Council.
(Ord. 1958-32, passed 6-16-1958)
§ 864.03 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   Prior to the granting of such a license, the applicant shall first make
application to the Police Chief, who shall investigate the character of the
persons operating such taxicab business, the drivers thereof and the conditions
of the vehicles proposed to be used in such business.
(Ord. 1958-32, passed 6-16-1958)
§ 864.04 INSPECTIONS; INSURANCE; DRIVER’S LICENSE.
   The Police Chief shall examine and inspect all vehicles proposed to be used
in such business and, if a license is granted, such vehicles shall be inspected
by the Police Chief or by a person designated by him or her at least once a
month during the term of such license. The persons operating such business
shall submit evidence of the insurance coverage required by Council at the time
such license is granted. Evidence of such insurance coverage shall also be
submitted to the Director of Law for his or her approval. The applicant shall
also exhibit to the Police Chief evidence that the applicant and the operators
of taxicabs have complied with all statutes of Ohio governing licenses. The
name of each driver shall also be registered with the Police Chief along with
each driver’s address, age, citizenship and statement of physical condition. No
person shall be permitted to drive a taxicab who is unable to read or write the
English language, who is addicted to the use of intoxicating liquors or drugs
or who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the state.
(Ord. 1958-32, passed 6-16-1958)
§ 864.05 ISSUANCE OF BUSINESS LICENSE.
   When the Police Chief has completed his or her investigation of the
character of the applicant and his or her drivers, and the condition and
serviceability of the vehicles proposed to be used, he or she shall report his
or her findings to Council. Council may then issue such license if it is
satisfied as to the character of such applicant and drivers, and shall
determine the amount of insurance coverage to be required and approve the
proposed schedule of rates to be used, and such license may be issued subject
to such other terms and conditions as may be deemed necessary by Council.
§ 864.06 FALSE INFORMATION.
   No person, firm or corporation shall give fictitious information or practice
any fraud, misrepresentation or subterfuge in connection with the licensing,
inspection or operation of any taxicab.
(Ord. 1958-32, passed 6-16-1958)
§ 864.07 PAYMENT OF FARE IN ADVANCE.
   Every driver of a taxicab shall have the right to demand payment of the
legal fare in advance and may refuse employment unless so prepaid, but no
driver of a taxicab shall otherwise refuse or neglect to convey any orderly
person or persons upon request anywhere in the city, unless previously engaged.
(Ord. 1958-32, passed 6-16-1958)
§ 864.08 ACCIDENTS.
   Each and every accident involving a taxicab operated under a license in this
city, whether such accident occurs within or without the limits of the city,
shall be reported immediately to the Police Chief. Every owner or operator of a
taxicab shall file a statement with the Police Chief of all claims made or
judgments obtained against such operator or any driver.
(Ord. 1958-32, passed 6-16-1958)
§ 864.09 BUSINESS LICENSE FEE.
   The operators of any taxicab business shall pay to the Director of Finance
the amount of $10 per cab operated by such company at the time a license is
granted and on January 1 of each year thereafter, to defray the cost of
inspection of vehicles as provided herein.
(Ord. 1958-32, passed 6-16-1958)
§ 864.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(Ord. 1958-32, passed 6-16-1958)
CHAPTER 868: TOPSOIL REMOVAL
Section
   
868.01   Permit required; application; bond
   
868.02   Public hearing
   
868.03   Referral to Council
   
868.04   Bond
   
868.05   Exemptions (Repealed)
   
868.06   Permit for minor work; fee
   
868.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Dropping or leaking loads, see §
440.06
   Landscape contractors, see
Ch. 836
   Landscaping, see §
1428.12
   Load limits, see §§
440.01,
440.09,
440.12
   Shifting or loose loads, see §
440.10
§ 868.01 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; BOND.
   (a)   Any person desiring to remove topsoil, loam, sand, gravel or other
substances from land located in any area within the city, shall file with the
City Engineer a written application for permission to carry on such operations.
Such application shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   A description of the land on which such operations are to take
place; and
      (3)   The method of removal to be employed, the time within which such
work is to be commenced and completed, the depth to which such removal is to
take place, the type of reseeding or replanting proposed and the proposed
ultimate use of the land.
   (b)   Such application shall also contain a statement that the applicant
will furnish a performance bond in the sum of $5,000 per acre or fraction
thereof in the event that the permit is granted.
   (c)   Such application shall be forwarded to the Board of Zoning Appeals by
the City Engineer, together with his or her report and recommendation thereon.
§ 868.02 PUBLIC HEARING.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall set the matter down for public hearing
after due and proper notice to the applicant and any other interested parties
in accordance with the procedure followed by the Board in considering appeals
filed under the Zoning Code. If, after such hearing, the Board determines that
the granting of the application will not adversely affect the public health,
safety and welfare, it shall grant the application with such conditions
relating to the method of removal, the term of the permit, the amount of such
removal which may be permitted on the land, the reseeding or replanting
proposed, the drainage after removal and such other conditions which the Board
may deem necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare,
which conditions shall be made a part of the permit and constitute limitations
thereon.
(Ord. 1956-71, passed 11-5-1956)
§ 868.03 REFERRAL TO COUNCIL.
   The Secretary of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall immediately notify the
City Engineer and Council of any action taken by the Board pursuant to this
chapter. Council may, at its next ensuing meeting, affirm, modify or reverse
the decision of the Board. If no action is taken by Council at its next ensuing
meeting, the decision of the Board shall be final. When a special permit has
been granted by the Board or by Council, the Clerk shall forward a written
notice thereof to the City Engineer, who shall incorporate the conditions, if
any, on the permit when issued.
(Ord. 1956-71, passed 11-5-1956)
§ 868.04 BOND.
   If the application is granted by either the Board or Council, the City
Engineer shall issue a permit containing the restrictions imposed, if any, upon
the posting of a bond in favor of the city, conditioned upon the performance of
the permit in accordance with its terms, in the amount fixed by the approving
body, such bond to be signed by the applicant and such sureties as may be
approved by the Mayor.
(Ord. 1956-71, passed 11-5-1956)
§ 868.05 EXEMPTIONS (REPEALED).
Editor’s note:
   Section 868.05 was repealed by Ordinance 1991-219, passed February 17, 1992.
See §
868.06.
§ 868.06 PERMIT FOR MINOR WORK; FEE.
   (a)   All applications under this chapter, when determined by the City
Engineer to be so minor, desirable and without potential harm to adjacent
landowners and the public health, safety and general welfare, shall be
permitted by the City Engineer, in writing, subject to such conditions as he or
she may require in the public interest. The permittee shall notify the City
Engineer of the completion of the work, which shall then be inspected by the
City Engineer, or his or her designee. In all cases, completion of the work and
restoration shall include the requirement that a minimum of three inches of
topsoil cover be placed back over the ground.
   (b)   The fee for the permit and the inspection shall be $25. Such
applications need only contain so much information as the City Engineer may
require and need not be referred to the Board of Zoning Appeals. Further, no
bond shall be required. However, the penalty provisions of §
868.99 shall apply to any violation of any such permit issued by the City
Engineer.
(Ord. 1991-219, passed 2-17-1992)
§ 868.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not more than $500 or
imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both, for each offense. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
CHAPTER 869: OPERATION AND LICENSING OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
   
869.01   Purpose and findings
   
869.02   Definitions
   
869.03   Classification
   
869.04   Sexually oriented business license required
   
869.05   Sexually oriented business employee license required
   
869.06   Sexually oriented business license application
   
869.07   Issuance of sexually oriented business license
   
869.08   Sexually oriented business employee license application
   
869.09   Issuance of sexually oriented business employee license
   
869.10   Fees
   
869.11   Inspection
   
869.12   Expiration and renewal of license
   
869.13   Suspension
   
869.14   Revocation
   
869.15   Appeal rights
   
869.16   Transfer of license
   
869.17   Prohibition of adult motels
   
869.18   Regulations pertaining to the exhibition of sexually explicit films,
videos or live entertainment in viewing booths
   
869.19   Additional regulations concerning the operation of sexually oriented
businesses
   
869.20   Loitering and exterior lighting and monitoring requirements
   
869.21   Injunction
   
869.22   Effect of partial invalidity
   
869.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Sexually oriented business regulations, see § 1288.08
§ 869.01 PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.
   (a)   The purpose of this chapter is to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations to minimize and control the negative secondary effects of sexually
oriented businesses within the city in order to promote the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the city. The provisions of this chapter have
neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the
content of any communicative materials or communication, including sexually
oriented entertainment. Similarly, it is not the purpose or effect of this
chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented entertainment
protected by the First Amendment of the Constitution, or to deny access by
distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their
intended market. Furthermore, it is not the intent or effect of this chapter to
condone or legitimize the distribution of or exhibition of entertainment that
is obscene.
   (b)   Based on evidence submitted to City Council and the Planning
Commission concerning the adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented
businesses including: the findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton
v. Playtime Theaters, Inc. 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theaters,
427 U.S. 50 (1976) and Barnes v. Glen Theater, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991) and
including the studies conducted by other cities including, but not limited to,
those conducted by New York City, New York; Kansas City, Missouri; Denver,
Colorado; Newport News, Virginia and Phoenix, Arizona, this City Council finds
the following.
      (1)   Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary and
unlawful and unhealthy activities.
      (2)   Sexual acts, including masturbation and oral and anal sex, occur at
sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or semi-
private booths or rooms for viewing films, videos or live sexually oriented
entertainment. Such activities may result in spreading communicable diseases
such as syphilis, gonorrhea and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
      (3)   Offering sexually oriented entertainment under conditions that
encourage such activities creates unhealthy conditions.
      (4)   Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are
unhealthy, in part because of the failure of owners and operators to regulate
those activities and maintain their facilities.
      (5)   Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in
the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view sexually oriented
films.
      (6)   The findings noted in divisions (b)(1) through (b)(5) hereof raise
substantial governmental concerns.
      (7)   Sexually oriented business have operational characteristics which
should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial
governmental concerns.
      (8)   A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to
place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and operators of
sexually oriented businesses. Further, such licensing procedure will place a
heretofore nonexistent incentive on operators to see that sexually oriented
businesses are run in a manner consistent with the health, safety and welfare
of patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the city. It is
appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual
operator of the sexually oriented business, and fully in possession and control
of the premises and activities occurring therein.
      (9)   The regulation of nudity in sexually oriented businesses will
further the substantial government interests in preventing prostitution and
other sex-related crimes, including illegal sex acts, and protecting the public
health, safety and welfare.
      (10)   Removal of doors on viewing booths in sexually oriented business
and requiring sufficient lighting on premises with viewing booths will advance
the substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary
sexual activity occurring in adult arcades and theaters and will facilitate the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and other federal, state and
local laws, thereby furthering the substantial governmental interest in
protecting the public health, safety and welfare.
      (11)   Requiring sufficient lighting in all sexually oriented businesses
will advance the substantial governmental interest in curbing illegal sexual
activity on the premises of sexually oriented businesses, and will facilitate
the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and other federal, state and
local laws, thereby furthering the substantial governmental interest in
protecting the public health, safety and welfare.
      (12)   The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately
responsible for the day to day operation and maintenance of sexually oriented
businesses, and by the employees of such businesses, will facilitate the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and other federal, state and
local laws, and will thereby further the substantial government interest in
protecting the public health, safety and welfare.
      (13)   A person who recently has been convicted of a sexually related
crime is not an appropriate individual to operate or be employed in a sexually
oriented business or adult motel and barring such individuals from the
management of and employment in sexually oriented businesses for a period of
years serves as a deterrent to and prevents the commission of sexually related
criminal acts, including conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually
transmitted diseases.
(Ord. 2002-175, passed 10-7-2002)
§ 869.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   ADULT ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
where either or both motion picture machines, projectors, video or laser disc
players, or other video or image producing devices are available, run via coin,
token or any form of consideration, to show images to five or fewer persons at
one time; and where the images shown and/or live entertainment presented are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
   (b)   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE. A
commercial establishment which, as its principal or predominant stock or trade,
offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the
following:
      (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions,
slides or other visual representations that are characterized by the depiction
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
      (2)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia, other than prophylactics,
that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities.
   (c)   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment that regularly features:
      (1)   Persons who appear in a state of semi-nudity;
      (2)   Live entertainment characterized by the depiction or description of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities;
      (3)   Live entertainment of an erotic nature including exotic dancers,
strippers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainment; or
      (4)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, photographic
reproductions or other visual representations, that are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
   (d)   ADULT MOTEL. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
      (1)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
and provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes or other photographic reproductions or other
visual representations, which are characterized by the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas;
      (2)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less
than ten hours; or
      (3)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room
for a period of time that is less than ten hours.
   (e)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where, for
any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or
other photographic reproductions or visual representations, are regularly shown
which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas and that take place outside the
context of some larger form of expression.
   (f)   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment that regularly features persons who appear in a state
of nudity or semi-nudity or live performances which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified anatomical areas, specified sexual
activities or live entertainment of an erotic nature including exotic dancers,
strippers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainment and which, for
each of the previously mentioned categories, take place outside the context of
some larger form of expression.
   (g)   COVERING. Any clothing or wearing apparel, including pasties, but does
not include any substance that can be washed off the skin, such as paint or
makeup or any substance designed to simulate the appearance of the anatomical
area beneath it.
   (h)   EMPLOYEE. A person who performs any service or work on the premises of
asexually oriented business, including, but not limited to, providing
entertainment, performing work of a management or supervisory nature, or
performing support functions, on a full-time, part-time or contract basis,
whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor,
agent or otherwise and whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or
other compensation by the operator of said business. EMPLOYEE does not include
a person on the premises exclusively for the repair or maintenance of the
premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the
premises.
   (i)   HEALTH COMMISSIONER. The Cuyahoga County Commissioner of Health or his
or her authorized representative.
   (j)   LICENSEE. With respect to a sexually oriented business license issued
under this chapter, a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually
oriented business or adult motel has been issued, as well as the individual(s)
designated on the license application as principally responsible for the
operation of the sexually oriented business or adult motel. With respect to a
sexually oriented business employee license issued under this chapter, LICENSEE
means a person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment
in a sexually oriented business or adult motel.
   (k)   LIVE VIEWING BOOTH. Any private or semi-private booth, or any viewing
room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, to which the public may gain
admittance, wherein a live performance is presented to five or fewer persons at
any one time.
   (l)   NUDE MODEL STUDIO. Any place where a person who appears semi-nude or
who displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be observed, sketched,
drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons
who pay money or any other form of consideration. NUDE MODEL STUDIO shall not
include:
      (1)   A proprietary school licensed by the state, or a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation;
      (2)   A private college or university that offers educational programs in
which credits are transferable to a college, junior college or university
supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
      (3)   An establishment holding classes in a structure that has no sign
visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that
indicates a semi-nude person is available for viewing; where in order to
participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of
the class; and where no more than one semi-nude model is on the premises at any
one time.
   (m)   NUDITY or a STATE OF NUDITY. Exposing to view the genitals, pubic
area, vulva, perineum, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, or pubic hair with less
than a fully opaque covering; exposing to view any portion of the areola of the
female breast with less than a fully opaque covering; exposing to view male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if entirely covered by an opaque
covering; or exposing to view any device, costume or covering that gives the
appearance of or simulates any of these anatomical areas.
   (n)   OPERATE. To control or hold primary responsibility for the operation
of a sexually oriented business or adult motel, either as a business entity, as
an individual, or as part of a group of individuals with shared responsibility.
OPERATE or CAUSE TO BE OPERATED shall mean to function or to put or keep in
operation. OPERATOR means any person on the premises of a sexually oriented
business who is authorized to exercise overall operational control or hold
primary responsibility for the operation of a sexually oriented business or who
shall cause to function or who puts or keeps in operation the business. A
person may be found to be operating or causing to operate a sexually oriented
business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner or licensee of the
business.
   (o)   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, firm association,
joint stock company, corporation or combination of individuals of whatever form
or character.
   (p)   SEMI-NUDITY or SEMI-NUDE. Exposing to view, with less than a fully
opaque covering, any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola
or any portion of the buttocks. This definition shall include the entire lower
portion of the female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage
of the female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit
or other clothing, provided that the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
   (q)   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. A business or commercial enterprise that, as
one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
      (1)   Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of the opposite sex; or
      (2)   Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is semi-nude.
   (r)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult
novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater,
nude model studio or sexual encounter center. SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS does
not include an adult motel as defined above.
   (s)   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
      (1)   The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered; or
      (2)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks or female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola.
   (t)   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY. Any of the following offenses:
      (1)   Prostitution or promoting prostitution; soliciting; loitering to
engage in solicitation; sexual performance by a child; sexual assault;
molestation of a child; or any similar offense to those described above under
the criminal or penal code of any local jurisdiction, state or county;
      (2)   For which:
         A.   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is
the later date, if the conviction is a misdemeanor offense; or
         B.   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is
the later date, if the conviction is a felony offense.
      (3)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall not prevent such
conviction from constituting a SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY as defined in this
section.
   (u)   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Any of the following:
      (1)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;
      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or
      (3)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in divisions (1) or (2) above.
   (v)   VIDEO BOOTH. Any private or semi-private booth or any viewing room of
less than 150 square feet of floor space or area to which the public may gain
admittance, wherein a still or motion picture machine, projector, video monitor
or similar equipment is available for the purpose of showing still or motion
pictures, videos or similar images or photographic reproductions to five or
fewer persons at any one time.
   (w)   VIEWING BOOTH. Live viewing booth or video booth, and VIEWING BOOTHS
means live viewing booths, video booths, or any combination thereof.
(Ord. 2002-175, passed 10-7-2002)
§ 869.03 CLASSIFICATION.
   Businesses subject to sexually oriented business licensing are classified as
follows:
   (a)   Adult arcades;
   (b)   Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores or adult video stores;
   (c)   Adult cabarets;
   (d)   Adult motion picture theaters;
   (e)   Adult theaters;
   (f)   Nude model studios;
   (g)   Sexual encounter centers; and
   (h)   Any combination of classification set forth in divisions (a) through
(g) above.
(Ord. 2002-175, passed 10-7-2002)
§ 869.04 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall:
      (1)   Operate a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually
oriented business license issued by the city pursuant to this chapter; or
      (2)   In connection with operating a sexually oriented business, retain
the services of a person as an employee, as defined in §
869.02 of this chapter who is not licensed as a sexually oriented business
employee by the city pursuant to this chapter.
   (b)   Any person who violates division (a)(1) of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor or the first degree.
(Ord. 2002-175, passed 10-7-2002)
§ 869.05 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall act as an employee, as defined in §
869.02 of this chapter, on the premises of a sexually oriented business or an
adult motel without having secured a sexually oriented business employee
license pursuant to this chapter.
   (b)   Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
of the third degree.
(Ord. 2002-175, passed 10-7-2002)
§ 869.06 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (a)   An application for a sexually oriented business license shall be
submitted to the Zoning Official and/or Health Department on a form provided by
the Commissioner. The application may request and the applicant shall provide
such information as reasonably necessary (including fingerprints) to enable the
city to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in
this chapter.
   (b)   An application for a sexually oriented business license shall identify
and be signed by the following persons:
      (1)   If the business is owned by an individual, that individual;
      (2)   If the business entity is owned by a corporation, each officer or
director of the corporation and each individual with a 50% or greater ownership
interest in the corporation; and
      (3)   If the business entity is owned by a partnership, each partner and
each individual with a 50% or greater ownership in the partnership.
   (c)   An application for a sexually oriented business license must designate
one or more individuals who are to be principally responsible for the operation
of the proposed sexually oriented business, if a license is granted. At least
one person so designated must be involved in the day to day operation of the
proposed sexually oriented business on a regular basis. Each person so
designated, as well as the business entity itself, shall be considered a
license applicant, must qualify as a licensee under this chapter, and shall be
considered a licensee if a license is granted.
   (d)   An application for a sexually oriented business license shall be
completed according to the instructions of the application form, which shall
require the following:
      (1)   If the applicant is:
         A.   An individual, state the legal name and any aliases of such
individual;
         B.   A partnership, state the complete name of the partnership and all
of its partners and whether the partnership is general or limited, and provide
a copy of the partnership agreement, if any; or
         C.   A corporation, state the complete name of the corporation and the
date of its incorporation, provide evidence that the corporation is in good
standing under the laws of its state or incorporation, and state the names and
capacity of all officers and directors, the name of the registered corporate
agent and the address of the registered office for service of process.
      (2)   If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business
or adult motel under a name other than that of the applicant, state the
fictitious name to be used and submit copies of documentation evidencing the
registration of the business name under applicable laws;
      (3)   State whether any applicant has been convicted of a specified
criminal activity as defined in §
869.02 of this chapter, and if so, the specified criminal activity involved and
the date, place and jurisdiction of each such conviction;
      (4)   State whether any applicant has had a previous license under this
chapter or other similar regulation of another community denied, suspended or
revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business or
adult motel for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as
the date of the denial, suspension or revocation; and state whether the
applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or 10% or
greater owner of a corporation licensed under this chapter whose license has
previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location
of the business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked as well
as the date of denial, suspension or revocation;
      (5)   State whether any applicant holds any other licenses under this
chapter or other similar regulation from this or another jurisdiction and, if
so, the names and locations of such other licensed businesses;
      (6)   State the classification of license for which the applicant is
filing;
      (7)   State the location of the proposed sexually oriented business or
adult motel, including a legal description of the property (i.e., block and
lot), street address and telephone number(s) if any;
      (8)   State the mailing address and residential address of each applicant
and each person signing the application;
      (9)   Submit a recent photograph of each applicant who is a natural
person, taken by the Police Department which clearly shows the applicant’s
face;
      (10)   Submit the fingerprints of each applicant who is a natural person,
recorded by the Police Department;
      (11)   For any applicant who is a natural person, describe and identify
the location of any tattoos on such person’s face, arms, legs or hands, or any
other anatomical area that normally would be visible when such person is on the
premises of the proposed sexually oriented business or adult motel;
      (12)   State the driver’s license number and Social Security number of
each applicant who is a natural person and each person signing the application,
or, for an applicant that is not a natural person, the applicant’s federally
issued tax identification number;
      (13)   Submit proof that each applicant who is a natural person is at
least 18 years old;
      (14)   Submit a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the
premises of the sexually oriented business or adult motel, including the
location of all stages and customer seating and a statement of total floor
space occupied by the business. The diagram shall also designate the place at
which the adult business license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. The
sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to
a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches; and
      (15)   If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually oriented business,
other than an adult motel, which shall exhibit on the premises in a booth, as
defined in §
869.02 of this chapter, films, video cassettes, other video or image
reproduction, or live entertainment which depict specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, then the applicant shall comply with the additional
requirements set forth in §
869.18(a)(1) of this chapter.
(Ord. 2002-175, passed 10-7-2002)
§ 869.07 ISSUANCE OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSE.
   (a)   Within five days of receipt of an application for a sexually oriented
business license, the Zoning Official and/or Health Department shall notify the
Police Chief, the Fire Chief, the Planning Director and the Cuyahoga County
Health Commissioner of such application. In making such notification, the
Zoning Official and/or Health Department shall request that the Fire Chief and
Health Commissioner promptly inspect the premises for which the sexually
oriented business license is sought to assess compliance with the regulations
under their respective jurisdictions.
   (b)   Upon receipt of an application for a sexually oriented business
license, the Zoning Official and/or Health Department shall request that the
Police Chief promptly investigate the information provided in the application
concerning the criminal background of the applicant(s). The Police Chief shall
record the results of his or her investigation in writing within five days of
the completion of his or her investigation.
   (c)   The Fire Chief shall provide to the Chief Building Official a written
certification of whether the premises are in compliance with the Fire Code
within ten days of receipt of notice of the application.
   (d)   The Planning Director shall provide to the Zoning Official and/or
Health Department written certification of whether the proposed sexually
oriented business is in compliance with § 1288.03(Sexually Oriented Business
Regulations) of the Planning and Zoning Code.
   (e)   The Zoning Official and/or Health Department shall commence the
inspection of the premises for which a sexually oriented business license is
sought promptly upon receipt of notice of the application, and shall complete a
written certification of whether the premises are in compliance with the
Building Code, and the provisions of this chapter related to physical
characteristics of the premises within 15 days after receipt of the
application.
   (f)   Within 21 days after receipt of a completed sexually oriented business
license application, the Zoning Official and/or Health Department shall review
such application with the Director of Law and shall approve or deny the
issuance of a license. The Zoning Official and/or Health Department shall
approve the issuance of a license to an applicant unless he or she determines
that one or more of the following findings is true:
      (1)   An applicant who is a natural person is under 18 years of age;
      (2)   An applicant has failed to provide all information and documents
required for issuance of the license as requested on the application form, or
has provided information or documents as requested on the application that are
insufficient on their face;
      (3)   An applicant has been denied an adult business license or has had a
license to operate a sexually oriented business or adult motel revoked within
the preceding 12 months by any jurisdiction;
      (4)   An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as
defined in §
869.02 of this chapter;
      (5)   The proposed sexually oriented business would violate or fail to be
in compliance with any provisions of § 1288.08 of the Planning and Zoning Code,
the General Offenses Code of the city, or state statute or regulation;
      (6)   The application and investigation fee required by this chapter has
not been paid; and/or
      (7)   An applicant is in violation of or not in compliance with any
provision of this chapter, except as provided in division (f)(1) hereof.
   (g)   If the Zoning Official and/or Health Department determines that one or
both of the following findings is true, the license issued pursuant to division
(a) hereof shall contain a requirement that the licensee correct all
deficiencies specified within 120 days of the date the license is issued:
      (1)   The results of inspections of the premises by the Fire Chief, the
Health Commissioner, and/or the Zoning Official and/or Health Department
indicate that the premises are not in compliance with applicable laws and
regulations under their respective jurisdictions, including the provisions of
this chapter related to characteristics of the physical premises. This division
(g) shall not apply to premises that are in violation of any law or regulation
that is identified or referenced in divisions (e)(1) through (e)(7) hereof;
and/or
      (2)   An applicant is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees,
fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him or her in relation to
any business, which are not the subject of a pending appeal or other legal
challenge.
   (h)   If the Zoning Official and/or Health Department determines that no
other grounds for denial of a license exist under division (a) hereof, the
Zoning Official and/or Health Department shall not delay approval of the
application past the end of the 21-day period provided in this section solely
because the Fire Chief or the Health Commissioner has not provided the Zoning
Official and/or Health Department with the results of his or her inspection of
the premises; the results of the Building Inspector’s inspection of the
premises are not available; and/or the Police Chief has not completed his or
her investigation of the criminal background of the applicant(s). If, after
approving the issuance of a license, the Zoning Official and/or Health
Department receives information from his or her investigation which he or she
determines constitutes grounds for denial of a license under division (a)
hereof, then the sexually oriented business license issued pursuant to division
(g) hereof shall be immediately revoked. If after approving the issuance of a
license, the Zoning Official and/or Health Department receives information
concerning the results of inspections of the premises by the Fire Chief or the
Health Commissioner’s inspection, which the Zoning Official and/or Health
Department determines constitutes grounds for the issuance of a license subject
to a requirement to correct deficiencies under division (f) hereof, then a
requirement shall be added to the terms of the sexually oriented business
licenses issued pursuant to division (g) hereof to correct all deficiencies
noted within 120 days of the date such requirement is added.
   (i)   A sexually oriented business license, if granted, shall state on its
face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration
date, the address of the licensed sexually oriented business or adult motel,
and the classification for which the license is issued pursuant to §
869.03 of this chapter. All sexually oriented business licenses shall be posted
in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the business so that they may
be easily read at any time.
   (j)   The Zoning Official and/or Health Department shall advise the
applicant in writing of the reasons for any license denial.
(Ord. 2002-175, passed 10-7-2002)
§ 869.08 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (a)   An application for a sexually oriented business employee license shall
be submitted to the Zoning Official and/or Health Department on a form provided
by the Zoning Official and/or Health Department. The application may request
and the applicant shall provide such information as reasonably necessary
(including fingerprints) to enable the city to determine whether the applicant
meets the qualifications established in this chapter.
   (b)   An application for a sexually oriented business employee license shall
be completed according to the instructions on the application form, which shall
require the following:
      (1)   State the applicant’s name and any other names (including “stage”
names) or aliases used by the applicant;
      (2)   State the applicant’s date and place of birth;
      (3)   State the applicant’s height, weight, and hair and eye color;
      (4)   Submit the applicant’s fingerprints, recorded by the Police
Department;
      (5)   Describe and identify the location of any tattoos on the
applicant’s face, arms, legs or hands, or any other anatomical area that
normally would be visible when the applicant is on the premises of the proposed
sexually oriented business;
      (6)   State the applicant’s present residence address and telephone
number;
      (7)   State the applicant’s present or intended business address and
telephone number;
      (8)   State the applicant’s driver’s license number and Social Security
number;
      (9)   Submit proof that the applicant is at least 18 years old;
      (10)   Obtain a photograph of the applicant and all employees upon
issuance of the license;
      (11)   Provide a statement detailing the sexually oriented business-
related license history of the applicant for the five years immediately
preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such
applicant previously operated or is seeking to operate a sexually oriented
business, or adult motel, in this or any other jurisdiction, and whether the
applicant has ever had a sexually oriented business-related license, permit or
authorization to do business denied, revoked or suspended. In the event of any
such denial, revocation or suspension, state the name of the issuing or denying
jurisdiction and describe in full the reason for the denial, revocation or
suspension. Attach a copy of any order of denial, revocation or suspension; and
      (12)   State whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified
criminal activity as defined in §
869.02 of this chapter and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved and
the date, place and jurisdiction of.
(Ord. 2002-175, passed 10-7-2002)
§ 869.09 ISSUANCE OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE.
   (a)   Upon the filing of a completed application for a sexually oriented
business employee license, the Zoning Official and/or Health Department shall
issue a temporary license to said applicant immediately.
   (b)   Within five days of receipt of a completed application for a sexually
oriented business employee license, the Zoning Official and/or Health
Department shall request that the Police Chief initiate an investigation of the
information provided in the application concerning the criminal background of
the applicant. The Police Chief shall document the results of his or her
investigation in writing within five days of the completion of his or her
investigation.
   (c)   Within ten days after completion of the Police Chief’s investigation
of the criminal background of the applicant, the Zoning Official and/or Health
Department upon review of such information with the Director of Law, shall
approve or deny the issuance of the license. The Zoning Official and/or Health
Department shall approve the issuance of the license to an applicant unless he
or she determines that one or more of the following findings is true:
      (1)   The applicant has failed to provide all information and documents
required for issuance of the license as requested on the application form, or
has provided information or documents as requested on the application that are
insufficient on their face;
      (2)   The applicant is under 18 years of age;
      (3)   The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity
as defined in §
869.02 of this chapter;
      (4)   The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for
employment in a business prohibited by local, state or federal law, statute,
rule or regulation; or
      (5)   The applicant has been denied a sexually oriented business employee
license or has had a sexually oriented business employee license revoked within
the preceding 12 months by any jurisdiction.
   (d)   If the sexually oriented business employee license is denied, the
temporary license previously issued is immediately deemed null and void. The
Zoning Official and/or Health Department shall advise the applicant in writing
of the reason(s) for any such denial.
(Ord. 2002-175, passed 10-7-2002)
§ 869.10 FEES.
   (a)   Every application for a new sexually oriented business license shall
be accompanied by a $400 non-refundable application and investigation fee.
   (b)   Every application for renewal of a sexually oriented business license
shall be accompanied by a $250 non-refundable application and investigation
fee.
   (c)   In addition to the application and investigation fee required in
division (a) or (b) hereof, every applicant that is granted a sexually oriented
business license (new or renewal) shall pay to the city an annual, non-
refundable license fee of $400 within 30 days of license issuance or renewal.
   (d)   Every application for a new sexually oriented business employee
license shall be accompanied by an annual, non-refundable application,
investigation and license fee of $100.
   (e)   Every application for renewal of a sexually oriented business employee
license shall be accompanied by an annual, non-refundable application,
investigation and license fee of $50.
(Ord. 2002-175, passed 10-7-2002)
§ 869.11 INSPECTION.
   (a)   The Police Department shall, from time to time, but not more than four
times a year, inspect that portion of each sexually oriented business and adult
motel licensed under the provisions of this chapter that is open to the public
in order to assess compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   The Zoning Official and/or Health Department shall, from time to time,
but no more than four times a year, request that the Health Commissioner
inspect that portion of each sexually oriented business and adult motel
licensed under the provisions of this chapter that is open to the public in
order to assess compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (c)   An applicant or licensee shall permit the Zoning Official and/or
Health Department and representative of the Police Department, Fire Department,
or other city departments or agencies, or the Health Commissioner, to inspect
that portion of each sexually oriented business that is open to the public or
adult motel for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time
that it is occupied or open for business.
   (d)   Any refusal to permit such lawful inspection of the premises or
prohibition or interference with such lawful inspection of the premises shall
be grounds for suspension of the sexually oriented business license pursuant to
§
869.13 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2002-175, passed 10-7-2002)
§ 869.12 EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   (a)   Each license issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire one year
from the date of issuance and may be renewed by making application as provided
in this section. Application for renewal shall be made no more than 90 days and
no less than 30 days before the expiration date. If application is made less
than 30 days before the expiration date, the license will not be extended
pending a decision on the application, but will expire on its normal expiration
date.
   (b)   An application for renewal of a sexually oriented business license
shall be submitted to the Zoning Official and/or Health Department on a form
provided by the Zoning Official and/or Health Department. The renewal
application may request and the applicant shall provide such information as
reasonably necessary to enable the city to determine whether the applicant
meets the qualifications established in this chapter. The completed renewal
application shall describe any changes or additions to, or deletions from, the
information provided in the applicant’s initial license application pursuant to
§
869.06 of this chapter. The completed renewal application shall be accompanied
by copies of any document or material submitted in connection with the initial
license application that has been revised or requires revision to reflect any
change in circumstances or conditions. Sketches or diagrams submitted with an
initial sexually oriented business license application may be resubmitted with
subsequent renewal applications, provided that the applicant certifies in
writing that the sketch or diagram still depicts the premises accurately.
   (c)   The Zoning Official and/or Health Department shall make determinations
concerning the approval of license renewals based on the same criteria used to
evaluate applications for new licenses under §
869.07 of this chapter.
   (d)   The Zoning Official and/or Health Department shall advise the
applicant in writing of the reason(s) for any denial of a license renewal.
   (e)   An application for renewal of a sexually oriented business employee
license shall be submitted to the Zoning Official and/or Health Department on a
form provided by the Zoning Official and/or Health Department. The renewal
application may request and the applicant shall provide such information as
reasonably necessary to enable the city to determine whether the applicant
meets the qualifications established in this chapter. The completed renewal
application shall describe any changes or additions to, or deletions from, the
information provided in the applicant’s initial license application pursuant to
§
869.08 of this chapter. The completed renewal application shall be accompanied
by copies of any document or material submitted in connection with the initial
license application that has been revised or requires revision to reflect any
change in circumstances or conditions.
   (f)   The Zoning Official and/or Health Department shall make determinations
concerning the approval of license renewals based on the same criteria used to
evaluate applications for new licenses under §
869.09 of this chapter.
   (g)   The Zoning Official and/or Health Department shall advise the
applicant in writing of the reason(s) for any denial of a license renewal.
   (h)   When the city denies an application for renewal of a license, the
applicant shall not be issued another license for one year from the date of
denial. If the city finds, subsequent to denial, that the basis for denial of
the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted
a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the denial was issued.
(Ord. 2002-175, passed 10-7-2002)
§ 869.13 SUSPENSION.
   (a)   The city shall suspend a sexually oriented business license for a
period not to exceed 30 days if it determines that a licensee:
      (1)   Has violated or is not in compliance with any section of this
chapter; or
      (2)   Has knowingly allowed an employee to violate or fail to comply with
any section of this chapter.
   (b)   The city shall suspend a sexually oriented business license for a
period not to exceed 30 days if it determines that a licensee or his or her
employee or agent has refused to allow, has prohibited or has interfered with
an inspection of the licensed sexually oriented business or adult motel
premises as authorized by this chapter.
   (c)   The city shall suspend a sexually oriented business employee license
for a period not to exceed 30 days if it determines that a licensee has
violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter.
   (d)   The Zoning Official and/or Health Department shall advise the licensee
in writing of the reason(s) for any suspension.
(Ord. 2002-175, passed 10-7-2002)
§ 869.14 REVOCATION.
   (a)   The city shall revoke a sexually oriented business license or sexually
oriented business employee license if a cause of suspension under §
869.13 of this chapter occurs and the license has been suspended two times
within the preceding 12 months.
   (b)   The city shall revoke a sexually oriented business license if it
determines that:
      (1)   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application process;
      (2)   The licensee(s) failed to comply with any requirement stated in the
license, pursuant to §
869.07(g) of this chapter, to correct specified deficiencies within 120 days;
      (3)   A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of
controlled substances on the premises;
      (4)   A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution, solicitation or the
commission of a felony on the premises;
      (5)   A licensee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during
a period of time when the licensee’s license was suspended;
      (6)   A licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse,
sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or other sex act to occur in or on the
licensed premises;
      (7)   A licensee has been convicted of a specified criminal activity, as
defined in §
869.02 of this chapter, during the term of the license; or
      (8)   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city, county or state
for any taxes or fees past due that were assessed or imposed in relation to any
business.
   (c)   The city shall revoke a sexually oriented business employee license if
it determines that:
      (1)   The licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application process;
      (2)   The licensee has knowingly acted as an employee on the premises of
a sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee’s
license was suspended: or
      (3)   The licensee has been convicted of a specified criminal activity,
as defined in §
869.02 of this chapter during the term of the license.
   (d)   The Zoning Official and/or Health Department shall advise the licensee
in writing of the reason(s) for any revocation.
   (e)   When the city revokes a license, the licensee shall not be issued
another license for one year from the date the revocation became effective. If
the city finds, subsequent to revocation, that the basis for the revocation has
been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90
days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective.
(Ord. 2002-175, passed 10-7-2002)
§ 869.15 APPEAL RIGHTS.
   (a)   Any denial, suspension or revocation of a new or renewal license under
this chapter may be appealed to City Council by written notice within ten days
of such denial, suspension or revocation. Unless the applicant requests a
longer period, City Council must hold a hearing on the appeal within 30 days
and must issue a decision affirming or reversing the denial, suspension or
revocation within five days after the hearing.
   (b)   Any decision by City Council shall be a final appealable order, and
the applicant or licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such
administrative action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
   (c)   In the event that an applicant or licensee seeks judicial review of a
decision issued pursuant to this chapter, the applicant or licensee shall
provide written notice of such appeal to City Council in advance of or at the
time of the filing of the appeal. Within ten days of receiving such written
notice of appeal, or within such shorter time as may be ordered by the court,
City Council shall transmit to the court in which appeal was sought a copy of
the full administrative record for the matter, including a complete transcript
of all the original papers, testimony and evidence offered, heard and taken
into consideration in issuing the final order. City Council and all other
departments or agencies of the city shall provide any further information,
assistance or cooperation requested by the reviewing court without delay.
   (d)   Subject to the provisions of division (f) hereof, any licensee
lawfully operating a sexually oriented business or adult motel prior to the
denial of a license renewal application, or the suspension or revocation of a
license, may continue to operate said business during the pendency of an appeal
of a decision rendered under this chapter to City Council or to a court.
   (e)   Subject to the provisions of division (f) hereof, any licensee
lawfully acting as an employee in a sexually oriented business or adult motel
prior to the denial of a license renewal application, or the suspension or
revocation of a license, may continue to serve in such capacity during the
pendency of an appeal of a decision rendered under this chapter to the City
Council or to a court.
   (f)   In the event that an applicant for a new sexually oriented business
license or a new sexually oriented business employee license seeks judicial
review of the denial of a new license, and such review does not result in a
final judicial decision within 30 days of the date the appeal was filed, the
city will issue such applicant a provisional sexually oriented business license
or sexually oriented business employee license upon request of the applicant.
The provisional license:
      (1)   Will allow an applicant for a sexually oriented business license to
operate the sexually oriented business or adult motel named in the license
application under the same terms as a normal sexually oriented business issued
pursuant to §
869.07 of this chapter for the period of time specified in division (g) hereof;
      (2)   Will allow an applicant for a sexually oriented business employee
license to act as an employee on the premises of a sexually oriented business
or adult motel under the same terms as a normal sexually oriented business
employee license issued pursuant to §
869.09 of this chapter for the period of time specified in division (g) hereof;
and
      (3)   Will be subject to the same requirements as a normal sexually
oriented business license or sexually oriented business employee license issued
under §
869.07 or
869.09 of this chapter.
   (g)   A provisional license will expire on whichever of the following three
dates is earliest:
      (1)   The date that judicial decision is issued upholding the license
denial;
      (2)   The date on which a non-provisional sexually oriented business
license or sexually oriented business employee license is issued to the
applicant pursuant to a judicial decision overturning the license denial; or
      (3)   The date one year from the issuance of the provisional license.
   (h)   In the event that judicial review of the denial of a new license
application is still pending 30 days before the expiration date of a
provisional license, the provisional licensee may file a renewal license
application with the Zoning Official and/or Health Department pursuant to §
869.12(b) of this chapter. The Zoning Official and/or Health Department shall
grant an application for renewal of a provisional license unless he or she
determines that new grounds exist for denial of a license application pursuant
to §
869.07 or
869.09 of this chapter, which did not exist at the time of the original license
application. In the event that an application for renewal of a provisional
license is denied and the applicant seeks judicial review of that denial; the
city has the right to consolidate such review with the pending judicial appeal
of the previous license denial.
(Ord. 2002-175, passed 10-7-2002)
§ 869.16 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   (a)   A sexually oriented business license is not transferable from one
licensee to another or from one location to another. Any purported transfer of
a sexually oriented business license shall automatically and immediately revoke
that license.
   (b)   A sexually oriented business employee license is not transferable from
one licensee to another, but the use of the license by the individual to whom
it was issued may be transferred from one licensed sexually oriented business
or adult motel to another such licensed establishment during the term of the
license, provided that the licensee gives written notice of such transfer to
the Zoning Official and/or Health Department within 15 days of such transfer.
(Ord. 2002-175, passed 10-7-2002)
§ 869.17 PROHIBITION OF ADULT MOTELS.
   (a)   No person shall operate an adult motel within the city.
   (b)   Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial
establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in less than ten
hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel
as that term is defined in §
869.02 of this chapter.
   (c)   Evidence that a person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel
or similar commercial establishment has rented or sub-rented a sleeping room to
a person and, within ten hours from the time the room was rented, has rented or
sub-rented the same sleeping room again, creates a rebuttable presumption that
the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in §
869.02 of this chapter.
   (d)   For purposes of division (b) hereof, the terms RENT or SUB-RENT means
the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration.
   (e)   Any person who operates a hotel, motel or similar commercial
establishment that is found to be an adult motel, as defined in §
869.02 of this chapter, commits a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. 2002-175, passed 10-7-2002)
§ 869.18 REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO THE EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS,
VIDEOS OR LIVE ENTERTAINMENT IN VIEWING BOOTHS.
   (a)   No person may operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented
business which exhibits on the premises in a viewing booth, as defined in §
869.02 of this chapter, films, video cassettes, other video or image
reproduction, or live entertainment which depict or depicts specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, without complying with the following
requirements.
      (1)   The sexually oriented business license application required under
this chapter shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof which specifies the location of one or more employee’s stations and the
location of all overhead lighting fixtures, and which designates any portion of
the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. The diagram shall also
designate the place at which the sexually oriented business license will be
conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the
nature of an engineer’s or architect’s blueprint shall not be required;
however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated
street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked
dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of
the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.
      (2)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from an employee’s station of every area of
the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, including
the interior of all viewing booths and excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not
contain video reproduction equipment, and no entertainment of any kind may be
offered in restrooms. If the premises has two or more employee’s stations
designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a
manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which
any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the
employee’s stations. The view required in this division (a)(2) must be by
direct line of sight from the employee’s station.
      (3)   No alteration in the configuration or location of an employee’s
station shall be made without the prior approval of the Zoning Official and/or
Health Department.
      (4)   At least one employee shall be on duty and situated in each
employee’s station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
      (5)   An employee’s station shall not exceed 32 square feet of floor
area, and no single dimension of an employee’s station shall exceed eight feet.
      (6)   The view from the employee’s station(s) shall remain unobstructed
by any doors, curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other
materials.
      (7)   No patron may at any time be permitted access to any area of the
premises which has been designated in the license application files pursuant to
this chapter as an area in which patrons will not be permitted.
      (8)   No viewing booth may be occupied by more than one person at any
time.
      (9)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted
access, including both the interior of viewing booths and restrooms, at an
illumination level of not less than five foot-candles as measured at floor
level.
      (10)   The illumination described above shall be maintained at all times
that any patron is present in the premises. In the event of a power failure,
the business shall stop operating immediately and all patrons shall be cleared
from the premises. The premises shall not be reopened until the minimum
illumination level can be assured.
      (11)   No openings of any kind shall be permitted to exist between
viewing booths or in any wall of a viewing booth.
      (12)   No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind
between viewing booths or in any wall of a viewing booth.
      (13)   The walls of each viewing booth shall be inspected regularly
during each business day to determine if any openings or holes exist.
      (14)   All floor coverings in viewing booths shall be nonporous; easily
cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.
      (15)   All wall surfaces, ceiling surfaces and seating surfaces in
viewing booths shall be constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous,
easily cleanable material.
   (b)   Any person who operates a sexually oriented business or his or her
agent or employee shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree if he or
she operates a sexually oriented business in violation of division (a) hereof.
(Ord. 2002-175, passed 10-7-2002)
§ 869.19 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS CONCERNING THE OPERATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESSES.
   (a)   Nudity, sexual activity, live entertainment and performances. (The
provisions of this division (a) shall not apply to an employee’s bona fide use
of a restroom or of a single-sex dressing room that is accessible only to
entertainers.)
      (1)   No employee on the premises of a sexually oriented business may
appear in a state of nudity as defined in §
869.02 of this chapter, or engage in specified sexual activities in a state of
nudity, as defined in §
869.02 of this chapter.
      (2)   Any employee appearing on the premises of a sexually oriented
business in a state of semi-nudity, as defined in §
869.02 of this chapter, must be on a stage that is at least 72 inches from all
parts of a clear designated area in which patrons will be present.
      (3)   All live entertainment and performances in a sexually oriented
business must take place on a stage at a distance at least 72 inches from all
parts of a clear designated area in which patrons will be present.
      (4)   The stage shall be separated from the area in which patrons may be
present.
      (5)   No employee, as defined in §
869.02 of this chapter, appearing on the premises of a sexually oriented
business in a state of semi-nudity, may intentionally or knowingly touch a
customer or a customer’s clothing or permit himself or herself to be touched by
a customer or a customer’s clothing.
      (6)   Any live entertainment that is provided on the premises of a
sexually oriented business, in a private or semi-private room, to five or fewer
persons at any one time, must take place in the direct, unobstructed line of
sight of an employee’s station at which at least one employee is on duty and
stationed at all times during which such entertainment takes place with all
doors to such room completely open and ajar, if such room is not considered a
viewing booth as defined in §
869.02 of this chapter and therefore is not subject to the provisions of §
869.18 of this chapter.
   (b)   Dressing rooms. All sexually oriented businesses that offer live
entertainment must provide separate dressing room facilities for female and
male entertainers which shall not be occupied or used in any way by anyone
other than entertainers.
   (c)   Minors prohibited. No person under the age of 18 years shall be
permitted on the premises of a sexually oriented business.
   (d)   Hours of operation. No sexually oriented business shall remain open at
any time between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and
Saturdays, and 2:30 a.m. and noon (12:00 p.m.) on Sundays, nor shall any
entertainment, service or product be provided to a customer on the premises of
a sexually oriented business during those hours.
   (e)   Minimum lighting level.
      (1)   The premises of every sexually oriented business shall be equipped
with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every
place to which patrons are permitted access, including restrooms, at an
illumination level of not less than five foot-candles as measured at floor
level.
      (2)   The illumination described in division (a) hereof shall be
maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. In the
event of a power failure, the business shall stop operating immediately and all
patrons shall be cleared from the premises. The premises shall not be reopened
until the minimum illumination level can be assured.
   (f)   Exterior display. No sexually oriented business or adult motel shall
be operated in any manner that permits the observation from outside the
premises of any material or entertainment depicting or describing specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in §
869.02 of this chapter, or any person in a state of nudity or semi-nudity,
whether by means of display, decoration, sign, window or any other means.
   (g)   Penalty; division (a). Except as otherwise provided in this division
(g), any person who violates division (a) hereof, or any person who operates a
sexually oriented business and permits a violation of division (a) hereof on
the premises, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree If the
offender previously has been convicted of or plead guilty to one violation of
division (a) hereof, a violation of division (a) hereof will be considered a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of or plead guilty to two violations of division (a) hereof, a violation of
division (a) hereof will be considered a misdemeanor of the second degree. If
the offender previously has been convicted of or plead guilty to three or more
violations of division (a) hereof, a violation of division (a) hereof will be
considered a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (h)   Penalty; division (f). Any person who operates a sexually oriented
business and permits a violation of division (f) hereof on the premises shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (i)   Penalty; divisions (b), (d) or (e). Any person who operates a sexually
oriented business in violation of division (b), (d) or (e) hereof shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (j)   Penalty; division (c). Any operator of a sexually oriented business or
his or her agent or employee who recklessly violates, or operates a sexually
oriented business in violation of, division (c) hereof commits a misdemeanor of
the second degree. Mistake of age is not a defense to a charge under this
section, unless the person under age 18 who was permitted on the premises
exhibited to the operator or his or her agent or employee a draft card,
driver’s license, birth record or other official or apparently official
document purporting to show that the person was 18 years of age or over, and
the person to whom that document was exhibited did not otherwise have
reasonable cause to believe that the person seeking admittance was under 18
years old.
(Ord. 2002-175, passed 10-7-2002)
§ 869.20 LOITERING AND EXTERIOR LIGHTING AND MONITORING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of the operator of a sexually oriented business
to:
      (1)   Initiate and enforce a no loitering policy within the external
boundaries of the real property upon which the sexually oriented business is
located;
      (2)   Post conspicuous signs stating that no loitering is permitted on
such property;
      (3)   Designate one or more employees to monitor the activities of
persons on such property by visually inspecting such property at least once
every 30 minutes or inspecting such property by use of video cameras and
monitors; and
      (4)   Provide adequate lighting of the exterior premises to provide for
visual inspection or video monitoring to prohibit loitering. The video cameras
and monitors shall operate continuously at all times that the premises is open
for business. The monitors shall be installed within a manager’s station.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to
knowingly fail to fulfill that duty.
(Ord. 2002-175, passed 10-7-2002)
§ 869.21 INJUNCTION.
   Any person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business or adult motel in violation of this chapter is subject to a suit for
injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations under
Chapter 698 of the Codified Ordinances of the city.
(Ord. 2002-175, passed 10-7-2002)
§ 869.22 EFFECT OF PARTIAL INVALIDITY.
   If any section, division or clause of this chapter shall be deemed to be
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the validity of the remaining sections,
divisions and clauses shall not be affected.
(Ord. 2002-175, passed 10-7-2002)
§ 869.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   Violations of this chapter shall be misdemeanor offenses punishable by
fine or imprisonment, as provided in
Chapter 698 of the Codified Ordinances of the city.
   (b)   Each day that a sexually oriented business or adult motel operates in
violation of this chapter is a separate offense or violation
(Ord. 2002-175, passed 10-7-2002)
TITLE FOUR - TAXATION
            Chap.
890.   Municipal Income Tax Effective Through December 31, 2015
            Chap.
891.   Municipal Income Tax Effective Beginning January 1, 2016
            Chap.
892.   Hotel Tax
            Chap.
894.   Admissions Tax
CHAPTER 890: MUNICIPAL INCOME TAX EFFECTIVE THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2015
Section
   
890.01   Purposes
   
890.02   Definitions
   
890.03   Imposition of tax and rate
   
890.04   Effective period
   
890.05   Determination of allocation of tax
   
890.06   Returns and payment of tax
   
890.07   Collection at source
   
890.08   Declarations and estimated payments
   
890.09   Interest on unpaid tax
   
890.10   Penalties on unpaid tax
   
890.11   Exceptions to interest and penalty provisions
   
890.12   Abatement of interest and penalty
   
890.13   Violations
   
890.14   Reserved for future use
   
890.15   Failure to procure forms not excuse
   
890.16   Collection of unpaid taxes and refunds of overpayments
   
890.17   Solon resident subject to income tax in other municipality
   
890.18   Receipts and disbursement of income tax collections
   
890.19   Duties and authority of the Administrator
   
890.20   Board of Review
   
890.21   Collection of tax after termination of chapter
   
890.22   Savings clause
   
890.23   Revenue recapture program
   
890.99   Penalty
§ 890.01 PURPOSES.
   (a)   To provide funds for the purposes of general municipal functions of
the city there shall be and is hereby levied a tax on all income, salaries,
wages, commissions and other compensations, and on net profits, at the rate of
1% per annum as hereinafter provided.
   (b)   In addition to the tax levied in division (a) hereof, an additional
tax to provide funds for the replacement and/or repair of various water
facilities, with necessary appurtenances, the construction and repair of
various streets and roadways throughout the municipality with necessary
appurtenances, and the construction and repair of various storm and sanitary
sewer systems with necessary appurtenances, shall be and is hereby levied on
all income, salaries, wages, commissions and other compensations, and on net
profits, at the rate of 0.5% per annum from July 1, 1995, and thereafter, as
hereinafter provided.
   (c)   In addition to the tax levied in divisions (a) and (b) hereof, an
additional tax to provide funds for all capital and operating expenses of the
Department of Public Safety and the Service Department shall be and is hereby
levied on all income, salaries, wages, commissions and other compensations, and
on net profits, at the rate of 0.5% per annum from July 1, 1989, and
thereafter, as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 2007-217, passed 10-15-2007)
§ 890.02 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meaning ascribed
to them in this section, except as and if the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning. The singular shall include the plural and the
masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
   (a)   ADJUSTED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME. A C corporation’s federal taxable
income before net operating losses and special deductions as determined under
the Internal Revenue Code, but including subsequent adjustments from required
additions and deductions. Pass-through entities must compute ADJUSTED FEDERAL
TAXABLE INCOME as if the pass-through entity was a C corporation. This
definition does not apply to any taxpayer required to file a return under R.C.
§ 5745.03 or to the net profit from a sole proprietorship. This definition is
effective for tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2004.
   (b)   ADMINISTRATOR or INCOME TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The individual designated
to administer and enforce the provisions of the city income tax.
   (c)   ASSOCIATION. Any partnership, limited partnership, limited liability
company or any other form of unincorporated enterprise, including S
corporations as defined in the Federal Tax Code, 26 U.S.C. § 1361.
   (d)   BOARD OF REVIEW. The Board created by and constituted as provided in §
890.20.
   (e)   BUSINESS. Any enterprise, activity, profession or undertaking of any
nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for profit, whether by an
individual, partnership, association, corporation or any other entity.
   (f)   CITY. The City of Solon, Ohio.
   (g)   CORPORATION. A corporation, but not including S corporations as
defined in the Federal Tax Code, 26 U.S.C. § 1361, or joint stock association
organized under the laws of the United States, the state, or any other state,
territory or foreign country or dependency.
   (h)   DOMICILE. The permanent legal residence of a taxpayer. A taxpayer may
have more than one residence but not more than one DOMICILE.
   (i)   EMPLOYEE. One who works for income, wages, salary, commission or other
type of compensation in the service and under the control of an employer.
   (j)   EMPLOYER. An individual, partnership, association, corporation,
government body, unit or agency, or any other entity, whether or not organized
for profit, who or that employs one or more persons on income, salary, wage,
commission or other basis of compensation.
   (k)   FISCAL YEAR. An accounting period of 12 months or less ending on any
day other than December 31.
   (l)   GENERIC FORM. An electronic or paper form designed for reporting
estimated municipal income taxes, and/or annual municipal income tax liability,
and/or separate requests for refunds, that contain all the information required
on Solon’s regular tax return, estimated payment and refund request forms, and
are in a similar format that will allow processing of the generic forms without
altering Solon’s procedures for processing forms.
   (m)   GROSS RECEIPTS. The total revenue derived from sales, work done or
service rendered.
   (n)   INCOME. All monies and compensation in any form, subject to
limitations imposed by R.C. Chapter 718, derived from any source whatsoever,
including, but not limited to:
      (1)   All income, qualifying wages, commissions, other compensation and
other income from whatever source received by residents of Solon;
      (2)   All salaries, wages, commissions, other compensation and other
income from whatsoever source received by nonresidents for work done or
services performed or rendered or activities conducted in Solon; and
      (3)   The portion attributable to the city of the net profits of all
businesses, associations, professions, corporations or other entities, from
sales made, work done, services performed or rendered, and business or other
activities conducted in Solon.
   (o)   NET PROFITS. For taxable years prior to 2004, a net gain from the
operation of a business, profession, enterprise or other activity after
provision for all ordinary and necessary expenses either paid or accrued in
accordance with the accounting system (i.e., cash or accrual) used by the
taxpayer for federal income tax purposes, without deduction of taxes imposed by
this chapter, federal, state and other taxes based on income, and, in the case
of an association, without deduction of salaries paid to partners and other
owners. For taxable years 2004 and later, see ADJUSTED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME.
   (p)   NONRESIDENT. An individual domiciled outside the City of Solon.
   (q)   NONRESIDENT UNINCORPORATED BUSINESS ENTITY. An unincorporated business
entity not having an office or place of business within the City of Solon.
   (r)   PERSON. Every natural person, partnership, fiduciary, association or
corporation. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty,
the term PERSON, as applied to any unincorporated entity, shall mean the
partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers
thereof.
   (s)   PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any bona fide office (other than a mere statutory
office), factory, warehouse or other space which is occupied and used by the
taxpayer in carrying on any business activity individually or through one or
more of his or her regular employees regularly in attendance.
   (t)   QUALIFYING WAGE. Wages as defined in IRC § 3121(a), without regard to
any wage limitations, but including subsequent adjustments from required
additions and deductions. QUALIFYING WAGE represents employees’ income from
which municipal tax shall be deducted by the employer, and any wages not
considered a part of QUALIFYING WAGE shall not be taxed by a municipality. This
definition is effective January 1, 2004, for taxable years 2004 and later.
   (u)   RESIDENT. An individual domiciled in the City of Solon.
   (v)   RESIDENT UNINCORPORATED BUSINESS ENTITY. An unincorporated business
entity having an office or place of business within the City of Solon.
   (w)   TAXABLE INCOME. Income minus the deductions and credits allowed by
this chapter. (See INCOME definition.)
   (x)   TAXABLE YEAR. The calendar year, or the fiscal year upon the basis of
which the net profits are to be computed under this chapter, and, in the case
of a return for a fractional part of a year, the period for which such return
is required to be made.
   (y)   TAXPAYER. A person, whether an individual, partnership, association,
corporation or other entity, required hereunder to file a return and/or pay a
tax.
(Ord. 2007-217, passed 10-15-2007)
§ 890.03 IMPOSITION OF TAX AND RATE.
   An annual tax for the purposes specified in §
890.01 shall be imposed on and after July 1, 1995, at the rate of 2% per annum,
upon the following:
   (a)   On all income, qualifying wages, commissions and other compensation
earned on and after July 1, 1995, by residents of the city;
   (b)   On all income, qualifying wages, commissions and other compensation
earned on and after July 1, 1995, by nonresidents of the city for work done or
services performed or rendered within the city. Separation pay, termination
pay, reduction-in-force pay and other compensation paid as a result of an
employee leaving the service of an employer shall be allocable only to the
municipality.
      (1)   The city shall not, however, tax the compensation of a nonresident
individual who will be deemed to be an occasional entrant if all of the
following apply:
         A.   The compensation is paid for personal services performed by the
individual in the city on 12 or fewer days during the calendar year, in which
case the individual shall be considered an occasional entrant for purposes of
the city income tax. A day is a full day or any fractional part of a day;
         B.   In the case of an individual who is an employee, the principal
place of business of the individual’s employer is located outside the city and
the individual pays tax on compensation described in division (b)(2) of this
section to the municipality, if any, in which the employer’s principal place of
business is located, and no portion of that tax is refunded to the individual;
and
         C.   The individual is not a professional entertainer or professional
athlete, the promoter of a professional entertainment or sports event, or an
employee of such a promoter, all as may be reasonably defined by the city.
      (2)   Beginning with the thirteenth day an individual deemed to have been
an occasional entrant to the city performs services within the city, the
employer of said individual shall begin withholding the city income tax from
remuneration paid by the employer to the individual, and shall remit the
withheld income tax to the city in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter. Since the individual can no longer be considered to have been an
occasional entrant, the employer is further required to remit taxes on income
earned in the city by the individual for the first 12 days.
      (3)   If the individual is self-employed, it shall be the responsibility
of the individual to remit the appropriate income tax to the city.
   (c)   On the portion attributable to the city on the net profits earned on
and after July 1, 1995, of all resident unincorporated business entities or
professions or other activities, derived from sales made, work done and/or
services performed or rendered in business or other activities conducted in the
city. Tax that is due on net profits distributed to partners or owners of
unincorporated businesses and pass-through entities shall be collected and
remitted to Solon by the entities on behalf of its partners and owners;
   (d)   On the portion of the distributive share of the net profits earned on
and after July 1, 1995, of a resident partner or owner of a resident
unincorporated business entity not attributable to the city and not levied
against such unincorporated business entity by the city;
   (e)   On the portion attributable to the city of the net profits earned on
or after July 1, 1995, of all nonresident unincorporated business entities,
professions or other activities derived from sales made, work done and/or
services performed or rendered in business and other activities conducted in
the city, whether or not such unincorporated business entity has an office or
place of business in the city;
   (f)   On the portion of the distributive share of the net profits earned on
or after July 1, 1995, of a resident partner or owner of a nonresident
unincorporated business entity not attributable to the city and not levied
against such unincorporated business entity by the city;
   (g)   On the portion attributable to the city of the net profits earned on
and after July 1, 1995, of all corporations derived from sales made, work done,
services performed or rendered and business or other activities conducted in
the city, whether or not such corporations have an office or place of business
in the city;
   (h)   Effective for tax years 2004 and later, the distributive share of
income paid to an S corporation shareholder shall be taxable in the following
manner:
      (1)   If no portion of the net profits of the S Corporation are allocated
or apportioned to the state, the distributive share is taxable only to the
extent that it represents wages or net earnings from self-employment; and
      (2)   If any portion of the net profits of the S Corporation are
allocated or apportioned to the state, the full amount of the distributive
share is taxable.
   (i)   On all taxable income from lotteries, gaming, wagering or schemes of
chance received by residents of the city or received by nonresidents of the
city within the city or on the basis of activity conducted within the city.
Taxable income shall not include proceeds from casinos, lotteries, gaming,
wagering or schemes of chance sponsored by legitimate nonprofit organizations
in an aggregate amount of less than $250,000 per year; and
   (j)   Exemptions. The tax provided for herein shall not be levied on the
following:
      (1)   The military pay or allowances of members of the armed forces of
the United States and of members of their reserve components, including the
National Guard;
      (2)   The income of religious, fraternal, charitable, scientific,
literary or educational institutions to the extent that such income is derived
from tax exempt real estate, tax exempt tangible or intangible property or tax
exempt activities, and only to the extent that the said income is exempt from
federal income tax;
      (3)   Receipts by bona fide charitable, religious and educational
organizations and associations, when those receipts are from seasonal or casual
entertainment, amusement, sports events and health and welfare activities when
any such are conducted by bona fide charitable, religious or educational
organizations and associations and only to the extent that the said income is
exempt from federal income tax;
      (4)   Social Security benefits, unemployment compensation (excluding
supplemental unemployment compensation), payments from pension plans or similar
payments, including disability payments received from private industry, or
local, state or federal governments, or from charitable, religious or
educational organizations, and the proceeds of sick, accident or liability
insurance policies. The disability benefits excludable must be of a permanent
nature as determined by a physician or government entity;
      (5)   Proceeds of insurance paid by reason of the death of the insured;
pensions, annuities or gratuities not in the nature of compensation for
services rendered, from whatever sources derived;
      (6)   Compensation for personal injuries or for damages to property by
way of insurance or otherwise, but this exclusion does not apply to
compensation paid for lost salaries or wages or to compensation from punitive
damages;
      (7)   Gains from involuntary conversions, cancellation of indebtedness,
items of income already taxed by the state from which the city is specifically
prohibited from taxing and income of a decedent’s estate during the period of
administration (except such income from the operation of a business);
      (8)   Compensation paid to a precinct election official, to the extent
that such compensation does not exceed $1,000 annually;
      (9)   Income of all individuals under 18 years of age, whether residents
or nonresidents;
      (10)   Alimony received;
      (11)   Expenses deductible on Federal Form 2106 in accordance with
federal guidelines, and subject to audit and approval by the Administrator;
      (12)   Parsonage allowance, to the extent of the rental allowance or
rental value of a house provided as a part of an ordained clergy’s
compensation. The clergy must be duly ordained, commissioned or licensed by a
religious body constituting a religious denomination, and must have authority
to perform all sacraments of that religious body; and
      (13)   Income, salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation and
net profits, the taxation of which is prohibited by the United States
Constitution or any act of Congress limiting the power of the states or their
political subdivisions to impose net income taxes on income derived from
interstate commerce, and/or is prohibited by the Constitution of the state or
any act of the Ohio General Assembly limiting the power of a municipality to
impose net income taxes.
(Ord. 2007-217, passed 10-15-2007; Ord. 2012-202, passed 8-20-2012)
§ 890.04 EFFECTIVE PERIOD.
   (a)   The tax shall be levied, collected and paid with respect to the
income, salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation and with respect to
the net profits of businesses, professions or other activities earned on and
after October 1, 1967.
   (b)   All provisions of this chapter, including all amendments, shall apply
to taxpayers required to file tax returns on or after January 1, 2008.
(Ord. 2007-217, passed 10-15-2007)
§ 890.05 DETERMINATION OF ALLOCATION OF TAX.
   (a)   Method of determination. Net profits from a business or profession
conducted both within and without the boundaries of the city shall be
considered as having a taxable situs for purposes of the tax in the same
proportion as the average ratio of:
      (1)   The average original cost of the real and tangible personal
property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession in the
city during the taxable period to the average original cost of all the real and
tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or
profession during the same period, wherever situated. Real property shall
include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the value of such
property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental thereon by eight;
      (2)   Wages, salaries and other compensation paid during the taxable
period to persons employed in the business or profession for services performed
in the city to wages, salaries and other compensation paid during the same
period to persons employed in the business or profession, wherever their
services are performed. Wages, salaries and other compensation shall be
included to the extent that they represent qualifying wages; and
      (3)   Gross receipts of the business or profession from sales made and
services performed during the taxable period in the city to gross receipts of
the business or profession during the same period from sales and services,
wherever made or performed.
   (b)   Basis. In the event that the foregoing allocation formula in division
(a) above does not produce an equitable result, another basis may, under
uniform regulations, be substituted so as to produce such result. A basis using
the “books and records” method, or another method, may be substituted at the
discretion of the Administrator.
   (c)   Sales made in the City of Solon. As used in division (a)(3) hereof,
SALES MADE IN THE CITY OF SOLON means:
      (1)   All sales of taxable personal property which is delivered within
the City of Solon regardless of where title passes if shipped or delivered from
a stock of goods within the City of Solon;
      (2)   All sales of tangible personal property which is delivered within
the City of Solon regardless of where title passes even though transported from
a point outside the City of Solon if the taxpayer is regularly engaged through
its own employees in the solicitation or promotion of sales within the City of
Solon and the sales result from such solicitation or promotion; and
      (3)   All sales of tangible personal property which is shipped from a
place within the City of Solon to purchasers outside of the City of Solon
regardless of where title passes if the taxpayer is not, through its own
employees, regularly engaged in the solicitation or promotion of sales at the
place where delivery is made.
   (d)   Total allocation. The percentages determined in accordance with
divisions (c)(1), (c)(2) and (c)(3) hereof, or such of the aforesaid
percentages as are applicable to the particular taxpayer, shall be added
together and the total so obtained shall be divided by the number of
percentages used in deriving said total in order to obtain the business
allocation percentage referred to in division (a) hereof. A factor is
applicable even though it may be allocable entirely in or outside the city.
   (e)   Rentals. Rental income received by a taxpayer shall be included in the
computation of net profits from business activities under divisions (c) through
(g) of §
890.03 only if and to the extent that the rental, ownership, management or
operations of the real estate from which such rentals are derived (whether so
rented, managed or operated by a taxpayer individually or through agents or
other representatives) constitutes a business activity of the taxpayer in whole
or in part. The net profits will be allocated in accordance with the three-
factor formula, unless approval is given by the Administrator to use a
substitute method (see division (b) above). Net profits not constituting a
business activity remain taxable, and shall be taxed using the books and
records method.
      (1)   Where the gross monthly rental of any and all real properties,
regardless of number and value, aggregates in excess of $125 per month, it
shall be prima facie evidence that the rental, ownership, management or
operation of such properties is a business activity of such taxpayer, and the
net income of such rental property shall be subject to tax.
      (2)   In the case of commercial property, the owner shall be considered
engaged in a business activity when the rental is based on a fixed or
fluctuating percentage of gross or net sales, receipts or profits of the
lessee, whether or not such rental exceeds $125 per month.
      (3)   In the case of farm property, the owner shall be considered engaged
in a business activity when he or she shares in crops or when the rental is
based on a percentage of the gross or net receipts derived from the farm,
whether or not the gross income exceeds said $125 per month. Any person who
operates a licensed rooming house shall be considered in business whether or
not the gross income exceeds $125 per month.
   (f)   Operating loss-carry forward.
      (1)   The portion of a net operating loss sustained in any taxable year
subsequent to October 1, 1967, allocable to the city may be applied against the
portion of the profit of succeeding tax years allocable to the city until
exhausted, but in no event for more than five taxable years immediately
following the year in which the loss occurred. No portion of a net operating
loss shall be carried back against net profits of any prior year.
      (2)   The portion of net operating loss sustained shall be allocated to
the city in the same manner as provided herein for allocating net profits to
the city.
      (3)   The Administrator shall provide by Rules and Regulations the manner
in which such net operating loss carry-forward shall be determined.
(Ord. 2007-217, passed 10-15-2007)
§ 890.06 RETURNS AND PAYMENT OF TAX.
   (a)   When a return is required to be made and filed. Each taxpayer, except
as herein provided, shall, whether or not a tax is due thereon, make and file a
return on or before April 15 of the year following the effective date of this
chapter and on or before April 15 of each year thereafter. When the return is
made for a fiscal year or other period different from the calendar year, the
return shall be filed on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month from
the end of such fiscal year or period.
   (b)   Form and content of return. The return shall be filed with the
Administrator on a form or forms furnished by or obtainable upon request from
such Administrator, or on an acceptable generic form as defined in this
chapter, setting forth:
      (1)   The aggregate amounts of salaries, wages, commissions and other
compensation earned and/or received, and gross income from a business,
profession or other activity, less allowable expenses incurred in the
acquisition of such gross income earned during the preceding year and subject
to said tax;
      (2)   The amount of tax imposed by this chapter on such earnings and
profits; and
      (3)   Such other pertinent statements, information returns or other
information as the Administrator may require, including but not limited to
copies of all W-2 Forms, 1099 Miscellaneous Income Forms, page one of Form
1040, pages one through four of Form 1120, 1120S (including (K-1), 2106, 1065
(including K-1s), Schedule C (including cost of goods manufactured and/or
sold), Schedule E, Schedule F and any other federal schedules, if applicable.
   (c)   Taxpayer; return. The taxpayer making a return shall, at the time of
the filing thereof, pay to the Administrator the amount of taxes shown as due
thereon; provided, however, that where any portion of the tax so due shall have
been deducted at the source pursuant to the provisions of §
890.07, or where any portion of said tax shall have been paid by the taxpayer
pursuant to the provisions of §
890.08 or where an income tax has been paid to another municipality, credit for
the amount so paid in accordance with §
890.17, shall be deducted from the amount shown to be due and only the balance,
if any, shall be due and payable at the time of filing said return.
   (d)   Taxpayer; overpayment. A taxpayer who has overpaid the amount of tax
to which the city is entitled under the provisions of this chapter may have
such overpayment applied against any subsequent liability hereunder or, at his
or her election indicated on the return, such overpayment (or part thereof)
shall be refunded, provided that no additional taxes or refunds of less than $1
shall be collected or refunded.
   (e)   Extension of time for filing returns. The Administrator may extend the
time for filing of the annual return upon the request of the taxpayer provided
that a copy of the federal extension is filed with the Administrator on or
before the original due date of the city tax return.
      (1)   For taxable years 2004 and later, the extended due date for
individuals shall be the last day of the month following the month to which
federal income tax due date has been extended. For businesses, if the extension
is filed through the Ohio Business Gateway the extended due date shall be the
last day of the month to which the due date of the federal income tax return
has been extended. If not filed through the Ohio Business Gateway the extended
due date shall be the last day of the month following the month to which the
due date of the federal income tax return has been extended. The Administrator
may deny the extension if the taxpayer fails to file the request timely, fails
to file a copy of the federal extension request, or if the taxpayer’s income
tax account with the city is delinquent in any way.
      (2)   The Administrator may require a tentative return, accompanied by
payment of the amount of tax shown to be due thereon by the date the return is
normally due.
      (3)   No penalty or interest shall be assessed in those cases in which
the return is filed and the final tax paid within the period as extended.
   (f)   Consolidated returns.
      (1)   Any affiliated group which files a consolidated return for federal
income tax purposes pursuant to IRC § 1501 may file a consolidated return with
the city.
      (2)   In the case of a corporation that carried on transactions with its
stockholders or with other corporations related by stock ownership,
interlocking directorates or some other method, or in case any person operates
a division, branch, factory, office, laboratory or activity within the city
constituting a portion only of its total business, the Administrator shall
require such additional information as he or she may deem necessary to
ascertain whether net profits are properly allocated to the city. If the
Administrator finds that net profits are not properly allocated to the city by
reason of transactions with stockholders or with other corporations related by
stock ownership, interlocking directorates or transactions with such division,
branch, factory, office, laboratory or activity, or by some other method, he or
she shall make such allocations as he or she deems appropriate to produce a
fair and proper allocation of net profits to the city.
   (g)   Amended returns.
      (1)   Where necessary, an amended return must be filed in order to report
additional income and pay any additional tax due, or claim a refund of tax
overpaid, subject to the requirements, limitations, or both, contained in §§
890.16 and
890.17. Such amended return shall be on a form obtainable on request from the
Administrator. A taxpayer may not change the method of accounting (i.e., cash
or accrual) or apportionment of net profits after the due date for filing the
original return.
      (2)   Within three months from the final determination of any federal tax
liability affecting the taxpayer’s city tax liability, such taxpayer shall make
and file an amended city return showing income subject to the city tax based
upon such final determination of federal tax liability, and pay any additional
tax shown due thereon or make claim for refund of any overpayment.
   (h)   Business losses. Each taxpayer may offset business losses against
business net profits from any business conducted in the city or in any other
municipality that does not levy an income tax on net profits therefrom.
However, a loss from the operation of a business may not be used to offset the
income on a taxpayer’s W-2 Form.
   (i)   Reporting a net loss; filing requirements. Any business, profession,
association or corporation reporting a net loss is subject to the filing
requirements of this chapter.
   (j)   Liability. The officer or employee of such employer having control or
supervision or charged with the responsibility of filing the return and making
the payment shall be personally liable for failure to file the return or pay
the tax, penalties or interest due as required herein. The dissolution,
bankruptcy or reorganization of any such employer does not discharge an
officer’s or employee’s liability for a prior failure of such business to file
the return or pay taxes, penalties or interest due.
   (k)   Failure to receive or procure. The failure of any employer, taxpayer
or person to receive or procure a return, declaration or other required form
shall not excuse him or her from filing any information return, tax return,
declaration or other required form, or from paying the tax.
(Ord. 2007-217, passed 10-15-2007)
§ 890.07 COLLECTION AT SOURCE.
   (a)   Each employer within or doing business within the city shall deduct,
at the time of payment of an employee’s income, salary, wage, commission or
other compensation, the tax of 2% per annum on and after July 1, 1995, of the
gross income, salaries, wages, commissions or other compensation due by said
employer to said employee and shall make a return and pay to the Administrator
the amount of taxes so deducted. Said returns shall be on a form or forms
prescribed by or acceptable to the Administrator and shall be subject to the
rules and regulations prescribed therefore by the Administrator.
      (1)   If the taxes withheld by an employer for the city during the
previous tax year averaged $250 per month or more, the employer shall remit
payment of the withheld taxes to the city on or before the twentieth day of the
month following the month for which the taxes were withheld.
      (2)   If the taxes withheld by an employer for the city during the
previous tax year averaged less than $250 per month, payments may be remitted
quarterly on or before the last day of the month following the end of the
quarter for which the taxes were withheld, subject to the approval of the
Administrator, and in accordance with the rules and regulations prescribed by
the Administrator.
      (3)   Such employer shall be liable for the payment of the tax required
to be deducted and withheld whether or not such taxes have in fact been
withheld.
   (b)   Such employer in collecting said tax shall be deemed to hold the same,
until payment is made by such employer to the city, as a trustee for the
benefit of the city and any such tax collected by such employer from his or her
employees shall, until the same is paid to the city, be deemed a trust fund in
the hands of such employer.
   (c)   Said payments shall be on a form or forms furnished by or obtainable
upon request from the Administrator, setting forth the amount of tax deducted
for the month. A receipted copy of such form shall be returned to the employer
to be attached to and filed with the employer’s quarterly return of income tax
withheld
   (d)   No person shall be required to withhold the tax on wages or other
compensation paid domestic servants employed by him or her exclusively in or
about such person’s residence, even though such residence is in the city, but
such employee shall be subject to all of the requirements of this chapter.
   (e)   The officer or employee having control or supervision, or charged with
the responsibility of withholding the tax, filing the return and making the
payment, shall be personally liable for the failure to file the return or pay
the tax due as required herein. The dissolution, bankruptcy or reorganization
of any such employer does not discharge an officer’s or employee’s liability
for a prior failure of such business to file a return or pay taxes due.
   (f)   On or before February 28 following any calendar year, such employer
shall file with the Administrator an annual reconciliation return along with an
information return (W-2 Form) for each employee from whom Solon income tax has
been or should have been withheld, showing the name, address and Social
Security number of the employee, the total amount of compensation paid during
the year and the amount of municipal income tax withheld from the employee with
the municipality for which said tax was withheld identified. The information
return shall also include all of the information required to be reported by the
employer to IRS on a W-2 form. At the time of filing the annual reconciliation
return the employer shall pay over any amounts deducted or which should have
been deducted during the preceding year but which were not remitted. The annual
reconciliation form shall be obtained from the Administrator.
   (g)   On or before February 28 of each year all individuals, businesses,
employers, brokers or other who engage persons, either on a fee or commission
basis or as independent contractors and not employees (those who are not
subject to withholding) must provide the city with copies of all 1099
Miscellaneous Income Forms and/or a list of names, addresses, Social Security
numbers or federal identification numbers and a total amount of earnings,
payments, bonuses, commissions and/or fees paid to each person.
   (h)   All employers that provide any contractual service within the city,
and who employ subcontractors in conjunction with that service, shall provide
the city the names and addresses of the subcontractors. The subcontractors
shall be responsible for all income tax employer requirements under this
chapter.
(Ord. 2007-217, passed 10-15-2007)
§ 890.08 DECLARATIONS AND ESTIMATED PAYMENTS.
   (a)   Declaration of income not collected at source. Every person who
anticipates any taxable income which is not subject to §
890.07 and/or from which tax will not be fully withheld, or who engages in any
business, profession, enterprise or activity subject to the tax imposed by §
890.03, shall file a declaration setting forth such estimated income or the
estimated profit or loss from such business activity together with the
estimated tax due thereon, if any; provided, however, that if a person’s income
is wholly from wages from which the tax will be withheld and remitted to the
city in accordance with §
890.07, such person need not file a declaration.
      (1)   The declaration shall be filed on or before April 15 of each year
during the effective period set forth in §
890.04 or on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month of the date the
taxpayer becomes subject to tax for the first time.
      (2)   Those taxpayers reporting on a fiscal year basis shall file a
declaration on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the
beginning of each fiscal year or period.
      (3)   The declaration shall be filed upon a form furnished by, or
obtainable from, the Administrator, or on an acceptable generic form as defined
in this chapter. Credit shall be taken for city tax to be withheld from any
portion of such income. In accordance with the provisions of §
890.17, credit may be taken for tax to be paid or to be withheld and remitted
to another taxing municipality.
      (4)   The original declaration (or any subsequent amendment thereof) may
be increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment date as
provided for herein.
   (b)   Payment to accompany declaration. Such declaration of estimated tax to
be paid to the city shall be accompanied by a payment of at least one-fourth of
the estimated tax due.
      (1)   If the taxpayer is an individual, at least a similar amount shall
be paid on or before the last day of the seventh, tenth and thirteenth months
after the beginning of the taxpayer’s taxable year, provided that in case an
amended declaration has been filed, or the taxpayer is taxable for a portion of
the year only, the unpaid balance shall be paid in equal installments on or
before the remaining payment dates.
      (2)   If the taxpayer is a corporation or association, at least a similar
amount shall be paid on or before the fifteenth day of the sixth, ninth and
twelfth months of the taxable year; provided, however, that in case an amended
declaration has been filed, the unpaid balance shown due thereon shall be paid
in equal installments on or before the remaining payment dates.
   (c)   Penalties or interest. No penalties or interest shall be assessed, for
not filing a declaration, on any resident taxpayer who was not domiciled in the
city on the first day of January in the year in which they became subject to
estimated payments, nor shall penalties or interest be assessed on estimated
payments if the taxpayer has remitted an amount equal to 100% of the previous
year’s tax liability, provided that the previous year reflected a 12-month
period and the taxpayer filed a return for that year, nor shall penalties or
interest be assessed on estimated payments if the taxpayer has remitted an
amount equal to 90% of the final tax liability for the tax year due on or
before April 15 of the current year.
   (d)   Annual return. See §
890.06(a).
(Ord. 2007-217, passed 10-15-2007)
§ 890.09 INTEREST ON UNPAID TAX.
   All taxes imposed and all monies withheld or required to be withheld by
employers under the provisions of this chapter and remaining unpaid after they
become due shall bear interest at the rate of 1% per month or fraction of a
month thereof.
(Ord. 2007-217, passed 10-15-2007; Ord. 2012-202, passed 8-20-2012)
§ 890.10 PENALTIES ON UNPAID TAX.
   In addition to interest as provided in §
890.09, penalties based on the unpaid tax are hereby imposed as follows:
   (a)   For failure to pay taxes due, other than taxes withheld: 1% per month
or fraction of a month thereof, but not less than $25; and
   (b)   For failure to pay taxes withheld from employees: 3% per month or
fraction of a month thereof.
(Ord. 2007-217, passed 10-15-2007; Ord. 2012-202, passed 8-20-2012)
§ 890.11 EXCEPTIONS TO INTEREST AND PENALTY PROVISIONS.
   A penalty shall not be assessed on an additional tax assessment made by the
Administrator when a return has been filed in good faith and the tax paid
thereon within the time prescribed by the Administrator. Further, in the
absence of fraud, neither penalty nor interest shall be assessed on any
additional tax assessment resulting from a federal audit, provided that an
amended return is filed and the additional tax is paid within three months
after a final determination of the federal tax liability.
(Ord. 2007-217, passed 10-15-2007)
§ 890.12 ABATEMENT OF INTEREST AND PENALTY.
   The Administrator shall have the authority to abate penalty and/or interest.
(Ord. 2007-217, passed 10-15-2007)
§ 890.13 VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   No person shall:
      (1)   Fail, neglect or refuse to make any return, information return or
declaration required by this chapter;
      (2)   Make any incomplete, false or fraudulent return;
      (3)   Fail, neglect or refuse to pay the tax, penalties and/or interest
imposed by this chapter;
      (4)   Fail, neglect or refuse to withhold the tax from his or her
employees or remit such withholding to the Administrator;
      (5)   Refuse to permit the Administrator or any duly authorized agent or
employee to examine the books, records, papers and federal and state income tax
returns relating to the income or net profits of a taxpayer;
      (6)   Fail to appear before the Administrator and to produce his or her
books, records, papers or federal and state income tax returns relating to the
income or net profits of a taxpayer upon order or subpoena of the
Administrator;
      (7)   Refuse to disclose to the Administrator any information with
respect to the income or net profits of a taxpayer;
      (8)   Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order or
subpoena of the Administrator authorized hereby;
      (9)   Give to an employer false information as to his or her true name,
correct Social Security number and residence address, or fail to promptly
notify an employer of any change in residence address and the date thereof;
      (10)   Fail to use ordinary diligence in maintaining proper records of
employees’ residence addresses, total wages paid and city tax withheld, or
knowingly give the Administrator false information; or
      (11)   Attempt to do anything whatever to avoid the payment of the whole
or any part of the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this chapter.
   (b)   Prosecutions for an offense made punishable under this chapter shall
be commenced within three years after the commission of the offense; provided
that in the case of fraud, failure to file a return, or the omission of 25% or
more of the income or net profits required to be reported, prosecutions may be
commenced within six years after the commission of the offense in accordance
with R.C. § 718.12(B).
   (c)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of division (a) above
shall be subject to the penalties in §
890.99.
(Ord. 2007-217, passed 10-15-2007)
§ 890.14 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
§ 890.15 FAILURE TO PROCURE FORMS NOT EXCUSE.
   The failure of any employer or person to receive or procure a return,
declaration or other required form shall not excuse him or her from making any
information return, return or declaration, from filing such form or from paying
the tax.
(Ord. 2007-217, passed 10-15-2007)
§ 890.16 COLLECTION OF UNPAID TAXES AND REFUNDS OF OVERPAYMENTS.
   (a)   Unpaid taxes recoverable as other debts.
      (1)   All taxes imposed by this chapter shall be collectible, together
with any interest and penalties thereon, by suit, as other debts of like amount
are recoverable. Such suit shall not be made after three years from the time
the return was due or filed, whichever is later. However, in the case of fraud,
omission of 25% or more of income subject to this tax, or failure to file a
return, all additional assessments shall be made and all prosecutions to
recover municipal income taxes and penalties and interest thereon shall be
brought within six years after the tax was due or the return was filed,
whichever is later. In those cases in which a Commissioner of Internal Revenue
and the taxpayer have executed a waiver of the federal statute of limitations,
the period within which an additional assessment may be made by the
Administrator shall be one year from the time of the final determination of the
federal tax liability.
      (2)   When deemed necessary, the Administrator may outsource the
collection of delinquent accounts to a law firm or collection agency. The fees
charged for outsourcing, including related court costs, shall be assessed and
added to the delinquent taxpayers’ liability.
   (b)   Refunds of taxes erroneously paid. Taxes erroneously paid shall not be
refunded unless a claim for refund is made within three years from the date on
which such payment was made or the return was due, or within three months after
the final determination of the federal tax liability, whichever is later. In
addition, the following shall apply regarding refunds of tax withheld from non-
qualified deferred compensation plans (NDCP):
      (1)   A taxpayer may be eligible for a refund if the taxpayer has
suffered a loss from an NDCP. The loss will be considered sustained only in the
taxable year in which the taxpayer receives the final distribution of money and
property pursuant to the NDCP. Full loss is sustained if no distribution of
money and property will be made by the NDCP;
      (2)   A taxpayer who receives income as a result of payments from an
NDCP, and that income is less than the amount of income deferred to the NDCP
and upon which municipal tax was withheld, then a refund will be issued on the
amount representing the difference between the deferred income that was taxed
and the income received from the NDCP. If different tax rates applied to the
tax years in which deferrals, a weighted average of the different tax rates
will be used to compute the refund amount; and
      (3)   Refunds shall be allowed only if the loss is attributable to the
bankruptcy of the employer who had established the NDCP, or the employee’s
failure or inability to satisfy all of the employer’s terms and conditions
necessary to receive the non-qualified compensation.
   (c)   Refunds; recovery. Income tax that has been deposited with the city,
but should have been deposited with another municipality, is allowable by the
city as a refund but is subject to the three-year limitation on refunds. Income
tax that should have been deposited with the city, but was deposited with
another municipality, shall be subject to recovery by the city. The city will
allow a non-refundable credit for any amount owed the city that is in excess of
the amount to be refunded by the other municipality, as long as the tax rate of
the other municipality is the same or higher than the city’s tax rate. If the
city’s tax rate is higher, the tax representing the net difference of the rates
is also subject to collection by the city.
   (d)   Overpayments of withheld tax. Overpayments of withheld tax that have
resulted due to incorrect withholding of an employee by an employer, and are
not due as a result of excess withholding requested by the employee, shall be
refunded to the employer. It shall be the responsibility of the employer, and
not the city, to refund such overpayment to the employee. However, nothing in
this division (d) shall affect the right of a nonresident employee to apply
directly to the city for refund of income tax withheld for days worked out of
Solon.
   (e)   Payments on delinquent amounts. Payments on delinquent amounts shall
be applied in the following order:
      (1)   To the taxes owed for any previous year in the order in which such
taxes became due;
      (2)   To unpaid penalty and interest assessments in the order in which
such assessments became due; and
      (3)   To the taxpayer’s current estimated tax liability.
   (f)   Amounts of less than $1. Amounts of less than $1 shall not be
collected or refunded.
(Ord. 2007-217, passed 10-15-2007)
§ 890.17 SOLON RESIDENT SUBJECT TO INCOME TAX IN OTHER MUNICIPALITY.
   (a)   Claim for credit. If it is made to appear that a Solon resident has
paid a municipal income tax on the same income to another municipality, such
Solon resident may claim a credit of the amount of income tax paid to such
other municipality, but not in excess of the tax rate assessed by this chapter.
   (b)   Filing of return or form required. In the event a Solon resident is
entitled to credit for taxes paid another municipality, such Solon resident is
required to file a return or form in such manner as the Administrator
designated by the city may prescribe.
   (c)   Assignment of claim. Assignment of any claim for refund to which a
Solon resident may be entitled from another municipality shall be tentatively
accepted as payment of that portion of Solon income tax represented by such
assignment, provided, however, that if satisfactory evidence is offered that
the taxpayer is entitled to the claim covered by the assignment, such taxpayer
shall not be deprived of credit therefor because of fault or neglect on the
part of either municipality.
   (d)   Failure to file return or form. In the event that such Solon resident
fails, neglects or refuses to file such return or form as is prescribed by the
Administrator, he or she shall not be entitled to such credit and shall be
considered in violation of this chapter for failure to file a return and make
payment of taxes due hereunder.
   (e)   Time for filing claims. Any claim for credit for income taxes paid
another municipality on the same income taxable hereunder, or claim for or
assignment of any refund due to the credit provided for herein, must be filed
with the Administrator on or before December 31 of the year following that for
which such credit is claimed, provided that where such claim for reciprocity
refund has been assigned to the municipality of residence, such municipality of
residence shall file a claim for refund with the Administrator of the city on
or before January 31 following. Failure to file such claim for reciprocity
credit or refund, or assignment thereof, within the time prescribed herein
shall render such credit, claim for refund or assignment null and void.
   (f)   Credit. No credit will be given to taxpayers for school district
income taxes.
(Ord. 2007-217, passed 10-15-2007)
§ 890.18 RECEIPTS AND DISBURSEMENT OF INCOME TAX COLLECTIONS.
   All municipal income tax revenue received shall be deposited and credited to
the municipal income tax fund. After all expenses for collecting, administering
and enforcing the city’s income tax laws, rules and regulations, the balance
shall be distributed to other municipal funds in accordance with the voter
approved levies and City Council legislation.
(Ord. 2007-217, passed 10-15-2007)
§ 890.19 DUTIES AND AUTHORITY OF THE ADMINISTRATOR.
   (a)   Duty to receive tax imposed. It shall be the duty of the Administrator
to receive the tax imposed by this chapter in the manner prescribed herein from
the taxpayers, to keep an accurate record thereof and to report all monies so
received.
   (b)   Duty to enforce collection. It shall be the duty of the Administrator
to enforce payment of all taxes owing to the city, to keep accurate records for
a minimum of six years showing the amount due from each taxpayer required to
file a declaration and make any return, or both, including taxes withheld, and
to show the dates and amounts of payments thereof.
   (c)   Authority to make and enforce regulations. The Administrator is hereby
charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and is hereby
empowered, subject to the approval of the Board of Review, to adopt and
promulgate and to enforce rules and regulations pertaining to the collection of
taxes and the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter,
including provisions for the re-examination and correction of returns.
Taxpayers are hereby required to comply with the requirements of this chapter
and the rules and regulations.
   (d)   Authority to arrange installment payments. The Administrator is
authorized to arrange for the payment of unpaid taxes, interest and penalties
on a schedule of installment payments, when the taxpayer has proved to the
Administrator that, due to certain hardship conditions, he or she is unable to
pay the full amount of the tax due. Such authorization shall not be granted
until proper returns are filed by the taxpayer for all amounts owed by him or
her under this chapter. Failure to make any deferred payment when due shall
cause the total unpaid amount, including penalty and interest, to become
payable on demand and the provisions of §§
890.13, 890.16(a) and 890.99 shall apply.
   (e)   Authority to determine amount of tax due. In any case where a taxpayer
has failed to file a return or has filed a return which does not show the
proper amount of tax due, the Administrator may determine the amount of tax
appearing to be due the city from the taxpayer and shall send to such taxpayer
a written assessment showing the amount of tax so determined, together with
interest and penalties thereon, if any. If the taxpayer fails to respond to the
assessment within 30 calendar days, the tax, penalties and interest assessed
shall become due and payable and collectible as are other unpaid taxes.
   (f)   Authority to make investigations. The Administrator, or any authorized
employee, is hereby authorized to examine the books, papers, records and
federal and state income tax returns of any employer or of any taxpayer or
person subject to, or whom the Administrator believes is subject to the
provisions of this chapter, for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any
return made, or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax due under this
chapter. Every such employer, supposed employer, taxpayer or supposed taxpayer
is hereby directed and required to furnish within ten calendar days following a
written request by the Administrator, or his or her duly authorized agent or
employee, the means, facilities and opportunity for making such examinations
and investigations as are hereby authorized.
   (g)   Authority to compel productions of records. The Administrator is
hereby authorized to order any person presumed to have knowledge of the facts
to appear before him or her and may examine such person, under oath, concerning
any income which was or should have been returned for taxation or any
transaction tending to affect such income, and for this purpose may compel the
production of books, papers, records and federal income tax returns and the
attendance of all persons before him or her, whether as parties or witnesses,
whenever he or she believes such persons have knowledge of such income or
information pertinent to such inquiry.
   (h)   Refusal to produce records. The refusal to produce books, papers,
records and federal and state income tax returns, or the refusal to submit to
such examination by any employer or person subject or presumed to be subject to
the tax, or by any officer, agent or employee of a person subject to the tax or
required to withhold tax, or the failure of any person to comply with the
provisions of this chapter or with an order or subpoena of the Administrator
authorized hereby, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter, punishable as
provided in §
890.99.
   (i)   Confidential nature of information obtained. Any information gained as
the result of any returns, investigations, hearings or verifications required
or authorized by this chapter shall be confidential, except for official
purposes, or except in accordance with proper judicial order. No person shall
divulge such information in violation of this section.
   (j)   Taxpayer required to retain records. Every taxpayer shall retain all
records necessary to compute his or her tax liability for a period of six years
from the date his or her return is filed, or the withholding taxes are paid.
   (k)   Authority to contract for central collection facilities. The
Administrator may enter into an agreement, subject to the approval of Council,
on behalf of the city, with any other municipal corporation to permit such
other municipal corporation to act as agent for the city for the purpose of
administering the income tax laws of the city and of providing a central
collection facility for the collection of the income tax on behalf of the city.
   (l)   Assignment of duties and authority. In the event the Administrator, on
behalf of the city, enters into an agreement with any other municipal
corporation to act as agent of the city for the purpose of administering the
income tax laws of the city and of providing a central facility for the
collection of the income tax, as provided in division (k) hereof, then all or a
part of the duties and authority of the Administrator may be assigned by such
agreement to such other municipal corporation.
(Ord. 2007-217, passed 10-15-2007)
§ 890.20 BOARD OF REVIEW.
   (a)   Establishment; composition; officers; quorum; rules; records;
hearings. A Board of Review, consisting of the Mayor, the Vice-Mayor and a
member of the Audit Committee is hereby created. The Board shall select, each
year for a one-year term, one of its members to serve as Chairperson and one to
serve as Secretary. A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a
quorum. The Board shall adopt its own procedural rules and shall keep a record
of its transactions.
   (b)   Hearing. Any hearing by the Board shall be conducted privately and the
provisions of §
890.19(i) with reference to the confidential character of information required
to be disclosed by this chapter shall apply to such matters as may be heard
before the Board on appeal.
   (c)   Duty to approve regulations and to hear appeals. All rules and
regulations and amendments or changes thereto, which are adopted by the
Administrator under the authority conferred by this chapter, must be approved
by the Board of Review before the same become effective. The Board shall hear
and pass on appeals from any ruling or decision of the Administrator, and, at
the request of the taxpayer or Administrator, is empowered to substitute
alternate methods of allocation.
   (d)   Appeal of Administrator’s decision. Any person dissatisfied with any
ruling or decision of the Administrator which is made under authority conferred
by this chapter and who has filed the required returns or other documents
pertaining to the contested issue may appeal therefrom to the Board of Review
within 30 days from the announcement of such ruling or decision by the
Administrator. The appeal shall be in writing and shall state why the decision
should be deemed incorrect or unlawful. The Board shall, on hearing, have
jurisdiction to affirm, reverse or modify any such ruling or decision, or any
part thereof. The Board must schedule a hearing within 45 calendar days of
receiving the appeal. The Board must issue a written decision within 90 days
after the final hearing and send a notice of its decision by ordinary mail to
the taxpayer within 15 days after issuing the decision.
   (e)   Appeal of Board of Review’s decision. Any person dissatisfied with any
ruling or decision of the Board of Review may appeal therefrom to a court of
competent jurisdiction within 30 days from the announcement of such ruling or
decision. For matters relating to tax years beginning on or after January 1,
2004, any ruling or decision of the Board of Appeal may be appealed to a court
of competent jurisdiction or to the State Board of Tax Appeals.
(Ord. 2007-217, passed 10-15-2007)
§ 890.21 COLLECTION OF TAX AFTER TERMINATION OF CHAPTER.
   (a)   This chapter shall continue effective insofar as the levy of taxes is
concerned until repealed, and insofar as the collection of taxes levied
hereunder and actions and proceedings for collecting any tax so levied or
enforcing any provisions of this chapter are concerned, it shall continue
effective until all of said taxes levied in the aforesaid period are fully paid
and until any and all suits and prosecutions for the collection of said taxes
or for the punishment of violations of this chapter have been fully terminated,
subject to the limitations contained in §§
890.13 through
890.16.
   (b)   Annual returns due for all or any part of the last effective year of
this chapter shall be due on the date provided in §
890.06 as though the same were continuing.
(Ord. 2007-217, passed 10-15-2007)
§ 890.22 SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   If any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter or any tax against
any individual or any of the several groups specified herein, is found to be
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or
invalidity shall affect only such clause, sentence, section or part of this
chapter and shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or other parts of this chapter. It is hereby
declared to be the intention of Council that the provisions of this chapter
would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence,
clause, section or part thereof not be included herein.
(Ord. 2007-217, passed 10-15-2007)
§ 890.23 REVENUE RECAPTURE PROGRAM.
   (a)   The Tax Administrator is authorized to create and implement a Revenue
Recapture Program that will allow for the offset, redirect or interception of
any municipal income tax refund due an individual when it has been determined
that the individual taxpayer has an outstanding debt payable to the city.
Individual municipal income tax refunds may be used by the Tax Administrator to
apply to any debts, including but not limited to sewer billing charges,
permits, fees, fines, registrations, citations, restitution and other
administrative assessments, provided that the individual taxpayer has not
satisfied such debt within a reasonable time period.
   (b)   The Tax Administrator shall make provision for unfair application of a
refund in cases where a joint return has been filed for the year in which the
refund is requested and the spouse of the main filer has no participation in
the debt (innocent spouse provision). The Revenue Recapture Program applies
only to individual tax returns.
   (c)   Debts barred by any applicable statute of limitations cannot be
recaptured. Prior to the recapture of any debt, the Tax Administrator shall
notify in writing by certified mail, the taxpayer to whom the original refund
amount is due, of the city’s intention to offset part or all of the refund due.
Such notice shall detail the specific debt that the refund will offset. The
redirection or recapture of any valid date shall take place no sooner than 30
days from the date of the written notice to the taxpayer.
   (d)   Any taxpayer subject to the Revenue Recapture Program is entitled to
the appeal process provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. 2013-122, passed 7-1-2013)
§ 890.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter, for which no
penalty is otherwise provided, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree
and shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or
both, for each offense.
   (b)   Whoever violates §
890.19(i) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not
more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than six months, or both, for each
offense. Each disclosure shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, any
employee of the city who violates §
890.19(i) shall be guilty of an offense punishable by immediate dismissal.
(Ord. 2007-217, passed 10-15-2007)
CHAPTER 891: MUNICIPAL INCOME TAX EFFECTIVE BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2016
Section
   
891.01   Authority to levy tax; purpose of tax
   
891.02   Definitions
   
891.03   Imposition of tax
   
891.04   Collection at source
   
891.05   Annual return; filing
   
891.06   Credit for tax paid to other municipalities
   
891.07   Estimated taxes
   
891.08   Rounding of amounts
   
891.09   Requests for refunds
   
891.10   Second municipality imposing tax after time period allowed for refund
   
891.11   Amended returns
   
891.12   Limitations
   
891.13   Audits
   
891.14   Service of assessment
   
891.15   Administration of claims
   
891.16   Tax information confidential
   
891.17   Fraud
   
891.18   Interest and penalties
   
891.19   Authority of Tax Administrator; verification of information
   
891.20   Request for opinion of the Tax Administrator
   
891.21   Board of Tax Review
   
891.22   Authority to create rules and regulations
   
891.23   Rental and leased property
   
891.24   Savings clause
   
891.25   Collection of tax after termination of chapter
   
891.26   Adoption of RITA Rules and Regulations
   
891.27   Election to be subject to R.C. 718.80 to 718.95
   
891.99   Violations; penalties
§ 891.01 AUTHORITY TO LEVY TAX; PURPOSE OF TAX.
   (a)   To provide funds for the purposes of general municipal operations,
maintenance, new equipment, extension and enlargement of municipal services and
facilities and capital improvements, the city hereby levies an annual municipal
income tax on income, qualifying wages, commissions and other compensation, and
on net profits as hereinafter provided.
   (b)   (1)   The annual tax is levied at a rate of 2%. The tax is levied at a
uniform rate on all persons residing in or earning or receiving income in the
city. The tax is levied on income, qualifying wages, commissions and other
compensation, and on net profits as hereinafter provided in §
891.03 and other sections as they may apply.
      (2)   One percent per annum shall be to provide funds for the general
municipal functions of the city, and paying debt charges on securities and
other obligations of the city related thereto.
      (3)   One half of one percent per annum shall be to provide funds for the
construction, replacement and/or repair of various capital improvements in the
municipality including but not limited to water facilities with necessary
appurtenances, streets and roadways throughout the municipality with necessary
appurtenances, storm and sanitary sewer systems with necessary appurtenances,
parks and recreational facilities with necessary appurtenances and municipal
buildings with necessary appurtenances, and paying debt charges on securities
and other obligations of the city related thereto.
      (4)   One half of one percent per annum shall be to provide funds for all
capital and operating expenses of the Department of Public Safety and the
Service Department, and paying debt charges on securities and other obligations
of the city related thereto.
   (c)   The tax on income and the withholding tax established by this chapter
are authorized by Article XVIII, Section 3 of the Ohio Constitution. The tax is
levied in accordance with, and is intended to be consistent with, the
provisions and limitations of R.C. Chapter 718.
(Ord. 2015-212, passed 11-2-2015; Ord. 2023-145, passed 11-20-2023)
§ 891.02 DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   Any term used in this chapter that is not otherwise defined in this
chapter has the same meaning as when used in a comparable context in laws of
the United States relating to federal income taxation or in R.C. Title LVII,
unless a different meaning is clearly required. If a term used in this chapter
that is not otherwise defined in this chapter is used in a comparable context
in both the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax and in
R.C. Title LVII and the use is not consistent, then the use of the term in the
laws of the United States relating to federal income tax shall control over the
use of the term in R.C. Title LVII.
   (b)   The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and the gender-neutral.
   (c)   As used in this chapter:
      (1)   ADJUSTED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME. For a person required to file as a
C corporation, or for a person that has elected to be taxed as a C corporation
under division (c)(24)E. of this section, means a C corporation's federal
taxable income before net operating losses and special deductions as determined
under the Internal Revenue Code, adjusted as follows:
         A.   Deduct intangible income to the extent included in federal
taxable income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether the
intangible income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets held
for the production of income;
         B.   Add an amount equal to 5% of intangible income deducted under
division (c)(1)A. of this section, but excluding that portion of intangible
income directly related to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of property
described in section 1221 of the Internal Revenue Code;
         C.   Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the computation of
federal taxable income if the losses directly relate to the sale, exchange, or
other disposition of an asset described in section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal
Revenue Code;
         D.   1.   Except as provided in division (c)(l)D.2. of this section,
deduct income and gain included in federal taxable income to the extent the
income and gain directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of
an asset described in section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal Revenue Code;
            2.   Division (c)(l)D.1. of this section does not apply to the
extent the income or gain is income or gain described in section 1245 or 1250
of the Internal Revenue Code.
         E.   Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a deduction in
the computation of federal taxable income;
         F.   In the case of a real estate investment trust or regulated
investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to, distributions
to, or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of investors and
allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income;
         G.   Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded in
computing federal taxable income, any income derived from a transfer agreement
or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement under R.C. § 4313.02;
         H.   Deduct exempt income to the extent not otherwise deducted or
excluded in computing adjusted federal taxable income.
         I.   Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity owned directly or
indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that net profit in
the group's federal taxable income in accordance with §
891.05(v)(3)B.
         J.   Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity owned directly or
indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that loss in the
group's federal taxable income in accordance with §
891.05(v)(3)B.
      If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is not a disregarded entity that
has made an election described in division (c)(48)B. of this section, is not a
publicly traded partnership that has made the election described in division
(c)(24)E. of this section, and is not an individual, the taxpayer shall compute
adjusted federal taxable income under this section as if the taxpayer were a C
corporation, except guaranteed payments and other similar amounts paid or
accrued to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member,
or former member shall not be allowed as a deductible expense unless such
payments are in consideration for the use of capital and treated as payment of
interest under section 469 of the Internal Revenue Code or United States
Treasury regulations. Amounts paid or accrued to a qualified self-employed
retirement plan with respect to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former
shareholder, member, or former member of the taxpayer, amounts paid or accrued
to or for health insurance for a partner, former partner, shareholder, former
shareholder, member, or former member, and amounts paid or accrued to or for
life insurance for a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder,
member, or former member shall not be allowed as a deduction.
      Nothing in division (c)(1) of this section shall be construed as allowing
the taxpayer to add or deduct any amount more than once or shall be construed
as allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or accrued for purposes
of federal self-employment tax.
      (2)   A.   ASSESSMENT. A written finding by the Tax Administrator that a
person has underpaid municipal income tax, or owes penalty and interest, or any
combination of tax, penalty, or interest, to the municipal corporation that
commences the person's time limitation for making an appeal to the Board of Tax
Review pursuant to §
891.21, and has "ASSESSMENT" written in all capital letters at the top of such
finding.
         B.   ASSESSMENT. Does not include a notice denying a request for
refund issued under §
891.09(c)(3), a billing statement notifying a taxpayer of current or past-due
balances owed to the municipal corporation, a Tax Administrator's request for
additional information, a notification to the taxpayer of mathematical errors,
or a Tax Administrator's other written correspondence to a person or taxpayer
that does not meet the criteria prescribed by division (c)(2)A. of this
section.
      (3)   AUDIT. The examination of a person or the inspection of the books,
records, memoranda, or accounts of a person, ordered to appear before the Tax
Administrator, for the purpose of determining liability for a municipal income
tax.
      (4)   BOARD OF TAX REVIEW or BOARD OF REVIEW or BOARD OF TAX APPEALS, or
other named local board constituted to hear appeals of municipal income tax
matters, means the entity created under §
891.21.
      (5)   CALENDAR QUARTER. The three-month period ending on the last day of
March, June, September, or December.
      (6)   CASINO OPERATOR and CASINO FACILITY. Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 3772.01.
      (7)   CERTIFIED MAIL, EXPRESS MAIL, UNITED STATES MAIL, POSTAL SERVICE,
and similar terms include any delivery service authorized pursuant to R.C. §
5703.056.
      (8)   DISREGARDED ENTITY. A single member limited liability company, a
qualifying subchapter S subsidiary, or another entity if the company,
subsidiary, or entity is a disregarded entity for federal income tax purposes.
      (9)   DOMICILE. The true, fixed, and permanent home of a taxpayer and to
which, whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return. A taxpayer may have
more than one residence but not more than one domicile.
      (10)   EMPLOYEE. An individual who is an employee for federal income tax
purposes.
      (11)   EMPLOYER. A person that is an employer for federal income tax
purposes.
      (12)   EXEMPT INCOME. All of the following:
         A.   The military pay or allowances of members of the Armed Forces of
the United States or members of their reserve components, including the
national guard of any state.
         B.   Intangible income. However, a municipal corporation that taxed
any type of intangible income on March 29, 1988, pursuant to Section 3 of S.B.
238 of the 116th General Assembly, may continue to tax that type of income if a
majority of the electors of the municipal corporation voting on the question of
whether to permit the taxation of that type of intangible income after 1988
voted in favor thereof at an election held on November 8, 1988.
         C.   Social Security benefits, railroad retirement benefits,
unemployment compensation, pensions, retirement benefit payments, payments from
annuities, and similar payments made to an employee or to the beneficiary of an
employee under a retirement program or plan, disability payments received from
private industry or local, state, or federal governments or from charitable,
religious or educational organizations, and the proceeds of sickness, accident,
or liability insurance policies. As used in division (c)(12)C. of this section,
UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION does not include supplemental unemployment
compensation described in section 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         D.   The income of religious, fraternal, charitable, scientific,
literary, or educational institutions to the extent such income is derived from
tax-exempt real estate, tax-exempt tangible or intangible property, or tax-
exempt activities.
         E.   Compensation paid under R.C. § 3501.28 or 3501.36 to a person
serving as a precinct election official to the extent that such compensation
does not exceed $1,000 for the taxable year. Such compensation in excess of
$1,000 for the taxable year may be subject to taxation by a municipal
corporation. A municipal corporation shall not require the payer of such
compensation to withhold any tax from that compensation.
         F.   Dues, contributions, and similar payments received by charitable,
religious, educational, or literary organizations or labor unions, lodges, and
similar organizations.
         G.   Alimony and child support received.
         H.   Compensation for personal injuries or for damages to property
from insurance proceeds or otherwise, excluding compensation paid for lost
salaries or wages or compensation from punitive damages.
         I.   Income of a public utility when that public utility is subject to
the tax levied under R.C. § 5727.24 or 5727.30. Division (c)(12)I. of this
section does not apply for purposes of R.C. Chapter 5745.
         J.   Gains from involuntary conversions, interest on federal
obligations, items of income subject to a tax levied by the state and that a
municipal corporation is specifically prohibited by law from taxing, and income
of a decedent's estate during the period of administration except such income
from the operation of a trade or business.
         K.   Compensation or allowances excluded from federal gross income
under section 107 of the Internal Revenue Code.
         L.   Employee compensation that is not qualifying wages as defined in
division (c)(35) of this section.
         M.   Compensation paid to a person employed within the boundaries of a
United States Air Force base under the jurisdiction of the United States Air
Force that is used for the housing of members of the United States Air Force
and is a center for Air Force operations, unless the person is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile. If the compensation is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile, tax on such income shall be payable
only to the municipal corporation of residence or domicile.
         N.   1.   For tax years through 2023, to the extent authorized under a
resolution or ordinance adopted by the city before January 1, 2016, all or a
portion of the income of individuals or a class of individuals under 18 years
of age.
            2.   For tax years 2024 and after, the income of individuals under
18 years of age.
         O.   1.   Except as provided in divisions (c)(12)O.2., 3., and 4. of
this section, qualifying wages described in §
891.04(c)(2) or (c)(5) to the extent the qualifying wages are not subject to
withholding for the city under either of those divisions.
            2.   The exemption provided in division (c)(12)O.1. of this section
does not apply with respect to the municipal corporation in which the employee
resided at the time the employee earned the qualifying wages.
            3.   The exemption provided in division (c)(12)O.1. of this section
does not apply to qualifying wages that an employer elects to withhold under §
891.04(c)(4)B.
            4.   The exemption provided in division (c)(12)O.1. of this section
does not apply to qualifying wages if both of the following conditions apply:
               a.   For qualifying wages described in §
891.04(c)(2), the employee's employer withholds and remits tax on the
qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employee's principal
place of work is situated, or, for qualifying wages described in §
891.04(c)(5), the employee's employer withholds and remits tax on the
qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employer's fixed
location is located;
               b.   The employee receives a refund of the tax described in
division (c)(12)O.4.a. of this section on the basis of the employee not
performing services in that municipal corporation.
         P.   1.   Except as provided in division (c)(12)P.2. or 3. of this
section, compensation that is not qualifying wages paid to a nonresident
individual for personal services performed in the city on not more than 20 days
in a taxable year.
            2.   The exemption provided in division (c)(12)P.2. of this section
does not apply under either of the following circumstances:
               a.   The individual's base of operation is located in the
municipal corporation.
               b.   The individual is a professional athlete, professional
entertainer, or public figure, and the compensation is paid for the performance
of services in the individual's capacity as a professional athlete,
professional entertainer, or public figure. For purposes of division (c)
(12)P.2.b. of this section, PROFESSIONAL ATHLETE, PROFESSIONAL ENTERTAINER, and
PUBLIC FIGURE have the same meanings as in §
891.04(c).
            3.   Compensation to which division (c)(12)P. of this section
applies shall be treated as earned or received at the individual's base of
operation. If the individual does not have a base of operation, the
compensation shall be treated as earned or received where the individual is
domiciled.
            4.   For purposes of division (c)(12)P. of this section, BASE OF
OPERATION means the location where an individual owns or rents an office,
storefront, or similar facility to which the individual regularly reports and
at which the individual regularly performs personal services for compensation.
         Q.   Compensation paid to a person for personal services performed for
a political subdivision on property owned by the political subdivision,
regardless of whether the compensation is received by an employee of the
subdivision or another person performing services for the subdivision under a
contract with the subdivision, if the property on which services are performed
is annexed to a municipal corporation pursuant to R.C. § 709.023 on or after
March 27, 2013, unless the person is subject to such taxation because of
residence. If the compensation is subject to taxation because of residence,
municipal income tax shall be payable only to the municipal corporation of
residence.
         R.   Income the taxation of which is prohibited by the constitution or
laws of the United States.
      Any item of income that is exempt income of a pass-through entity under
division (c) of this section is exempt income of each owner of the pass-through
entity to the extent of that owner's distributive or proportionate share of
that item of the entity's income.
      (13)   FORM 2106. Internal Revenue Service form 2106 filed by a taxpayer
pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (14)   GENERIC FORM. An electronic or paper form that is not prescribed
by a particular municipal corporation and that is designed for reporting taxes
withheld by an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer, estimated
municipal income taxes, or annual municipal income tax liability or for filing
a refund claim.
      (15)   GROSS RECEIPTS. The total revenue derived from sales, work done,
or service rendered.
      (16)   INCOME.
         A.   1.   For residents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages,
commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by
the resident, including the resident's distributive share of the net profit of
pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by the resident and any net
profit of the resident, except as provided in division (c)(24)E. of this
section.
            2.   For the purposes of division (c)(16)A.1. of this section:
               a.   Any net operating loss of the resident incurred in the
taxable year and the resident's distributive share of any net operating loss
generated in the same taxable year and attributable to the resident's ownership
interest in a pass-through entity shall be allowed as a deduction, for that
taxable year and the following five taxable years, against any other net profit
of the resident or the resident's distributive share of any net profit
attributable to the resident's ownership interest in a pass-through entity
until fully utilized, subject to division (c)(16)A.4. of this section;
               b.   The resident's distributive share of the net profit of each
pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by the resident shall be
calculated without regard to any net operating loss that is carried forward by
that entity from a prior taxable year and applied to reduce the entity's net
profit for the current taxable year.
            3.   Division (c)(16)A.2. of this section does not apply with
respect to any net profit or net operating loss attributable to an ownership
interest in an S corporation unless shareholders' shares of net profits from S
corporations are subject to tax in the municipal corporation as provided in
division (c)(12)N. or (c)(16)E. of this section.
            4.   Any amount of a net operating loss used to reduce a taxpayer's
net profit for a taxable year shall reduce the amount of net operating loss
that may be carried forward to any subsequent year for use by that taxpayer. In
no event shall the cumulative deductions for all taxable years with respect to
a taxpayer's net operating loss exceed the original amount of that net
operating loss available to that taxpayer.
         B.   In the case of nonresidents, all income, salaries, qualifying
wages, commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or
received by the nonresident for work done, services performed or rendered, or
activities conducted in the municipal corporation, including any net profit of
the nonresident, but excluding the nonresident's distributive share of the net
profit or loss of only pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by
the nonresident.
         C.   For taxpayers that are not individuals, net profit of the
taxpayer.
         D.   Lottery, sweepstakes, gambling and sports winnings, winnings from
games of chance, and prizes and awards. If the taxpayer is a professional
gambler for federal income tax purposes, the taxpayer may deduct related
wagering losses and expenses to the extent authorized under the Internal
Revenue Code and claimed against such winnings.
         E.   In accordance with a ballot issue, regarding S corporation
language, approved by the voters in the election on November 2, 2004, a
shareholder's share of net profits of an S corporation are taxable to the city
to the extent such shares would be so allocated or apportioned to this state.
      (17)   INTANGIBLE INCOME. Income of any of the following types: income
yield, interest, capital gains, dividends, or other income arising from the
ownership, sale, exchange, or other disposition of intangible property
including, but not limited to, investments, deposits, money, or credits as
those terms are defined in R.C. Chapter 5701, and patents, copyrights,
trademarks, tradenames, investments in real estate investment trusts,
investments in regulated investment companies, and appreciation on deferred
compensation. INTANGIBLE INCOME does not include prizes, awards, or other
income associated with any lottery winnings, gambling winnings, or other
similar games of chance.
      (18)   INTERNAL REVENUE CODE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5747.01.
      (19)   LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY. A limited liability company formed
under R.C. Chapter 1705 or under the laws of another state.
      (20)   MUNICIPAL CORPORATION. Includes a joint economic development
district or joint economic development zone that levies an income tax under
R.C. §§ 715.691, 715.70, 715.71, or 715.74.
      (21)   A.   MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME.
            1.   For a person other than an individual, income apportioned or
sitused to the city under § 891.03, as applicable, reduced by any pre-2017 net
operating loss carryforward available to the person for the city.
            2.   a.   For an individual who is a resident of the city, income
reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income, then
reduced as provided in division (c)(21)B. of this section, and further reduced
by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the individual for
the municipal corporation.
               b.   For an individual who is a nonresident of the city, income
reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and then,
as applicable, apportioned or sitused to the municipal corporation under §
891.03, then reduced as provided in division (c)(21)B. of this section, and
further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to
the individual for the city.
         B.   In computing the municipal taxable income of a taxpayer who is an
individual, the taxpayer may subtract, as provided in division (c)(21)A.2.a. or
(c)(21)B. of this section, the amount of the individual's employee business
expenses reported on the individual's form 2106 that the individual deducted
for federal income tax purposes for the taxable year, subject to the limitation
imposed by section 67 of the Internal Revenue Code. For the municipal
corporation in which the taxpayer is a resident, the taxpayer may deduct all
such expenses allowed for federal income tax purposes, but to the extent the
expenses do not relate to exempt income. For a municipal corporation in which
the taxpayer is not a resident, the taxpayer may deduct such expenses only to
the extent the expenses are related to the taxpayer's performance of personal
services in that nonresident municipal corporation and are not related to
exempt income.
      (22)   MUNICIPALITY. The same as the City of Solon.
      (23)   NET OPERATING LOSS. A loss incurred by a person in the operation
of a trade or business. NET OPERATING LOSS does not include unutilized losses
resulting from basis limitations, at-risk limitations, or passive activity loss
limitations.
      (24)   A.   NET PROFIT. For a person who is an individual means the
individual's net profit required to be reported on schedule C, schedule E, or
schedule F reduced by any net operating loss carried forward. For the purposes
of division (c)(24)A. of this section, the net operating loss carried forward
shall be calculated and deducted in the same manner as provided in division (c)
(24)C. of this section.
         B.   NET PROFIT. For a person other than an individual means adjusted
federal taxable income reduced by any net operating loss incurred by the person
in a taxable year beginning on or after January 1, 2017, subject to the
limitations of division (c)(24)C. of this section.
         C.   1.    The amount of such operating loss shall be deducted from
net profit to the extent necessary to reduce municipal taxable income to zero,
with any remaining unused portion of the net operating loss carried forward to
not more than five consecutive taxable years following the taxable year in
which the loss was incurred, but in no case for more years than necessary for
the deduction to be fully utilized.
            2.   No person shall use the deduction allowed by division (c)
(24)C. of this section to offset qualifying wages.
            3.   a.   For taxable years beginning in 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, or
2022, a person may not deduct more than 50% of the amount of the deduction
otherwise allowed by division (c)(24)C. of this section.
               b.   For taxable years beginning in 2023 or thereafter, a person
may deduct the full amount allowed by division (c)(24)C. of this section
without regard to the limitation of division (c)(24)C.3.a. of this section.
            4.   Any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward deduction that is
available may be utilized before a taxpayer may deduct any amount pursuant to
(c)(24)C. of this section.
            5.   Nothing in division (c)(24)C.3.a. of this section precludes a
person from carrying forward, for use with respect to any return filed for a
taxable year beginning after 2018, any amount of net operating loss that was
not fully utilized by operation of division (c)(24)C.3.a. of this section. To
the extent that an amount of net operating loss that was not fully utilized in
one or more taxable years by operation of division (c)(1)H.3.a. of this section
is carried forward for use with respect to a return filed for a taxable year
beginning in 2019, 2020, 2021, or 2022, the limitation described in division
(c)(24)C.3.a. of this section shall apply to the amount carried forward.
         D.   For the purposes of this chapter, and notwithstanding division
(c)(24)A. of this section, net profit of a disregarded entity shall not be
taxable as against that disregarded entity, but shall instead be included in
the net profit of the owner of the disregarded entity.
         E.   A publicly traded partnership that is treated as a partnership
for federal income tax purposes, and that is subject to tax on its net profits
by the city, may elect to be treated as a C corporation for the city. The
election shall be made on the annual return for the city. The city will treat
the publicly traded partnership as a C corporation if the election is so made.
      (25)   NONRESIDENT. An individual that is not a resident.
      (26)   OHIO BUSINESS GATEWAY. The online computer network system, created
under R.C. § 125.30, that allows persons to electronically file business reply
forms with state agencies and includes any successor electronic filing and
payment system.
      (27)   OTHER PAYER. Any person, other than an individual's employer or
the employer's agent that pays an individual any amount included in the federal
gross income of the individual. OTHER PAYER includes casino operators and video
lottery terminal sales agents.
      (28)   PASS-THROUGH ENTITY. A partnership not treated as an association
taxable as a C corporation for federal income tax purposes, a limited liability
company not treated as an association taxable as a C corporation for federal
income tax purposes, an S corporation, or any other class of entity from which
the income or profits of the entity are given pass-through treatment for
federal income tax purposes. PASS-THROUGH ENTITY does not include a trust,
estate, grantor of a grantor trust, or disregarded entity.
      (29)   PENSION. Any amount paid to an employee or former employee that is
reported to the recipient on an IRS form 1099-R, or successor form. Pension
does not include deferred compensation, or amounts attributable to nonqualified
deferred compensation plans, reported as FICA/Medicare wages on an IRS form W-
2, Wage and Tax Statement, or successor form.
      (30)   PERSON. Includes individuals, firms, companies, joint stock
companies, business trusts, estates, trusts, partnerships, limited liability
partnerships, limited liability companies, associations, C corporations, S
corporations, governmental entities, and any other entity.
      (31)   POSTAL SERVICE. The United States postal service.
      (32)   POSTMARK DATE, DATE OF POSTMARK, and similar terms include the
date recorded and marked in the manner described in division (B)(3) of R.C. §
5703.056.
      (33)   A.   PRE-2017 NET OPERATING LOSS CARRYFORWARD. Any net operating
loss incurred in a taxable year beginning before January 1, 2017, to the extent
such loss was permitted, by a resolution or ordinance of the municipal
corporation that was adopted by the municipal corporation before January 1,
2016, to be carried forward and utilized to offset income or net profit
generated in such municipal corporation in future taxable years.
         B.   For the purpose of calculating municipal taxable income, any pre-
2017 net operating loss carryforward may be carried forward to any taxable
year, including taxable years beginning in 2017 or thereafter, for the number
of taxable years provided in the resolution or ordinance or until fully
utilized, whichever is earlier.
      (34)   PUBLICLY TRADED PARTNERSHIP. Any partnership, an interest in which
is regularly traded on an established securities market. A PUBLICLY TRADED
PARTNERSHIP may have any number of partners.
      (35)   QUALIFYING WAGES. Wages, as defined in section 3121(a) of the
Internal Revenue Code, without regard to any wage limitations, adjusted as
follows:
         A.   Deduct the following amounts:
            1.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes
compensation attributable to a plan or program described in section 125 of the
Internal Revenue Code.
            2.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes payment
on account of a disability related to sickness or an accident paid by a party
unrelated to the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer.
            3.   Any amount included in wages that is exempt income.
         B.   Add the following amounts:
            1.   Any amount not included in wages solely because the employee
was employed by the employer before April 1, 1986.
            2.   Any amount not included in wages because the amount arises
from the sale, exchange, or other disposition of a stock option, the exercise
of a stock option, or the sale, exchange, or other disposition of stock
purchased under a stock option and the municipal corporation has not, by
resolution or ordinance, exempted the amount from withholding and tax adopted
before January 1, 2016. Division (c)(35)B.2. of this section applies only to
those amounts constituting ordinary income.
            3.   Any amount not included in wages if the amount is an amount
described in section 401(k), 403(b), or 457 of the Internal Revenue Code.
Division (c)(35)B.2. of this section applies only to employee contributions and
employee deferrals.
            4.   Any amount that is supplemental unemployment compensation
benefits described in section 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code and not
included in wages.
            5.   Any amount received that is treated as self-employment income
for federal tax purposes in accordance with section 1402(a)(8) of the Internal
Revenue Code.
            6.   Any amount not included in wages if all of the following
apply:
               a.   For the taxable year the amount is employee compensation
that is earned outside the United States and that either is included in the
taxpayer's gross income for federal income tax purposes or would have been
included in the taxpayer's gross income for such purposes if the taxpayer did
not elect to exclude the income under section 911 of the Internal Revenue Code;
               b.   For no preceding taxable year did the amount constitute
wages as defined in section 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code;
               c.   For no succeeding taxable year will the amount constitute
wages; and
               d.   For any taxable year the amount has not otherwise been
added to wages pursuant to either division (c)(35)B. of this section or §
891.04, as that section existed before the effective date of H.B. 5 of the
130th General Assembly, March 23, 2015.
      (36)   RELATED ENTITY.
         A.   An individual stockholder, or a member of the stockholder's
family enumerated in section 318 of the Internal Revenue Code, if the
stockholder and the members of the stockholder's family own directly,
indirectly, beneficially, or constructively, in the aggregate, at least 50% of
the value of the taxpayer's outstanding stock;
         B.   A stockholder, or a stockholder's partnership, estate, trust, or
corporation, if the stockholder and the stockholder's partnerships, estates,
trusts, or corporations own directly, indirectly, beneficially, or
constructively, in the aggregate, at least 50% of the value of the taxpayer's
outstanding stock;
         C.   A corporation, or a party related to the corporation in a manner
that would require an attribution of stock from the corporation to the party or
from the party to the corporation under division (c)(36)D. of this section,
provided the taxpayer owns directly, indirectly, beneficially, or
constructively, at least 50% of the value of the corporation's outstanding
stock;
         D.   The attribution rules described in section 318 of the Internal
Revenue Code apply for the purpose of determining whether the ownership
requirements in divisions (c)(36)A. to C. of this section have been met.
      (37)   RELATED MEMBER. A person that, with respect to the taxpayer during
all or any portion of the taxable year, is either a related entity, a component
member as defined in section 1563(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, or a person
to or from whom there is attribution of stock ownership in accordance with
section 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code except, for purposes of
determining whether a person is a related member under this division, "twenty
percent (20%)" shall be substituted for "five percent (5%)" wherever "five
percent (5%)" appears in section 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (38)   RESIDENT. An individual who is domiciled in the municipal
corporation as determined under §
891.03(e).
      (39)   S CORPORATION. A person that has made an election under subchapter
S of Chapter 1 of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code for its taxable year.
      (40)   SCHEDULE C. Internal Revenue Service schedule C (form 1040) filed
by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (41)   SCHEDULE E. Internal Revenue Service schedule E (form 1040) filed
by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (42)   SCHEDULE F. Internal Revenue Service schedule F (form 1040) filed
by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (43)   SINGLE MEMBER LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY. A limited liability
company that has one direct member.
      (44)   SMALL EMPLOYER. Any employer that had total revenue of less than
$500,000 during the preceding taxable year. For purposes of this division,
TOTAL REVENUE means receipts of any type or kind, including, but not limited
to, sales receipts; payments; rents; profits; gains, dividends, and other
investment income; compensation; commissions; premiums; money; property;
grants; contributions: donations; gifts; program service revenue; patient
service revenue; premiums; fees, including premium fees and service fees;
tuition payments; unrelated business revenue; reimbursements; any type of
payment from a governmental unit, including grants and other allocations; and
any other similar receipts reported for federal income tax purposes or under
generally accepted accounting principles. SMALL EMPLOYER does not include the
federal government; any state government, including any state agency or
instrumentality; any political subdivision; or any entity treated as a
government for financial accounting and reporting purposes.
      (45)   A.   TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The individual charged with direct
responsibility for administration of an income tax levied by the city in
accordance with this chapter. TAX ADMINISTRATOR does not include the state tax
commissioner.
         B.   TAX COMMISSIONER. The Tax Commissioner appointed under R.C. §
121.03.
      (46)   TAX RETURN PREPARER. Any individual described in section 7701(a)
(36) of the Internal Revenue Code and 26 C.F.R. 301.7701-15.
      (47)   TAXABLE YEAR. The corresponding tax reporting period as prescribed
for the taxpayer under the Internal Revenue Code.
      (48)   A.   TAXPAYER. A person subject to a tax levied on income by a
municipal corporation in accordance with this chapter. TAXPAYER does not
include a grantor trust or, except as provided in division (c)(48)B.1. of this
section, a disregarded entity.
         B.   1.   A single member limited liability company that is a
disregarded entity for federal tax purposes may be a separate taxpayer from its
single member in all Ohio municipal corporations in which it either filed as a
separate taxpayer or did not file for its taxable year ending in 2003, if all
of the following conditions are met:
               a.   The limited liability company's single member is also a
limited liability company.
               b.   The limited liability company and its single member were
formed and doing business in one or more Ohio municipal corporations for at
least five years before January 1, 2004.
               c.   Not later than December 31, 2004, the limited liability
company and its single member each made an election to be treated as a separate
taxpayer under division (c)(38) of this section as this section existed on
December 31, 2004.
               d.   The limited liability company was not formed for the
purpose of evading or reducing Ohio municipal corporation income tax liability
of the limited liability company or its single member.
               e.   The Ohio municipal corporation that was the primary place
of business of the sole member of the limited liability company consented to
the election.
            2.   For purposes of division (c)(48)B.2. of this section, a
municipal corporation was the primary place of business of a limited liability
company if, for the limited liability company's taxable year ending in 2003,
its income tax liability was greater in that municipal corporation than in any
other municipal corporation in Ohio, and that tax liability to that municipal
corporation for its taxable year ending in 2003 was at least $400,000.
      (49)   TAXPAYERS' RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The rights provided to
taxpayers in §§
891.09,
891.12,
891.13,
891.19(b),
891.20,
891.21, and R.C. §§ 5717.011 and 5717.03, and the responsibilities of taxpayers
to file, report, withhold, remit, and pay municipal income tax and otherwise
comply with R.C. Chapter 718 and resolutions, ordinances, and rules and
regulations adopted by the city for the imposition and administration of a
municipal income tax.
      (50)   VIDEO LOTTERY TERMINAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3770.21.
      (51)   VIDEO LOTTERY TERMINAL SALES AGENT. A lottery sales agent licensed
under R.C. Chapter 3770 to conduct video lottery terminals on behalf of the
state pursuant to R.C. § 3770.21.
(Ord. 2015-212, passed 11-2-2015; Ord. 2018-03, passed 1-16-2018; Ord. 2023-
275, passed 12-18-2023)
§ 891.03 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   The income tax levied by the city at a rate of 2% is levied on the municipal
taxable income of every person residing in and/or earning and/or receiving
income in the city.
Individuals
   (a)   For residents of the city, the income tax levied herein shall be on
all income, salaries, qualifying wages, commissions, and other compensation
from whatever source earned or received by the resident, including the
resident's distributive share of the net profit of pass-through entities owned
directly or indirectly by the resident and any net profit of the resident. This
is further detailed in the definition of income (§
891.02(c)(16)).
   (b)   For nonresidents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages, commissions,
and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by the
nonresident for work done, services performed or rendered, or activities
conducted in the municipal corporation, including any net profit of the
nonresident, but excluding the nonresident's distributive share of the net
profit or loss of only pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by
the nonresident.
   (c)   For residents and nonresidents, income can be reduced to municipal
taxable income as defined in §
891.02(c)(21). Exemptions which may apply are specified in §
891.02(c)(12).
Refundable Credit for Nonqualified Deferred Compensation Plan
   (d)   (1)   As used in this division:
         A.   NONQUALIFIED DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN. A compensation plan
described in section 3121(v)(2)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         B.   QUALIFYING LOSS. The amount of compensation attributable to a
taxpayer's nonqualified deferred compensation plan, less the receipt of money
and property attributable to distributions from the nonqualified deferred
compensation plan. Full loss is sustained if no distribution of money and
property is made by the nonqualified deferred compensation plan. The taxpayer
sustains a qualifying loss only in the taxable year in which the taxpayer
receives the final distribution of money and property pursuant to that
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
         C.   1.   QUALIFYING TAX RATE. The applicable tax rate for the taxable
year for the which the taxpayer paid income tax to the city with respect to any
portion of the total amount of compensation the payment of which is deferred
pursuant to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
            2.   If different tax rates applied for different taxable years,
then the qualifying tax rate is a weighted average of those different tax
rates. The weighted average shall be based upon the tax paid to the city each
year with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
         D.   REFUNDABLE CREDIT. The amount of the city’s income tax that was
paid on the non-distributed portion, if any, of a nonqualified deferred
compensation plan,
      (2)   If, in addition to the city, a taxpayer has paid tax to other
municipal corporations with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation
plan, the amount of the credit that a taxpayer may claim from each municipal
corporation shall be calculated on the basis of each municipal corporation's
proportionate share of the total municipal corporation income tax paid by the
taxpayer to all municipal corporations with respect to the nonqualified
deferred compensation plan.
      (3)   In no case shall the amount of the credit allowed under this
section exceed the cumulative income tax that a taxpayer has paid to the city
for all taxable years with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation
plan.
      (4)   The credit allowed under this division is allowed only to the
extent the taxpayer's qualifying loss is attributable to:
         A.   The insolvency or bankruptcy of the employer who had established
the nonqualified deferred compensation plan; or
         B.   The employee's failure or inability to satisfy all of the
employer's terms and conditions necessary to receive the nonqualified deferred
compensation.
Domicile
   (e)   (1)   A.   An individual is presumed to be domiciled in the city for
all or part of a taxable year if the individual was domiciled in the city on
the last day of the immediately preceding taxable year or if the Tax
Administrator reasonably concludes that the individual is domiciled in the city
for all or part of the taxable year.
         B.   An individual may rebut the presumption of domicile described in
division (e)(1)A. of this section if the individual establishes by a
preponderance of the evidence that the individual was not domiciled in the city
for all or part of the taxable year.
      (2)   For the purpose of determining whether an individual is domiciled
in the city for all or part of a taxable year, factors that may be considered
include, but are not limited to, the following:
         A.   The individual's domicile in other taxable years;
         B.   The location at which the individual is registered to vote;
         C.   The address on the individual's driver's license;
         D.   The location of real estate for which the individual claimed a
property tax exemption or reduction allowed on the basis of the individual's
residence or domicile;
         E.   The location and value of abodes owned or leased by the
individual;
         F.   Declarations, written or oral, made by the individual regarding
the individual's residency;
         G.   The primary location at which the individual is employed;
         H.   The location of educational institutions attended by the
individual's dependents as defined in section 152 of the Internal Revenue Code,
to the extent that tuition paid to such educational institution is based on the
residency of the individual or the individual's spouse in the municipal
corporation where the educational institution is located;
         I.   The number of contact periods the individual has with the city.
For the purposes of this division, an individual has one contact period with
the city if the individual is away overnight from the individual's abode
located outside of the city and while away overnight from that abode spends at
least some portion, however minimal, of each of two consecutive days in the
city.
      (3)   All additional applicable factors are provided in the Rules and
Regulations.
Businesses
   (f)   This division applies to any taxpayer engaged in a business or
profession in the city, unless the taxpayer is an individual who resides in the
city or the taxpayer is an electric company, combined company, or telephone
company that is subject to and required to file reports under Ohio R.C. Chapter
5745.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (f)(2) and (g) of this
section, net profit from a business or profession conducted both within and
without the boundaries of the city shall be considered as having a taxable
situs in Solon for purposes of municipal income taxation in the same proportion
as the average ratio of the following:
         A.   The average original cost of the real property and tangible
personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession
in Solon during the taxable period to the average original cost of all of the
real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the
business or profession during the same period, wherever situated.
            As used in the preceding paragraph, tangible personal or real
property shall include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the value
of such property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental thereon
by eight;
         B.   Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the taxable
period to individuals employed in the business or profession for services
performed in the city to wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during
the same period to individuals employed in the business or profession, wherever
the individual's services are performed, excluding compensation from which
taxes are not required to be withheld under §
891.04(c);
         C.   Total gross receipts of the business or profession from sales and
rentals made and services performed during the taxable period in the city to
total gross receipts of the business or profession during the same period from
sales, rentals, and services, wherever made or performed.
      (2)   A.   If the apportionment factors described in division (f)(1) of
this section do not fairly represent the extent of a taxpayer's business
activity in the city, the taxpayer may request, or the Tax Administrator of the
city may require, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or any portion of
the income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method involving one
or more of the following:
            1.   Separate accounting;
            2.   The exclusion of one or more of the factors;
            3.   The inclusion of one or more additional factors that would
provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the taxpayer to the
municipal corporation;
            4.   A modification of one or more of the factors.
         B.   A taxpayer request to use an alternative apportionment method
shall be in writing and shall accompany a tax return, timely filed appeal of an
assessment, or timely filed amended tax return. The taxpayer may use the
requested alternative method unless the Tax Administrator denies the request in
an assessment issued within the period prescribed by §
891.12(a).
         C.   The Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer to use an
alternative apportionment method as described in division (f)(2)A. of this
section, but only by issuing an assessment to the taxpayer within the period
prescribed by §
891.12(a).
         D.   Nothing in division (f)(2) of this section nullifies or otherwise
affects any alternative apportionment arrangement approved by the Tax
Administrator or otherwise agreed upon by both the Tax Administrator and
taxpayer before January 1, 2016.
      (3)   As used in division (f)(1)B. of this section, wages, salaries, and
other compensation includes only wages, salaries, or other compensation paid to
an employee for services performed at any of the following locations:
         A.   A location that is owned, controlled, or used by, rented to, or
under the possession of one of the following:
            1.   The employer;
            2.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of the employer, or a
related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient;
            3.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of a person described
in division (f)(3)A.2. of this section, or a related member of such a vendor,
customer, client, or patient.
         B.   Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing, investigation,
inquiry, review, court-martial, or similar administrative, judicial, or
legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted, provided that the
compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of the employer
or that the employee's presence at the location directly or indirectly benefits
the employer;
         C.   Any other location, if the Tax Administrator determines that the
employer directed the employee to perform the services at the other location in
lieu of a location described in division (f)(3)A. or B. of this section solely
in order to avoid or reduce the employer's municipal income tax liability. If
the Tax Administrator makes such a determination, the employer may dispute the
determination by establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the Tax
Administrator's determination was unreasonable.
      (4)   For the purposes of division (f)(1)C. of this section, and except
as provided in division (g) of this section, receipts from sales and rentals
made and services performed shall be sitused to a municipal corporation as
follows:
         A.   Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property shall
be sitused to the municipal corporation in which the sale originated. For the
purposes of this division, a sale of property originates in the city if,
regardless of where title passes, the property meets any of the following
criteria:
            1.   The property is shipped to or delivered within the city from a
stock of goods located within the city.
            2.   The property is delivered within the city from a location
outside the city, provided the taxpayer is regularly engaged through its own
employees in the solicitation or promotion of sales within the city and the
sales result from such solicitation or promotion.
            3.   The property is shipped from a place within the city to
purchasers outside the municipal corporation, provided that the taxpayer is
not, through its own employees, regularly engaged in the solicitation or
promotion of sales at the place where delivery is made.
         B.   Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be sitused to the
city to the extent that such services are performed in the city.
         C.   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from the sale of
real property located in the city shall be sitused to the city.
         D.   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from rents and
royalties from real property located in the city shall be sitused to the city.
         E.   Gross receipts from rents and royalties from tangible personal
property shall be sitused to the city based upon the extent to which the
tangible personal property is used in the city.
      (5)   The net profit received by an individual taxpayer from the rental
of real estate owned directly by the individual, or by a disregarded entity
owned by the individual, shall be subject to the city’s tax only if the
property generating the net profit is located in the city or if the individual
taxpayer that receives the net profit is a resident of the city. The city shall
allow such taxpayers to elect to use separate accounting for the purpose of
calculating net profit sitused under this division to the municipal corporation
in which the property is located.
      (6)   A.   Commissions received by a real estate agent or broker relating
to the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate shall be sitused to the
municipal corporation in which the real estate is located. Net profit reported
by the real estate agent or broker shall be allocated to the city, if
applicable, based upon the ratio of the commissions the agent or broker
received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate located in the city
to the commissions received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate
everywhere in the taxable year.
         B.   An individual who is a resident of the city shall report the
individual's net profit from all real estate activity on the individual's
annual tax return for the city. The individual may claim a credit for taxes the
individual paid on such net profit to another municipal corporation to the
extent that such a credit is allowed under the city's income tax ordinance.
      (7)   When calculating the ratios described in division (f)(1) of this
section for the purposes of that division or division (f)(2) of this section,
the owner of a disregarded entity shall include in the owner's ratios the
property, payroll, and gross receipts of such disregarded entity.
   (g)   (1)   As used in this division:
         A.   QUALIFYING REMOTE EMPLOYEE OR OWNER means an individual who is an
employee of a taxpayer or who is a partner or member holding an ownership
interest in a taxpayer that is treated as a partnership for federal income tax
purposes, provided that the individual meets both of the following criteria:
            1.   The taxpayer has assigned the individual to a qualifying
reporting location.
            2.   The individual is permitted or required to perform services
for the taxpayer at a qualifying remote work location.
         B.   QUALIFYING REMOTE WORK LOCATION means a permanent or temporary
location at which an employee or owner chooses or is required to perform
services for the taxpayer, other than a reporting location of the taxpayer or
any other location owned or controlled by a customer or client of the taxpayer.
QUALIFYING REMOTE WORK LOCATION may include the residence of an employee or
owner and may be located outside of a municipal corporation that imposes an
income tax in accordance with this chapter. An employee or owner may have more
than one qualifying remote work location during a taxable year.
         C.   QUALIFYING REPORTING LOCATION means one of the following:
            1.    The reporting location in this state at which an employee or
owner performs services for the taxpayer on a regular or periodic basis during
the taxable year;
            2.   If no reporting location exists in this state for an employee
or owner under division (g)(1)C.1. of this section, the reporting location in
this state at which the employee's or owner's supervisor regularly or
periodically reports during the taxable year;
            3.   If no reporting location exists in this state for an employee
or owner under division (g)(1)C.1. or 2. of this section, the location that the
taxpayer otherwise assigns as the employee's or owner's qualifying reporting
location, provided the assignment is made in good faith and is recorded and
maintained in the taxpayer's business records. A taxpayer may change the
QUALIFYING REPORTING LOCATION designated for an employee or owner under this
division at any time.
         D.   REPORTING LOCATION means either of the following:
            1.   A permanent or temporary place of doing business, such as an
office, warehouse, storefront, construction site, or similar location, that is
owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the taxpayer;
            2.   Any location in this state owned or controlled by a customer
or client of the taxpayer, provided that the taxpayer is required to withhold
taxes under §
891.04 of this chapter, on qualifying wages paid to an employee for the
performance of personal services at that location.
      (2)   For tax years ending on or after December 31, 2023, a taxpayer may
elect to apply the provisions of this division to the apportionment of its net
profit from a business or profession. For taxpayers that make this election,
the provisions of division (f) of this section apply to such apportionment
except as otherwise provided in this division.
         A.   A taxpayer shall make the election allowed under this division in
writing on or with the taxpayer's net profit return or, if applicable, a timely
filed amended net profit return or a timely filed appeal of an assessment. The
election applies to the taxable year for which that return or appeal is filed
and for all subsequent taxable years, until the taxpayer revokes the election.
         B.   The taxpayer shall make the initial election with the tax
administrator of each municipal corporation with which, after applying the
apportionment provisions authorized in this division, the taxpayer is required
to file a net profit tax return for that taxable year. A taxpayer shall not be
required to notify the tax administrator of a municipal corporation in which a
qualifying remote employee's or owner's qualifying remote work location is
located unless the taxpayer is otherwise required to file a net profit return
with that municipal corporation due to business operations that are unrelated
to the employee's or owner's activity at the qualifying remote work location.
         C.   After the taxpayer makes the initial election, the election
applies to every municipal corporation in which the taxpayer conducts business.
The taxpayer shall not be required to file a net profit return with a municipal
corporation solely because a qualifying remote employee's or owner's qualifying
remote work location is located in such municipal corporation.
         D.   Nothing in this division prohibits a taxpayer from making a new
election under this division after properly revoking a prior election.
      (3)   For the purpose of calculating the ratios described in division (f)
(l) of this section all of the following apply to a taxpayer that has made the
election described in division (g)(2):
         A.   For the purpose of division (f)(1)A. of this section, the average
original cost of any tangible personal properly used by a qualifying remote
employee or owner at that individual's qualifying remote work location shall be
sitused to that individual's qualifying reporting location.
         B.   For the purpose of division (f)(1)B. of this section, any wages,
salaries, and other compensation paid during the taxable period to a qualifying
remote employee or owner for services performed at that individual's qualifying
remote work location shall be sitused to that individual's qualifying reporting
location.
         C.   For the purpose of division (f)(1)C. of this section, and
notwithstanding division (f)(4) of this section, any gross receipts of the
business or profession from services performed during the taxable period by a
qualifying remote employee or owner for services performed at that individual's
qualifying remote work location shall be sitused to that individual's
qualifying reporting location.
      (4)   Nothing in this division prevents a taxpayer from requesting, or a
tax administrator from requiring, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or
a portion of the income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method as
described in division (f)(2) of this section. However, a tax administrator
shall not require an alternative apportionment method in such a manner that it
would require a taxpayer to file a net profit return with a municipal
corporation solely because a qualifying remote employee's or owner's qualifying
remote work location is located in that municipal corporation.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, nothing in this
division is intended to affect the withholding of taxes on qualifying wages
pursuant to §
891.04 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2015-212, passed 11-2-2015; Ord. 2023-275, passed 12–18-2023)
§ 891.04 COLLECTION AT SOURCE.
Withholding Provisions
   (a)   Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer located or doing
business in the city shall withhold an income tax from the qualifying wages
earned and/or received by each employee in the city. Except for qualifying
wages for which withholding is not required under §
891.03 or division (b)(4) or (b)(6) of this section, the tax shall be withheld
at the rate, specified in division (b)(1) of this section, of 2%. An employer,
agent of an employer, or other payer shall deduct and withhold the tax from
qualifying wages on the date that the employer, agent, or other payer directly,
indirectly, or constructively pays the qualifying wages to, or credits the
qualifying wages to the benefit of, the employee.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(2) of this section, an
employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall remit to the Tax
Administrator of the city the greater of the income taxes deducted and withheld
or the income taxes required to be deducted and withheld by the employer,
agent, or other payer according to the following schedule:
         A.   Taxes required to be deducted and withheld shall be remitted
monthly to the Tax Administrator if the total taxes deducted and withheld or
required to be deducted and withheld by the employer, agent, or other payer on
behalf of the city in the preceding calendar year exceeded $2,399, or if the
total amount of taxes deducted and withheld or required to be deducted and
withheld on behalf of the city in any month of the preceding calendar quarter
exceeded $200.
            Payment under division (b)(1)A. of this section shall be made to
the Tax Administrator not later than 15 days after the last day of each month
for which the tax was withheld.
         B.   Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer not required
to make payments under division (b)(1)A. of this section of taxes required to
be deducted and withheld shall make quarterly payments to the Tax Administrator
not later than the last day of the month following the last day of each
calendar quarter.
      (2)   If the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer is required
to make payments electronically for the purpose of paying federal taxes
withheld on payments to employees under section 6302 of the Internal Revenue
Code, 26 C.F.R. 31.6302-1, or any other federal statute or regulation, the
payment shall be made by electronic funds transfer to the Tax Administrator of
all taxes deducted and withheld on behalf of the city. The payment of tax by
electronic funds transfer under this division does not affect an employer's,
agents, or other payer's obligation to file any return as required under this
section.
      (3)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall make and
file a return showing the amount of tax withheld by the employer, agent, or
other payer from the qualifying wages of each employee and remitted to the Tax
Administrator. A return filed by an employer, agent, or other payer under this
division shall be accepted by Tax Administrator and the city as the return
required of an non-resident employee whose sole income subject to the tax under
this chapter is the qualifying wages reported by the employee's employer, agent
of an employer, or other payer.
      (4)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer is not required
to withhold city income tax with respect to an individual's disqualifying
disposition of an incentive stock option if, at the time of the disqualifying
disposition, the individual is not an employee of either the corporation with
respect to whose stock the option has been issued or of such corporation's
successor entity.
      (5)   A.   An employee is not relieved from liability for a tax by the
failure of the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer to withhold the
tax as required under this chapter or by the employer's, agent's, or other
payer's exemption from the requirement to withhold the tax.
         B.   The failure of an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer
to remit to the city the tax withheld relieves the employee from liability for
that tax unless the employee colluded with the employer, agent, or other payer
in connection with the failure to remit the tax withheld.
      (6)   Compensation deferred before June 26, 2003, is not subject to
city's income tax or income tax withholding requirement to the extent the
deferred compensation does not constitute qualifying wages at the time the
deferred compensation is paid or distributed.
      (7)   Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer required to
withhold taxes is liable for the payment of that amount required to be
withheld, whether or not such taxes have been withheld, and such amount shall
be deemed to be held in trust for the city until such time as the withheld
amount is remitted to the Tax Administrator.
      (8)   On or before the last day of February of each year, an employer
shall file a withholding reconciliation return with the Tax Administrator
listing:
         A.   The names, addresses, and Social Security numbers of all
employees from whose qualifying wages tax was withheld or should have been
withheld for the city during the preceding calendar year;
         B.   The amount of tax withheld, if any, from each such employee, the
total amount of qualifying wages paid to such employee during the preceding
calendar year;
         C.   The name of every other municipal corporation for which tax was
withheld or should have been withheld from such employee during the preceding
calendar year;
         D.   Any other information required for federal income tax reporting
purposes on Internal Revenue Service form W-2 or its equivalent form with
respect to such employee;
         E.   Other information as may be required by the Tax Administrator.
      (9)   The officer or the employee of the employer, agent of an employer,
or other payer with control or direct supervision of or charged with the
responsibility for withholding the tax or filing the reports and making
payments as required by this section, shall be personally liable for a failure
to file a report or pay the tax due as required by this section. The
dissolution of an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer does not
discharge the officer's or employee's liability for a failure of the employer,
agent of an employer, or other payer to file returns or pay any tax due.
      (10)   An employer is required to deduct and withhold the city's income
tax on tips and gratuities received by the employer's employees and
constituting qualifying wages, but only to the extent that the tips and
gratuities are under the employer's control. For the purposes of this division,
a tip or gratuity is under the employer's control if the tip or gratuity is
paid by the customer to the employer for subsequent remittance to the employee,
or if the customer pays the tip or gratuity by credit card, debit card, or
other electronic means.
      (11)   The Tax Administrator shall consider any tax withheld by an
employer at the request of an employee, when such tax is not otherwise required
to be withheld by this chapter to be tax required to be withheld and remitted
for the purposes of this section.
Occasional Entrant - Withholding
   (c)   (1)   As used in this division:
         A.   EMPLOYER. Includes a person that is a related member to or of an
employer.
         B.   FIXED LOCATION. A permanent place of doing business in this
state, such as an office, warehouse, storefront, or similar location owned or
controlled by an employer.
         C.   PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK. The fixed location to which an employee
is required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis. If
the employee is not required to report for employment duties on a regular and
ordinary basis to a fixed location, PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK means the worksite
location in this state to which the employee is required to report for
employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis. If the employee is not
required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis to a
fixed location or worksite location, PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK means the location
in this state at which the employee spends the greatest number of days in a
calendar year performing services for or on behalf of the employee's employer.
            If there is not a single municipal corporation in which the
employee spent the greatest number of days in a calendar year performing
services for or on behalf of the employer, but instead there are two or more
municipal corporations in which the employee spent an identical number of days
that is greater than the number of days the employee spent in any other
municipal corporation, the employer shall allocate any of the employee's
qualifying wages subject to division (c)(2)A.1. of this section among those two
or more municipal corporations. The allocation shall be made using any fair and
reasonable method, including, but not limited to, an equal allocation among
such municipal corporations or an allocation based upon the time spent or sales
made by the employee in each such municipal corporation. A municipal
corporation to which qualifying wages are allocated under this division shall
be the employee's principal place of work with respect to those qualifying
wages for the purposes of this section.
            For the purposes of this division, the location at which an
employee spends a particular day shall be determined in accordance with
division (c)(2)B. of this section, except that "location" shall be substituted
for "municipal corporation" wherever "municipal corporation" appears in that
division.
         D.   PROFESSIONAL ATHLETE. An athlete who performs services in a
professional athletic event for wages or other remuneration.
         E.   PROFESSIONAL ENTERTAINER. A person who performs services in the
professional performing arts for wages or other remuneration on a per-event
basis.
         F.   PUBLIC FIGURE. A person of prominence who performs services at
discrete events, such as speeches, public appearances, or similar events, for
wages or other remuneration on a per-event basis.
         G.   WORKSITE LOCATION. A construction site or other temporary
worksite in this state at which the employer provides services for more than 20
days during the calendar year. WORKSITE LOCATION does not include the home of
an employee.
      (2)   A.   Subject to divisions (c)(3), (c)(5), (c)(6), and (c)(7) of
this section, an employer is not required to withhold city income tax on
qualifying wages paid to an employee for the performance of personal services
in the city if the employee performed such services in the city on 20 or fewer
days in a calendar year, unless one of the following conditions applies:
            1.   The employee's principal place of work is located in the city.
            2.   The employee performed services at one or more presumed
worksite locations in the city. For the purposes of this division, PRESUMED
WORKSITE LOCATION means a construction site or other temporary worksite in the
city at which the employer provides or provided services that can reasonably
be, or would have been, expected by the employer to last more than 20 days in a
calendar year. Services can reasonably be expected by the employer to last more
than 20 days if either of the following applies at the time the services
commence:
               a.   The nature of the services are such that it will require
more than 20 days of the services to complete the services;
               b.   The agreement between the employer and its customer to
perform services at a location requires the employer to perform the services at
the location for more than 20 days.
            3.   The employee is a resident of the city and has requested that
the employer withhold tax from the employee's qualifying wages as provided in §
891.04.
            4.   The employee is a professional athlete, professional
entertainer, or public figure, and the qualifying wages are paid for the
performance of services in the employee's capacity as a professional athlete,
professional entertainer, or public figure.
         B.   For the purposes of division (c)(2)A. of this section, an
employee shall be considered to have spent a day performing services in the
city only if the employee spent more time performing services for or on behalf
of the employer in the city than in any other municipal corporation on that
day. For the purposes of determining the amount of time an employee spent in a
particular location, the time spent performing one or more of the following
activities shall be considered to have been spent at the employee's principal
place of work:
            1.   Traveling to the location at which the employee will first
perform services for the employer for the day;
            2.   Traveling from a location at which the employee was performing
services for the employer to any other location;
            3.   Traveling from any location to another location in order to
pick up or load, for the purpose of transportation or delivery, property that
has been purchased, sold, assembled, fabricated, repaired, refurbished,
processed, remanufactured, or improved by the employee's employer;
            4.   Transporting or delivering property described in division (c)
(2)B.3. of this section, provided that, upon delivery of the property, the
employee does not temporarily or permanently affix the property to real estate
owned, used, or controlled by a person other than the employee's employer;
            5.   Traveling from the location at which the employee makes the
employee's final delivery or pick-up for the day to either the employee's
principal place of work or a location at which the employee will not perform
services for the employer.
      (3)   If the principal place of work of an employee is located in another
Ohio municipal corporation that imposes an income tax, the exception from
withholding requirements described in division (c)(2)A. of this section shall
apply only if, with respect to the employee's qualifying wages described in
that division, the employer withholds and remits tax on such qualifying wages
to that municipal corporation.
      (4)   A.   Except as provided in division (c)(4)B. of this section, if,
during a calendar year, the number of days an employee spends performing
personal services in the city exceeds the 20-day threshold, the employer shall
withhold and remit tax to the city for any subsequent days in that calendar
year on which the employer pays qualifying wages to the employee for personal
services performed in the city.
         B.   An employer required to begin withholding tax for the city under
division (c)(4)A. of this section may elect to withhold tax for the city for
the first 20 days on which the employer paid qualifying wages to the employee
for personal services performed in the city.
      (5)   If an employer's fixed location is the city and the employer
qualifies as a small employer as defined in §
891.02, the employer shall withhold municipal income tax on all of the
employee's qualifying wages for a taxable year and remit that tax only to the
city, regardless of the number of days which the employee worked outside the
corporate boundaries of the city.
         To determine whether an employer qualifies as a small employer for a
taxable year, the employer will be required to provide the Tax Administrator
with the employer's federal income tax return for the preceding taxable year.
      (6)   Divisions (c)(2)A. and (c)(4) of this section shall not apply to
the extent that a Tax Administrator and an employer enter into an agreement
regarding the manner in which the employer shall comply with the requirements
of §
891.04.
(Ord. 2015-212, passed 11-2-2015; Ord. 2018-03, passed 1-16-2018)
§ 891.05 ANNUAL RETURN; FILING.
   (a)   An annual city income tax return shall be completed and filed by every
taxpayer for each taxable year for which the taxpayer is subject to the tax,
whether or not a tax is due thereon.
      (1)   The Tax Administrator may accept on behalf of all nonresident
individual taxpayers a return filed by an employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer under §
891.05 when the nonresident individual taxpayer's sole income subject to the
tax is the qualifying wages reported by the employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer, and no additional tax is due to the city.
      (2)   Retirees having no municipal taxable income for city income tax
purposes may file with the Tax Administrator a written exemption from these
filing requirements on a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator. The written
exemption shall indicate the date of retirement and the entity from which
retired. The exemption shall be in effect until such time as the retiree
receives municipal taxable income taxable to the city, at which time the
retiree shall be required to comply with all applicable provisions of this
chapter.
   (b)   If an individual is deceased, any return or notice required of that
individual shall be completed and filed by that decedent's executor,
administrator, or other person charged with the property of that decedent.
   (c)   If an individual is unable to complete and file a return or notice
required by the city, the return or notice required of that individual shall be
completed and filed by the individual's duly authorized agent, guardian,
conservator, fiduciary, or other person charged with the care of the person or
property of that individual.
   (d)   Returns or notices required of an estate or a trust shall be completed
and filed by the fiduciary of the estate or trust.
   (e)   The city shall permit spouses to file a joint return.
   (f)   (1)   Each return required to be filed under this division shall
contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer's duly authorized agent
and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer. The return shall
include the taxpayer's Social Security number or taxpayer identification
number. Each return shall be verified by a declaration under penalty of
perjury.
      (2)   The Tax Administrator shall require a taxpayer who is an individual
to include, with each annual return and amended return, copies of the following
documents: all of the taxpayer's Internal Revenue Service form W-2, "Wage and
Tax Statements," including all information reported on the taxpayer's federal
W-2, as well as taxable wages reported or withheld for any municipal
corporation; the taxpayer's Internal Revenue Service form 1040 or, in the case
of a return or request required by a qualified municipal corporation, Ohio form
IT-1040; and, with respect to an amended tax return, any other documentation
necessary to support the adjustments made in the amended return. An individual
taxpayer who files the annual return required by this section electronically is
not required to provide paper copies of any of the foregoing to the Tax
Administrator unless the Tax Administrator requests such copies after the
return has been filed.
      (3)   The Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer that is not an
individual to include, with each annual net profit return, amended net profit
return, or request for refund required under this section, copies of only the
following documents: the taxpayer's Internal Revenue Service form 1041, form
1065, form 1120, form 1120-REIT, form 1120F, or form 1120S, and, with respect
to an amended tax return or refund request, any other documentation necessary
to support the refund request or the adjustments made in the amended return.
         A taxpayer that is not an individual and that files an annual net
profit return electronically through the Ohio Business Gateway or in some other
manner shall either mail the documents required under this division to the Tax
Administrator at the time of filing or, if electronic submission is available,
submit the documents electronically through the Ohio Business Gateway.
      (4)   After a taxpayer files a tax return, the Tax Administrator may
request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information, statements, or
documents required by the city to determine and verify the taxpayer's municipal
income tax liability. The requirements imposed under division (f) of this
section applies regardless of whether the taxpayer files on a generic form or
on a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
   (g)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each return
required to be filed under this section shall be completed and filed as
required by the Tax Administrator on or before the date prescribed for the
filing of state individual income tax returns under division (G) of R.C. §
5747.08. The taxpayer shall complete and file the return or notice on forms
prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on generic forms, together with
remittance made payable to the city. No remittance is required if the net
amount due is $10 or less.
      (2)   Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of the city’s income tax
return. The extended due date of city's income tax return shall be the 15th day
of the tenth month after the last day of the taxable year to which the return
relates. For tax years ending on or after January 1, 2023, the extended due
date of the city's income tax return for a taxpayer that is not an individual
shall be the 15th day of the eleventh month after the last day of the taxable
year to which the return relates. An extension of time to file under this
division is not an extension of the time to pay any tax due unless the Tax
Administrator grants an extension of that date.
         A.   A copy of the federal extension request shall be included with
the filing of the city’s income tax return.
         B.   A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return may request that
the Tax Administrator grant the taxpayer a six-month extension of the date for
filing the taxpayer’s city income tax return. If the request is received by the
Tax Administrator on or before the date the city income tax return is due, the
Tax Administrator shall grant the taxpayer's requested extension.
      (3)   If the tax commissioner extends for all taxpayers the date for
filing state income tax returns under division (G) of R.C. § 5747.08, a
taxpayer shall automatically receive an extension for the filing of city's
income tax return. The extended due date of city's income tax return shall be
the same as the extended due date of the state income tax return.
      (4)   If the Tax Administrator considers it necessary in order to ensure
the payment of the tax imposed by the city, the Tax Administrator may require
taxpayers to file returns and make payments otherwise than as provided in this
division, including taxpayers not otherwise required to file annual returns.
      (5)   If a taxpayer receives an extension for the filing of a municipal
income tax return under division (3), or (4) of this section, the Tax
Administrator shall not make any inquiry or send any notice to the taxpayer
with regard to the return on or before the date the taxpayer files the return
or on or before the extended due date to file the return whichever occurs
first.
         A.   If a Tax Administrator violates division (g)(5) of this section,
the municipal corporation shall reimburse the taxpayer for any reasonable costs
incurred to respond to such inquiry or notice, up to $150.
         B.   Division (g)(5) of this section does not apply to an extension
received under division (g)(2) of this section if the Tax Administrator has
actual knowledge that the taxpayer failed to file for a federal extension as
required to receive the extension under division (g)(2) of this section or
failed to file for an extension under division (g)(2)B. of this section.
      (6)   To the extent that any provision in this division (g) of this
section conflicts with any provision in divisions (n), (o), (p), or (q) of this
section, the provisions in divisions (n), (o), (p), or (q) prevail.
   (h)   (1)   For taxable years beginning after 2015, the city shall not
require a taxpayer to remit tax with respect to net profits if the net amount
due is $10 or less.
      (2)   Any taxpayer not required to remit tax to the city for a taxable
year pursuant to division (h)(1) of this section shall file with the city an
annual net profit return under division (f)(3) of this section unless the
provisions of division (h)(3) apply.
      (3)   A.   A person may notify the Tax Administrator that the person does
not expect to be a taxpayer subject to city income tax ordinance for a taxable
year if both the following apply:
            1.   The person was required to file a tax return with the city for
the immediately preceding taxable year because the person performed services at
a worksite location (as defined in § 891.04(c)(1)G. within the city.
            2.   The person no longer provides services in the city and does
not expect to be subject to city income tax for the taxable year.
         B.   The person shall provide the notice in a signed affidavit that
briefly explains the person’s circumstances, including the location of the
previous worksite location and the last date on which the person performed
services or made any sales within the city. The affidavit shall also include
the following statement: “The affiant has no plans to perform any services
within City of Solon, make anv sales in City of Solon or otherwise become
subject to the tax levied by City of Solon during the taxable year. If the
affiant does become subject to the tax levied by City of Solon for the taxable
year, the affiant agrees to be considered a taxpayer and to properly comply as
a taxpayer with City of Solon income tax ordinance and rules and regulations.”
The person shall sign the affidavit under penalty of perjury.
         C.   If a person submits an affidavit described in division (h)(3)B.
above the Tax Administrator shall not require the person to file a tax return
for the taxable year unless the Tax Administrator possesses information that
conflicts with the affidavit or if the circumstances described in the affidavit
change.
         D.   Nothing in division (h)(3) of this section prohibits the Tax
Administrator from performing an audit of the person.
   (i)   If a payment under this chapter is made by electronic funds transfer,
the payment shall be considered to be made on the date of the timestamp
assigned by the first electronic system receiving that payment.
   (j)   Taxes withheld for the city by an employer, the agent of an employer,
or other payer as described in §
891.04 shall be allowed to the taxpayer as credits against payment of the tax
imposed on the taxpayer by the city, unless the amounts withheld were not
remitted to the city and the recipient colluded with the employer, agent, or
other payer in connection with the failure to remit the amounts withheld.
   (k)   Each return required by the city to be filed in accordance with this
division shall include a box that the taxpayer may check to authorize another
person, including a tax return preparer who prepared the return, to communicate
with the Tax Administrator about matters pertaining to the return.
   (l)   The Tax Administrator shall accept for filing a generic form of any
income tax return, report, or document required by the city, provided that the
generic form, once completed and filed, contains all of the information
required by ordinance, resolution, or rules and regulations adopted by the city
or the Tax Administrator, and provided that the taxpayer or tax return preparer
filing the generic form otherwise complies with the provisions of this chapter
and of the city's ordinance, resolution, or rules and regulations governing the
filing of returns, reports, or documents.
Filing via Ohio Business Gateway
   (m)   (l)   Any taxpayer subject to municipal income taxation with respect
to the taxpayer's net profit from a business or profession may file the city's
income tax return, estimated municipal income tax return, or extension for
filing a municipal income tax return, and may make payment of amounts shown to
be due on such returns, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
      (2)   Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer may report the
amount of municipal income tax withheld from qualifying wages, and may make
remittance of such amounts, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
      (3)   Nothing in this section affects the due dates for filing employer
withholding tax returns.
Extension for Service in or for the Armed Forces
   (n)   Each member of the national guard of any state and each member of a
reserve component of the Armed Forces of the United States called to active
duty pursuant to an executive order issued by the President of the United
States or an act of the Congress of the United States, and each civilian
serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in
support of the Armed Forces, may apply to the Tax Administrator of the city for
both an extension of time for filing of the return and an extension of time for
payment of taxes required by the city during the period of the member's or
civilian's duty service, and for 180 days thereafter. The application shall be
filed on or before the 180th day after the member's or civilian's duty
terminates. An applicant shall provide such evidence as the Tax Administrator
considers necessary to demonstrate eligibility for the extension.
   (o)   (1)   If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant is
qualified for an extension under this section, the Tax Administrator shall
enter into a contract with the applicant for the payment of the tax in
installments that begin on the 181st day after the applicant's active duty or
service terminates. The Tax Administrator may prescribe such contract terms as
the Tax Administrator considers appropriate.
         However, taxes pursuant to a contract entered into under this division
are not delinquent, and the Tax Administrator shall not require any payments of
penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for the extension period.
      (2)   If the Tax Administrator determines that an applicant is qualified
for an extension under this section, the applicant shall neither be required to
file any return, report, or other tax document nor be required to pay any tax
otherwise due to the municipal corporation before the 181st day after the
applicant's active duty or service terminates.
      (3)   Taxes paid pursuant to a contract entered into under division (o)
(1) of this section are not delinquent. The Tax Administrator shall not require
any payments of penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for the
extension period.
   (p)   (l)   Nothing in this division denies to any person described in this
division the application of divisions (n) and (o) of this section.
      (2)   A.   A qualifying taxpayer who is eligible for an extension under
the Internal Revenue Code shall receive both an extension of time in which to
file any return, report, or other tax document and an extension of time in
which to make any payment of taxes required by a municipal corporation in
accordance with this chapter. The length of any extension granted under
division (p)(2)A. of this section shall be equal to the length of the
corresponding extension that the taxpayer receives under the Internal Revenue
Code. As used in this division, QUALIFYING TAXPAYER means a member of the
national guard or a member of a reserve component of the Armed Forces of the
United States called to active duty pursuant to either an executive order
issued by the President of the United States or an act of the Congress of the
United States, or a civilian serving as support personnel in a combat zone or
contingency operation in support of the Armed Forces.
         B.   Taxes whose payment is extended in accordance with division (p)
(2)A. of this section are not delinquent during the extension period. Such
taxes become delinquent on the first day after the expiration of the extension
period if the taxes are not paid prior to that date. The Tax Administrator
shall not require any payment of penalties or interest in connection with those
taxes for the extension period. The Tax Administrator shall not include any
period of extension granted under division (c)(2)A. of this section in
calculating the penalty or interest due on any unpaid tax.
   (q)   For each taxable year to which division (n), (o), or (p) of this
section applies to a taxpayer, the provisions of divisions (o)(2) and (o)(3) of
this section, as applicable, apply to the spouse of that taxpayer if the filing
status of the spouse and the taxpayer is married filing jointly for that year.
Consolidated Municipal Income Tax Return
   (r)   As used in this section:
      (1)   AFFILIATED GROUP OF CORPORATIONS. An affiliated group as defined in
section 1504 of the Internal Revenue Code, except that, if such a group
includes at least one incumbent local exchange carrier that is primarily
engaged in the business of providing local exchange telephone service in this
state, the affiliated group shall not include any incumbent local exchange
carrier that would otherwise be included in the group.
      (2)   CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL INCOME TAX RETURN. A consolidated return filed
for federal income tax purposes pursuant to section 1501 of the Internal
Revenue Code.
      (3)   CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME. The consolidated taxable
income of an affiliated group of corporations, as computed for the purposes of
filing a consolidated federal income tax return, before consideration of net
operating losses or special deductions. CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME
does not include income or loss of an incumbent local exchange carrier that is
excluded from the affiliated group under division (r)(l) of this section.
      (4)   INCUMBENT LOCAL EXCHANGE CARRIER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4927.01.
      (5)   LOCAL EXCHANGE TELEPHONE SERVICE. Has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. § 5727.01.
   (s)   (l)   For taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016, a
taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations may elect to
file a consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable year if at least
one member of the affiliated group of corporations is subject to the city's
income tax in that taxable year, and if the affiliated group of corporations
filed a consolidated federal income tax return with respect to that taxable
year. The election is binding for a five-year period beginning with the first
taxable year of the initial election unless a change in the reporting method is
required under federal law. The election continues to be binding for each
subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing
consolidated municipal income tax returns under division (s)(2) of this section
or a taxpayer receives permission from the Tax Administrator. The Tax
Administrator shall approve such a request for good cause shown.
      (2)   An election to discontinue filing consolidated municipal income tax
returns under this section must be made in the first year following the last
year of a five-year consolidated municipal income tax return election period in
effect under division (s)(l) of this section. The election to discontinue
filing a consolidated municipal income tax return is binding for a five-year
period beginning with the first taxable year of the election.
      (3)   An election made under division (s)(l) or (s)(2) of this section is
binding on all members of the affiliated group of corporations subject to a
municipal income tax.
   (t)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations
that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a taxable year shall
file a consolidated city income tax return for that taxable year if the Tax
Administrator determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that intercompany
transactions have not been conducted at arm's length and that there has been a
distortive shifting of income or expenses with regard to allocation of net
profits to the city. A taxpayer that is required to file a consolidated city
income tax return for a taxable year shall file a consolidated city income tax
return for all subsequent taxable years, unless the taxpayer requests and
receives written permission from the Tax Administrator to file a separate
return or a taxpayer has experienced a change in circumstances.
   (u)   A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated city income tax return in the
same manner as is required under the United States Department of Treasury
regulations that prescribe procedures for the preparation of the consolidated
federal income tax return required to be filed by the common parent of the
affiliated group of which the taxpayer is a member.
   (v)   (l)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (v)(2), (v)(3), and
(v)(4) of this section, corporations that file a consolidated municipal income
tax return shall compute adjusted federal taxable income, as defined in §
891.02, by substituting "consolidated federal taxable income" for "federal
taxable income" wherever "federal taxable income" appears in that division and
by substituting "an affiliated group of corporation's" for "a C corporation's"
wherever "a C corporation's" appears in that division.
      (2)   No corporation filing a consolidated city income tax return shall
make any adjustment otherwise required under §
891.02(c)(2)C.1. to the extent that the item of income or deduction otherwise
subject to the adjustment has been eliminated or consolidated in the
computation of consolidated federal taxable income.
      (3)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having at least
80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly or
indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, the
corporation filing a consolidated city income tax return shall do one of the
following with respect to that pass-through entity's net profit or loss for
that taxable year:
         A.   Exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in §
891.05(r) through (y), exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the
pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit
sitused to a municipal corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss is so
excluded, the entity shall be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the
basis of the entity's net profits that would otherwise be included in the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
         B.   Include the pass-through entity's net profit or loss in the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in §
891.05(r) through (y), include the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the
pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit
sitused to a municipal corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss is so
included, the entity shall not be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on
the basis of the entity's net profits that are included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
      (4)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having less than
80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly or
indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, all
of the following shall apply:
         A.   The corporation filing the consolidated municipal income tax
return shall exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purposes of making the computations required in §
891.05(r) through (y), exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the
pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit
sitused to the city;
         B.   The pass-through entity shall be subject to the city's income
taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with this chapter on the basis of
the entity's net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
   (w)   Corporations filing a consolidated city income tax return shall make
the computations required under §
891.05(r) through (y) by substituting "consolidated federal taxable income
attributable to" for "net profit from" wherever "net profit from" appears in
that section and by substituting "affiliated group of corporations" for
"taxpayer" wherever "taxpayer" appears in that section.
   (x)   Each corporation filing a consolidated city income tax return is
jointly and severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties, fines, charges,
or other amounts imposed by the city in accordance with this chapter on the
corporation, an affiliated group of which the corporation is a member for any
portion of the taxable year, or any one or more members of such an affiliated
group.
   (y)   Corporations and their affiliates that made an election or entered
into an agreement with the city before January 1, 2016, to file a consolidated
or combined tax return with the city may continue to file consolidated or
combined tax returns in accordance with such election or agreement for taxable
years beginning on and after January 1, 2016.
(Ord. 2015-212, passed 11-2-2015; Ord. 2018-03, passed 1-16-2018; Ord. 2023-
275, passed 12-18-2023)
§ 891.06 CREDIT FOR TAX PAID TO OTHER MUNICIPALITIES.
   (a)   Every individual taxpayer domiciled in the city who is required to and
does pay, or has acknowledged liability for, a municipal tax to another
municipality on or measured by the same income, qualifying wages, commissions,
net profits or other compensation taxable under this chapter may claim a
nonrefundable credit upon satisfactory evidence of the tax paid to the other
municipality. Subject to division (c) of this section, the credit shall not
exceed the tax due to the city under this chapter.
   (b)   The city shall grant a credit against its tax on income to a resident
of the city who works in a joint economic development zone created under R.C. §
715.691 or a joint economic development district created under R.C. § 715.70,
715.71, or 715.72 to the same extent that it grants a credit against its tax on
income to its residents who are employed in another municipal corporation.
   (c)   If the amount of tax withheld or paid to the other municipality is
less than the amount of tax required to be withheld or paid to the other
municipality, then for purposes of division (a) of this section, the income,
qualifying wages, commissions, net profits or other compensation subject to tax
in the other municipality shall be limited to the amount computed by dividing
the tax withheld or paid to the other municipality by the tax rate for that
municipality.
(Ord. 2015-212, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 891.07 ESTIMATED TAXES.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   ESTIMATED TAXES. The amount that the taxpayer reasonably estimates
to be the taxpayer's tax liability for the city's income tax for the current
taxable year.
      (2)   TAX LIABILITY. The total taxes due to the city for the taxable
year, after allowing any credit to which the taxpayer is entitled, and after
applying any estimated tax payment, withholding payment, or credit from another
taxable year.
   (b)   (1)   Every taxpayer shall make a declaration of estimated taxes for
the current taxable year, on the form prescribed by the Tax Administrator, if
the amount payable as estimated taxes is at least $200. For the purposes of
this section:
         A.   Taxes withheld for the city from qualifying wages shall be
considered as paid to the city in equal amounts on each payment date unless the
taxpayer establishes the dates on which all amounts were actually withheld, in
which case they shall be considered as paid on the dates on which the amounts
were actually withheld.
         B.   An overpayment of tax applied as a credit to a subsequent taxable
year is deemed to be paid on the date of the postmark stamped on the cover in
which the payment is mailed or, if the payment is made by electronic funds
transfer, the date the payment is submitted. As used in this division, DATE OF
THE POSTMARK means, in the event there is more than one date on the cover, the
earliest date imprinted on the cover by the postal service.
      (2)   Taxpayers filing joint returns shall file joint declarations of
estimated taxes. A taxpayer may amend a declaration under rules prescribed by
the Tax Administrator. A taxpayer having a taxable year of less than 12 months
shall make a declaration under rules prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
      (3)   The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or before the
date prescribed for the filing of municipal income tax returns under §
891.05(g) or on or before the 15th day of the fourth month after the taxpayer
becomes subject to tax for the first time.
      (4)   Taxpayers reporting on a fiscal year basis shall file a declaration
on or before the 15th day of the fourth month after the beginning of each
fiscal year or period.
      (5)   The original declaration or any subsequent amendment may be
increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment day as
provided in this section.
   (c)   (1)   The required portion of the tax liability for the taxable year
that shall be paid through estimated taxes made payable to the city, including
the application of tax refunds to estimated taxes and withholding on or before
the applicable payment date, shall be as follows:
         A.   On or before the 15th day of the fourth month after the beginning
of the taxable year, 22.5% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         B.   On or before the 15th day of the sixth month after the beginning
of the taxable year, 45% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         C.   On or before the 15th day of the ninth month after the beginning
of the taxable year, 67.5% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         D.   For an individual, on or before the 15th day of the first month
of the following taxable year, 90% of the tax liability for the taxable year.
For a person other than an individual, on or before the 15th day of the 12th
month of the taxable year, 90% of the tax liability for the taxable year.
      (2)   When an amended declaration has been filed, the unpaid balance
shown due on the amended declaration shall be paid in equal installments on or
before the remaining payment dates.
      (3)   On or before the 15th day of the fourth month of the year following
that for which the declaration or amended declaration was filed, an annual
return shall be filed and any balance which may be due shall be paid with the
return in accordance with R.C. § 718.05.
   (d)   (1)   In the case of any underpayment of any portion of a tax
liability, penalty and interest may be imposed pursuant to §
891.18 upon the amount of underpayment for the period of underpayment, unless
the underpayment is due to reasonable cause as described in division (e) of
this section. The amount of the underpayment shall be determined as follows:
         A.   For the first payment of estimated taxes each year, 22.5% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         B.   For the second payment of estimated taxes each year, 45% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         C.   For the third payment of estimated taxes each year, 67.5% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         D.   For the fourth payment of estimated taxes each year, 90% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment.
      (2)   The period of the underpayment shall run from the day the estimated
payment was required to be made to the date on which the payment is made. For
purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes on or before any payment
date shall be considered a payment of any previous underpayment only to the
extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the amount of the payment
presently required to be paid to avoid any penalty.
   (e)   An underpayment of any portion of tax liability determined under
division (d) of this section shall be due to reasonable cause and the penalty
imposed by this section shall not be added to the taxes for the taxable year if
any of the following apply:
      (1)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 90% of
the tax liability for the current taxable year, determined by annualizing the
income received during the year up to the end of the month immediately
preceding the month in which the payment is due.
      (2)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 100%
of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer for the preceding
taxable year, provided that the immediately preceding taxable year reflected a
period of 12 months and the taxpayer filed a return with the city under §
891.05 for that year.
      (3)   The taxpayer is an individual who resides in the city but was not
domiciled there on the first day of January of the calendar year that includes
the first day of the taxable year.
(Ord. 2015-212, passed 11-2-2015; Ord. 2018-03, passed 1-16-2018)
§ 891.08 ROUNDING OF AMOUNTS.
   A person may round to the nearest whole dollar all amounts the person is
required to enter on any return, report, voucher, or other document required
under this chapter. Any fractional part of a dollar that equals or exceeds $.50
shall be rounded to the next whole dollar, and any fractional part of a dollar
that is less than $.50 shall be dropped. If a person chooses to round amounts
entered on a document, the person shall round all amounts entered on the
document.
(Ord. 2015-212, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 891.09 REQUESTS FOR REFUNDS.
   (a)   As used in this section, WITHHOLDING TAX has the same meaning as in §
891.18.
   (b)   Upon receipt of a request for a refund, the Tax Administrator, in
accordance with this section, shall refund to employers, agents of employers,
other payers, or taxpayers, with respect to any income or withholding tax
levied by the municipal corporation:
      (1)   Overpayments of more than $10 or more;
      (2)   Amounts paid erroneously if the refund requested exceeds $10 or
more.
   (c)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, requests for
refund shall be filed with the Tax Administrator, on the form prescribed by the
Tax Administrator within three years after the tax was due or paid, whichever
is later. The Tax Administrator may require the requestor to file with the
request any documentation that substantiates the requestor's claim for a
refund.
      (2)   On filing of the refund request, the Tax Administrator shall
determine the amount of refund due and certify such amount to the appropriate
municipal corporation official for payment. Except as provided in division (c)
(3) of this section, the administrator shall issue an assessment to any
taxpayer whose request for refund is fully or partially denied. The assessment
shall state the amount of the refund that was denied, the reasons for the
denial, and instructions for appealing the assessment.
      (3)   If a Tax Administrator denies in whole or in part a refund request
included within the taxpayer's originally filed annual income tax return, the
Tax Administrator shall notify the taxpayer, in writing, of the amount of the
refund that was denied, the reasons for the denial, and instructions for
requesting an assessment that may be appealed under §
891.21.
   (d)   A request for a refund that is received after the last day for filing
specified in division (c) of this section shall be considered to have been
filed in a timely manner if any of the following situations exist:
      (1)   The request is delivered by the postal service, and the earliest
postal service postmark on the cover in which the request is enclosed is not
later than the last day for filing the request.
      (2)   The request is delivered by the postal service, the only postmark
on the cover in which the request is enclosed was affixed by a private postal
meter, the date of that postmark is not later than the last day for filing the
request, and the request is received within seven days of such last day.
      (3)   The request is delivered by the postal service, no postmark date
was affixed to the cover in which the request is enclosed or the date of the
postmark so affixed is not legible, and the request is received within seven
days of the last day for making the request.
   (e)   Interest shall be allowed and paid on any overpayment by a taxpayer of
any municipal income tax obligation from the date of the overpayment until the
date of the refund of the overpayment, except that if any overpayment is
refunded within 90 days after the final filing date of the annual return or 90
days after the completed return is filed, whichever is later, no interest shall
be allowed on the refund. For the purpose of computing the payment of interest
on amounts overpaid, no amount of tax for any taxable year shall be considered
to have been paid before the date on which the return on which the tax is
reported is due, without regard to any extension of time for filing that
return. Interest shall be paid at the interest rate described in §
891.18(a)(4).
(Ord. 2015-212, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 891.10 SECOND MUNICIPALITY IMPOSING TAX AFTER TIME PERIOD ALLOWED FOR REFUND.
   (a)   Income tax that has been deposited with the city, but should have been
deposited with another municipality, is allowable by the city as a refund but
is subject to the three-year limitation on refunds.
   (b)   Income tax that was deposited with another municipality but should
have been deposited with the city is subject to recovery by the city. If the
city's tax on that income is imposed after the time period allowed for a refund
of the tax or withholding paid to the other municipality, the city shall allow
a nonrefundable credit against the tax or withholding the city claims is due
with respect to such income or wages, equal to the tax or withholding paid to
the first municipality with respect to such income or wages.
   (c)   If the city's tax rate is less than the tax rate in the other
municipality, then the nonrefundable credit shall be calculated using the
city's tax rate. However, if the city's tax rate is greater than the tax rate
in the other municipality, the tax due in excess of the nonrefundable credit is
to be paid to the city, along with any penalty and interest that accrued during
the period of nonpayment.
   (d)   Nothing in this section permits any credit carryforward.
(Ord. 2015-212, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 891.11 AMENDED RETURNS.
   (a)   (1)   If a taxpayer's tax liability shown on the annual tax return for
the city changes as a result of an adjustment to the taxpayer's federal or
state income tax return, the taxpayer shall file an amended return with the
city. The amended return shall be filed on a form required by the Tax
Administrator.
      (2)   If a taxpayer intends to file an amended consolidated municipal
income tax return, or to amend its type of return from a separate return to a
consolidated return, based on the taxpayer's consolidated federal income tax
return, the taxpayer shall notify the Tax Administrator before filing the
amended return.
   (b)   (1)   In the case of an underpayment, the amended return shall be
accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax dues together with any
penalty and interest thereon. If the combined tax shown to be due is $10 or
less, no payment need be made. The amended return shall reopen those facts,
figures, computations, or attachments from a previously filed return that are
not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the
taxpayer's federal or state income tax return only:
         A.   To determine the amount of tax that would be due if all facts,
figures, computations, and attachments were reopened; or,
         B.   If the applicable statute of limitations for civil actions or
prosecutions under §
891.12 has not expired for a previously filed return.
      (2)   The additional tax to be paid shall not exceed the amount of tax
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments were
reopened; i.e., the payment shall be the lesser of the two amounts.
   (c)   (1)   In the case of an overpayment, a request for refund may be filed
under this division within the period prescribed by §
891.12(e) for filing the amended return, even if it is filed beyond the period
prescribed in that division if it otherwise conforms to the requirements of
that division. If the amount of the refund is less than $10, no refund need be
paid by the city. A request filed under this division shall claim refund of
overpayments resulting from alterations only to those facts, figures,
computations, or attachments required in the taxpayer's annual return that are
affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's
federal or state income tax return, unless it is also filed within the time
prescribed in §
891.09.
      (2)   The amount to be refunded shall not exceed the amount of refund
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments were
reopened. All facts, figures, computations, and attachments may be reopened to
determine the refund amount due by inclusion of all facts, figures,
computations, and attachments.
   (d)   Within 60 days after the final determination of any federal or state
tax liability affecting the taxpayer's city's tax liability, that taxpayer
shall make and file an amended city return showing income subject to the city's
income tax based upon such final determination of federal or state tax
liability. The taxpayer shall pay any additional city income tax shown due
thereon or make a claim for refund of any overpayment, unless the tax or
overpayment is less than $10.
(Ord. 2015-212, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 891.12 LIMITATIONS.
   (a)   (1)   A.   Civil actions to recover municipal income taxes and
penalties and interest on municipal income taxes shall be brought within the
later of:
            1.   Three years after the tax was due or the return was filed,
whichever is later; or
            2.   One year after the conclusion of the qualifying deferral
period, if any.
         B.   The time limit described in division (a)(1)A. of this section may
be extended at any time if both the Tax Administrator and the employer, agent
of the employer, other payer, or taxpayer consent in writing to the extension.
Any extension shall also extend for the same period of time the time limit
described in division (c) of this section.
      (2)   As used in this section, QUALIFYING DEFERRAL PERIOD means a period
of time beginning and ending as follows:
         A.   Beginning on the date a person who is aggrieved by an assessment
files with the Board of Tax Review the request described in §
891.21. That date shall not be affected by any subsequent decision, finding, or
holding by any administrative body or court that the Board of Tax Review did
not have jurisdiction to affirm, reverse, or modify the assessment or any part
of that assessment.
         B.   Ending the later of the sixtieth day after the date on which the
final determination of the Board of Tax Review becomes final or, if any party
appeals from the determination of the Board of Tax Review, the sixtieth day
after the date on which the final determination of the Board of Tax Review is
either ultimately affirmed in whole or in part or ultimately reversed and no
further appeal of either that affirmation, in whole or in part, or that
reversal is available or taken.
   (b)   Prosecutions for an offense made punishable under a resolution or
ordinance imposing an income tax shall be commenced within three years after
the commission of the offense, provided that in the case of fraud, failure to
file a return, or the omission of 25% or more of income required to be
reported, prosecutions may be commenced within six years after the commission
of the offense.
   (c)   A claim for a refund of municipal income taxes shall be brought within
the time limitation provided in §
891.09.
   (d)   (1)   Notwithstanding the fact that an appeal is pending, the
petitioner may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the subject of
the appeal. The acceptance of a payment by the city does not prejudice any
claim for refund upon final determination of the appeal.
      (2)   If upon final determination of the appeal an error in the
assessment is corrected by the Tax Administrator, upon an appeal so filed or
pursuant to a final determination of the Board of Tax Review, of the Ohio Board
of Tax Appeals, or any court to which the decision of the Ohio Board of Tax
Appeals has been appealed, so that the resultant amount due is less than the
amount paid, a refund will be paid in the amount of the overpayment as provided
by §
891.09, with interest on that amount as provided by division §
891.09(e).
   (e)   No civil action to recover city income tax or related penalties or
interest shall be brought during either of the following time periods:
      (1)   The period during which a taxpayer has a right to appeal the
imposition of that tax or interest or those penalties;
      (2)   The period during which an appeal related to the imposition of that
tax or interest or those penalties is pending.
(Ord. 2015-212, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 891.13 AUDITS.
   (a)   At or before the commencement of an audit, the Tax Administrator shall
provide to the taxpayer a written description of the roles of the Tax
Administrator and of the taxpayer during the audit and a statement of the
taxpayer's rights, including any right to obtain a refund of an overpayment of
a tax. At or before the commencement of an audit, the Tax Administrator shall
inform the taxpayer when the audit is considered to have commenced.
   (b)   Except in cases involving suspected criminal activity, the Tax
Administrator shall conduct an audit of a taxpayer during regular business
hours and after providing reasonable notice to the taxpayer. A taxpayer who is
unable to comply with a proposed time for an audit on the grounds that the
proposed time would cause inconvenience or hardship must offer reasonable
alternative dates for the audit.
   (c)   At all stages of an audit by the Tax Administrator, a taxpayer is
entitled to be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant, bookkeeper,
or other tax practitioner. The Tax Administrator shall prescribe a form by
which a taxpayer may designate such a person to assist or represent the
taxpayer in the conduct of any proceedings resulting from actions by the Tax
Administrator. If a taxpayer has not submitted such a form, the Tax
Administrator may accept other evidence, as the Tax Administrator considers
appropriate, that a person is the authorized representative of a taxpayer.
      A taxpayer may refuse to answer any questions asked by the person
conducting an audit until the taxpayer has an opportunity to consult with the
taxpayer's attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner.
      This division does not authorize the practice of law by a person who is
not an attorney.
   (d)   A taxpayer may record, electronically or otherwise, the audit
examination.
   (e)   The failure of the Tax Administrator to comply with a provision of
this section shall neither excuse a taxpayer from payment of any taxes owed by
the taxpayer nor cure any procedural defect in a taxpayer's case.
   (f)   If the Tax Administrator fails to substantially comply with the
provisions of this section, the Tax Administrator, upon application by the
taxpayer, shall excuse the taxpayer from penalties and interest.
(Ord. 2015-212, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 891.14 SERVICE OF ASSESSMENT.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   LAST KNOWN ADDRESS. The address the Tax Administrator has at the
time a document is originally sent by certified mail, or any address the Tax
Administrator can ascertain using reasonable means such as the use of a change
of address service offered by the postal service or an authorized delivery
service under R.C. § 5703.056.
      (2)   UNDELIVERABLE ADDRESS. An address to which the postal service or an
authorized delivery service under R.C. § 5703.056 is not able to deliver an
assessment of the Tax Administrator, except when the reason for non-delivery is
because the addressee fails to acknowledge or accept the assessment.
   (b)   Subject to division (c) of this section, a copy of each assessment
shall be served upon the person affected thereby either by personal service, by
certified mail, or by a delivery service authorized under R.C. § 5703.056. With
the permission of the person affected by an assessment, the Tax Administrator
may deliver the assessment through alternative means as provided in this
section, including, but not limited to, delivery by secure electronic mail.
   (c)   (1)   A.   If certified mail is returned because of an undeliverable
address, a Tax Administrator shall utilize reasonable means to ascertain a new
last known address, including the use of a change of address service offered by
the postal service or an authorized delivery service under R.C. § 5703.056. If
the Tax Administrator is unable to ascertain a new last known address, the
assessment shall be sent by ordinary mail and considered served. If the
ordinary mail is subsequently returned because of an undeliverable address, the
assessment remains appealable within 60 days after the assessment's postmark.
         B.   Once the Tax Administrator or other city official, or the
designee of either, serves an assessment on the person to whom the assessment
is directed, the person may protest the ruling of that assessment by filing an
appeal with the local board of tax review within 60 days after the receipt of
service. The delivery of an assessment of the Tax Administrator under division
(c)(1)A. of this section is prima facie evidence that delivery is complete and
that the assessment is served.
      (2)   If mailing of an assessment by a Tax Administrator by certified
mail is returned for some cause other than an undeliverable address, the Tax
Administrator shall resend the assessment by ordinary mail. The assessment
shall show the date the Tax Administrator sends the assessment and include the
following statement:
   "This assessment is deemed to be served on the addressee under applicable
law ten days from the date this assessment was mailed by the Tax Administrator
as shown on the assessment, and all periods within which an appeal may be filed
apply from and after that date."
         Unless the mailing is returned because of an undeliverable address,
the mailing of that information is prima facie evidence that delivery of the
assessment was completed ten days after the Tax Administrator sent the
assessment by ordinary mail and that the assessment was served.
         If the ordinary mail is subsequently returned because of an
undeliverable address, the Tax Administrator shall proceed under division (c)
(1)A. of this section. A person may challenge the presumption of delivery and
service under this division in accordance with division (d) of this section.
   (d)   (1)   A person disputing the presumption of delivery and service under
division (c) of this section bears the burden of proving by a preponderance of
the evidence that the address to which the assessment was sent by certified
mail was not an address with which the person was associated at the time the
Tax Administrator originally mailed the assessment. For the purposes of this
section, a person is associated with an address at the time the Tax
Administrator originally mailed the assessment if, at that time, the person was
residing, receiving legal documents, or conducting business at the address; or
if, before that time, the person had conducted business at the address and,
when the assessment was mailed, the person's agent or the person's affiliate
was conducting business at the address. For the purposes of this section, a
person's affiliate is any other person that, at the time the assessment was
mailed, owned or controlled at least 20%, as determined by voting rights, of
the addressee's business.
      (2)   If a person elects to appeal an assessment on the basis described
in division (d)(1) of this section, and if that assessment is subject to
collection and is not otherwise appealable, the person must do so within 60
days after the initial contact by the Tax Administrator or other city official,
or the designee of either, with the person. Nothing in this division prevents
the Tax Administrator or other official from entering into a compromise with
the person if the person does not actually file such an appeal with the Local
Board of Tax Review.
   (e)   Nothing in this section prohibits the Tax Administrator or the Tax
Administrator's designee from delivering an assessment by a Tax Administrator
by personal service.
   (f)   Collection actions taken upon any assessment being appealed under
division (c)(1)B. of this section, including those on which a claim has been
delivered for collection, shall be stayed upon the pendency of an appeal under
this section.
   (g)   Additional regulations as detailed in the Rules and Regulations shall
apply.
(Ord. 2015-212, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 891.15 ADMINISTRATION OF CLAIMS.
   (a)   As used in this section, CLAIM means a claim for an amount payable to
the city that arises pursuant to the city's income tax imposed in accordance
with this chapter.
   (b)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits a Tax Administrator from doing
either of the following if such action is in the best interests of the
municipal corporation:
      (1)   Compromise a claim;
      (2)   Extend for a reasonable period the time for payment of a claim by
agreeing to accept monthly or other periodic payments.
   (c)   The Tax Administrator's rejection of a compromise or payment-over-time
agreement proposed by a person with respect to a claim shall not be appealable.
   (d)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim
shall be binding upon and shall be to the benefit of only the parties to the
compromise or agreement, and shall not eliminate or otherwise affect the
liability of any other person.
   (e)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim
shall be void if the taxpayer defaults under the compromise or agreement or if
the compromise or agreement was obtained by fraud or by misrepresentation of a
material fact. Any amount that was due before the compromise or agreement and
that is unpaid shall remain due, and any penalties or interest that would have
accrued in the absence of the compromise or agreement shall continue to accrue
and be due.
(Ord. 2015-212, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 891.16 TAX INFORMATION CONFIDENTIAL.
   (a)   Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations,
hearings, or verifications required or authorized by this chapter is
confidential, and no person shall access or disclose such information except in
accordance with a proper judicial order or in connection with the performance
of that person's official duties or the official business of the city as
authorized by this chapter. The Tax Administrator or a designee thereof may
furnish copies of returns filed or otherwise received under this chapter and
other related tax information to the Internal Revenue Service, the Tax
Commissioner, and tax administrators of other municipal corporations.
   (b)   This section does not prohibit the city from publishing or disclosing
statistics in a form that does not disclose information with respect to
particular taxpayers.
(Ord. 2015-212, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 891.17 FRAUD.
   No person shall knowingly make, present, aid, or assist in the preparation
or presentation of a false or fraudulent report, return, schedule, statement,
claim, or document authorized or required by the city ordinance or state law to
be filed with the Tax Administrator, or knowingly procure, counsel, or advise
the preparation or presentation of such report, return, schedule, statement,
claim, or document, or knowingly change, alter, or amend, or knowingly procure,
counsel or advise such change, alteration, or amendment of the records upon
which such report, return, schedule, statement, claim, or document is based
with intent to defraud the city or the Tax Administrator.
(Ord. 2015-212, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 891.18 INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   APPLICABLE LAW. This chapter, the resolutions, ordinances, codes,
directives, instructions, and rules adopted by the city provided they impose or
directly or indirectly address the levy, payment, remittance, or filing
requirements of the city.
      (2)   FEDERAL SHORT-TERM RATE. The rate of the average market yield on
outstanding marketable obligations of the United States with remaining periods
to maturity of three years or less, as determined under section 1274 of the
Internal Revenue Code, for July of the current year.
      (3)   INCOME TAX, ESTIMATED INCOME TAX, and WITHHOLDING TAX. Any income
tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax imposed by the city pursuant to
applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016.
      (4)   INTEREST RATE AS DESCRIBED IN DIVISION (A) OF THIS SECTION. The
federal short-term rate, rounded to the nearest whole number percent, plus 5%.
The rate shall apply for the calendar year next following the July of the year
in which the federal short-term rate is determined in accordance with division
(a)(2) of this section.
      (5)   RETURN. Includes any tax return, report, reconciliation, schedule,
and other document required to be filed with the Tax Administrator or the city
by a taxpayer, employer, any agent of the employer, or any other payer pursuant
to applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016.
      (6)   UNPAID ESTIMATED INCOME TAX. Estimated income tax due but not paid
by the date the tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (7)   UNPAID INCOME TAX. Income tax due but not paid by the date the
income tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (8)   UNPAID WITHHOLDING TAX. Withholding tax due but not paid by the
date the withholding tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (9)   WITHHOLDING TAX. Includes amounts an employer, any agent of an
employer, or any other payer did not withhold in whole or in part from an
employee's qualifying wages, but that, under applicable law, the employer,
agent, or other payer is required to withhold from an employee's qualifying
wages.
   (b)   (1)   This section applies to the following:
         A.   Any return required to be filed under applicable law for taxable
years beginning on or after January 1, 2016;
         B.   Income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax required to
be paid or remitted to the city on or after January 1, 2016.
      (2)   This section does not apply to returns required to be filed or
payments required to be made before January 1, 2016, regardless of the filing
or payment date. Returns required to be filed or payments required to be made
before January 1, 2016, but filed or paid after that date shall be subject to
the ordinances or rules and regulations, as adopted before January 1, 2016, of
the city to which the return is to be filed or the payment is to be made.
   (c)   Should any taxpayer, employer, agent of the employer, or other payer
for any reason fails, in whole or in part, to make timely and full payment or
remittance of income tax, estimated income tax, or withholding tax or to file
timely with the city any return required to be filed, the following penalties
and interest shall apply:
      (1)   Interest shall be imposed at the rate described in division (a) of
this section, per annum, on all unpaid income tax, unpaid estimated income tax,
and unpaid withholding tax.
      (2)   A.   With respect to unpaid income tax and unpaid estimated income
tax, the city may impose a penalty equal to 15% of the amount not timely paid.
         B.   With respect to any unpaid withholding tax, the city may impose a
penalty not to exceed 50% of the amount not timely paid.
      (3)   A.   For tax years ending on or before December 31, 2022, with
respect to returns other than estimated income tax returns, the city may impose
a penalty of $25 for each failure to timely file each return, regardless of the
liability shown thereon for each month, or any fraction thereof, during which
the return remains unfiled regardless of the liability shown thereon. The
penalty shall not exceed $150 for each failure.
         B.   For tax years ending on or after January 1, 2023, with respect to
returns other than estimated income tax returns, the city may impose a penalty
not exceeding $25 for each failure to timely file each return, regardless of
the liability shown thereon, except that the city shall abate or refund the
penalty assessed on a taxpayer's first failure to timely file a return after
the taxpayer files that return.
   (d)   Nothing in this section requires the city to refund or credit any
penalty, amount of interest, charges, or additional fees that the city has
properly imposed or collected before January 1, 2016.
   (e)   Nothing in this section limits the authority of the city to abate or
partially abate penalties or interest imposed under this section when the Tax
Administrator determines, in the Tax Administrator's sole discretion, that such
abatement is appropriate.
   (f)   By the 31st day of October of each year the city shall publish the
rate described in division (a) of this section applicable to the next
succeeding calendar year.
   (g)   The city may impose on the taxpayer, employer, any agent of the
employer, or any other payer the city's post-judgment collection costs and
fees, including attorney's fees.
(Ord. 2015-212, passed 11-2-2015; Ord. 2018-03, passed 1-16-2018; Ord. 2023-
275, passed 12-18-2023)
§ 891.19 AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; VERIFICATION OF INFORMATION.
Authority
   (a)   Nothing in this chapter shall limit the authority of the Tax
Administrator to perform any of the following duties or functions, unless the
performance of such duties or functions is expressly limited by a provision of
the Ohio Revised Code:
      (1)   A.   Exercise all powers whatsoever of an query nature as provided
by law, including, the right to inspect books, accounts, records, memorandums,
and federal and state income tax returns, to examine persons under oath, to
issue orders or subpoenas for the production of books, accounts, papers,
records, documents, and testimony, to take depositions, to apply to a court for
attachment proceedings as for contempt, to approve vouchers for the fees of
officers and witnesses, and to administer oaths.
         B.   The powers referred to in this division shall be exercised by the
Tax Administrator only in connection with the performance of the duties
respectively assigned to the Tax Administrator under the city's income tax
ordinance;
      (2)   Appoint agents and prescribe their powers and duties;
      (3)   Confer and meet with officers of other municipal corporations and
states and officers of the United States on any matters pertaining to their
respective official duties as provided by law;
      (4)   Exercise the authority provided by law, including orders from
bankruptcy courts, relative to remitting or refunding taxes, including
penalties and interest thereon, for any reason overpaid. In addition, the Tax
Administrator may investigate any claim of overpayment and, if the Tax
Administrator finds that there has been an overpayment, make a written
statement of the Tax Administrator's findings, and approve and issue a refund
payable to the taxpayer, the taxpayer's assigns, or legal representative as
provided in this chapter;
      (5)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to consenting to
the compromise and settlement of tax claims;
      (6)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to the use of
alternative apportionment methods by taxpayers in accordance with §
891.03;
      (7)   A.   Make all tax findings, determinations, computations, and
orders the Tax Administrator is by law authorized and required to make and,
pursuant to time limitations provided by law, on the Tax Administrator's own
motion, review, re-determine, or correct any tax findings, determinations,
computations, or orders the Tax Administrator has made;
         B.   If an appeal has been filed with the Board of Tax Review or other
appropriate tribunal, the Tax Administrator shall not review, re-determine, or
correct any tax finding, determination, computation, or order which the Tax
Administrator has made, unless such appeal or application is withdrawn by the
appellant or applicant, is dismissed, or is otherwise final;
      (8)   Destroy any or all returns or other tax documents in the manner
authorized by law;
      (9)   Enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to simplify the withholding
obligations described in §
891.04.
Verification of Accuracy of Returns and Determination of Liability
   (b)   (1)   A Tax Administrator, or any authorized agent or employee thereof
may examine the books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax
returns of any employer, taxpayer, or other person that is subject to, or that
the Tax Administrator believes is subject to, the provisions of this chapter
for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made or, if no return
was filed, to ascertain the tax due under this chapter. Upon written request by
the Tax Administrator or a duly authorized agent or employee thereof, every
employer, taxpayer, or other person subject to this section is required to
furnish the opportunity for the Tax Administrator, authorized agent, or
employee to investigate and examine such books, papers, records, and federal
and state income tax returns at a reasonable time and place designated in the
request.
      (2)   The records and other documents of any taxpayer, employer, or other
person that is subject to, or that a Tax Administrator believes is subject to,
the provisions of this chapter shall be open to the Tax Administrator's
inspection during business hours and shall be preserved for a period of six
years following the end of the taxable year to which the records or documents
relate, unless the Tax Administrator, in writing, consents to their destruction
within that period, or by order requires that they be kept longer. The Tax
Administrator may require any person, by notice served on that person, to keep
such records as the Tax Administrator determines necessary to show whether or
not that person is liable, and the extent of such liability, for the income tax
levied by the city or for the withholding of such tax.
      (3)   The Tax Administrator may examine under oath any person that the
Tax Administrator reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income that
was or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to
affect such income. The Tax Administrator may, for this purpose, compel any
such person to attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books,
papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns in such person's
possession or control. The person may be assisted or represented by an
attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner at any such hearing
or examination. This division does not authorize the practice of law by a
person who is not an attorney.
      (4)   No person issued written notice by the Tax Administrator compelling
attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books, papers,
records, or federal or state income tax returns under this section shall fail
to comply.
Identification Information
   (c)   (1)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from
requiring any person filing a tax document with the Tax Administrator to
provide identifying information, which may include the person's Social Security
number, federal employer identification number, or other identification number
requested by the Tax Administrator. A person required by the Tax Administrator
to provide identifying information that has experienced any change with respect
to that information shall notify the Tax Administrator of the change before, or
upon, filing the next tax document requiring the identifying information.
      (2)   A.   If the Tax Administrator makes a request for identifying
information and the Tax Administrator does not receive valid identifying
information within 30 days of making the request, nothing in this chapter
prohibits the Tax Administrator from imposing a penalty upon the person to whom
the request was directed pursuant to §
891.18, in addition to any applicable penalty described in §
891.99.
         B.   If a person required by the Tax Administrator to provide
identifying information does not notify the Tax Administrator of a change with
respect to that information as required under §
891.19(c) within 30 days after filing the next tax document requiring such
identifying information, nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax
Administrator from imposing a penalty pursuant to §
891.18.
         C.   The penalties provided for under divisions (c)(2)A. and B. of
this section may be billed and imposed in the same manner as the tax or fee
with respect to which the identifying information is sought and are in addition
to any applicable criminal penalties described in §
891.99 for a violation of §
891.17 and any other penalties that may be imposed by the Tax Administrator by
law.
(Ord. 2015-212, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 891.20 REQUEST FOR OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR.
   (a)   An OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR means an opinion issued under this
section with respect to prospective municipal income tax liability. It does not
include ordinary correspondence of the Tax Administrator.
   (b)   A taxpayer may submit a written request for an opinion of the Tax
Administrator in accordance with the Rules and Regulations.
   (c)   A taxpayer is not relieved of tax liability for any activity or
transaction related to a request for an opinion that contained any
misrepresentation or omission of one or more material facts.
   (d)   A Tax Administrator may refuse to offer an opinion on any request
received under this section. Such refusal is not subject to appeal.
   (e)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator binds the Tax Administrator only
with respect to the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and does not
bind the Tax Administrator of any other municipal corporation.
   (f)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator issued under this section is not
subject to appeal.
(Ord. 2015-212, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 891.21 BOARD OF TAX REVIEW.
   (a)   (1)   The Board of Tax Review shall consist of three members. Two
members shall be appointed by the legislative authority of the city, but such
appointees may not be employees, elected officials, or contractors with the
city at any time during their term or in the five years immediately preceding
the date of appointment. One member shall be appointed by the Mayor. This
member may be an employee of the city, but may not be the Director of Finance
or equivalent officer, or the Tax Administrator or other similar official or an
employee directly involved in municipal tax matters, or any direct subordinate
thereof.
      (2)   The term for members of the Board of Tax Review of the city shall
be two years. There is no limit on the number of terms that a member may serve
if the member is reappointed by the legislative authority. The board member
appointed by the Mayor shall serve at the discretion of the administrative
official.
      (3)   Members of the Board of Tax Review appointed by the legislative
authority may be removed by the legislative authority by majority vote for
malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance in office. To remove such a member,
the legislative authority must give the member a copy of the charges against
the member and afford the member an opportunity to be publicly heard in person
or by counsel in the member's own defense upon not less than ten days' notice.
The decision by the legislative authority on the charges is final and not
appealable.
      (4)   A member of the Board of Tax Review who, for any reason, ceases to
meet the qualifications for the position prescribed by this section shall
resign immediately by operation of law.
      (5)   A vacancy in an unexpired term shall be filled in the same manner
as the original appointment within 60 days of when the vacancy was created. Any
member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the
term for which the member's predecessor was appointed shall hold office for the
remainder of such term. No vacancy on the Board of Tax Review shall impair the
power and authority of the remaining members to exercise all the powers of the
Board of Tax Review.
      (6)   If a member is temporarily unable to serve on the Board of Tax
Review due to a conflict of interest, illness, absence, or similar reason, the
legislative authority or top administrative official that appointed the member
shall appoint another individual to temporarily serve on the Board of Tax
Review in the member's place. The appointment of such an individual shall be
subject to the same requirements and limitations as are applicable to the
appointment of the member temporarily unable to serve.
   (b)   Whenever a Tax Administrator issues an assessment, the Tax
Administrator shall notify the taxpayer in writing at the same time of the
taxpayer's right to appeal the assessment, the manner in which the taxpayer may
appeal the assessment, and the address to which the appeal should be directed.
   (c)   Any person who has been issued an assessment may appeal the assessment
to the Board of Tax Review by filing a request with the Board of Tax Review.
The request shall be in writing, shall specify the reason or reasons why the
assessment should be deemed incorrect or unlawful, and shall be filed within 60
days after the taxpayer receives the assessment.
   (d)   The Board of Tax Review shall schedule a hearing to be held within 60
days after receiving an appeal of an assessment under division (c) of this
section, unless the taxpayer requests additional time to prepare or waives a
hearing. If the taxpayer does not waive the hearing, the taxpayer may appear
before the Board of Tax Review and may be represented by an attorney at law,
certified public accountant, or other representative. The Board of Tax Review
may allow a hearing to be continued as jointly agreed to by the parties. In
such a case, the hearing must be completed within 120 days after the first day
of the hearing unless the parties agree otherwise.
   (e)   The Board of Tax Review may affirm, reverse, or modify the Tax
Administrator's assessment or any part of that assessment. The Board of Tax
Review shall issue a final determination on the appeal within 90 days after the
Board of Tax Review's final hearing on the appeal, and send a copy of its final
determination by ordinary mail to all of the parties to the appeal within 15
days after issuing the final determination. The taxpayer or the Tax
Administrator may appeal the Board of Tax Review's final determination as
provided in R.C. § 5717.011.
   (f)   The Board of Tax Review created pursuant to this section shall adopt
rules governing its procedures and shall keep a record of its transactions.
Such records are not public records available for inspection under R.C. §
149.43. Hearings requested by a taxpayer before a Board of Tax Review created
pursuant to this section are not meetings of a public body subject to R.C. §
121.22.
(Ord. 2015-212, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 891.22 AUTHORITY TO CREATE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits the legislative authority of the
city, or a Tax Administrator pursuant to authority granted to the Administrator
by resolution or ordinance, to adopt rules to administer an income tax imposed
by the city in accordance with this chapter. Such rules shall not conflict with
or be inconsistent with any provision of this chapter. Taxpayers are hereby
required to comply not only with the requirements of this chapter, but also to
comply with the Rules and Regulations.
   (b)   All rules adopted under this section shall be published and posted on
the internet.
(Ord. 2015-212, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 891.23 RENTAL AND LEASED PROPERTY.
   (a)   All property owners of real property located in the city who rent or
otherwise lease the same, or any part thereof, to any person for residential
dwelling purposes, including apartments, rooms and other rental accommodations,
during any calendar year, or part thereof, commencing with the effective date
of this section, shall file with the Tax Administrator on or before the January
31 first following such calendar year a written report disclosing the name,
address and also telephone number, if available, of each tenant known to have
occupied on December 31 during such calendar year such apartment, room or other
residential dwelling rental property.
   (b)   The Tax Administrator may order the appearance before him, or his duly
authorized agent, of any person whom he believes to have any knowledge of the
name, address and telephone number of any tenant of residential rental real
property in the city. The Tax Administrator, or his duly authorized agent, is
authorized to examine any person, under oath, concerning the name, address and
telephone number of any tenant of residential real property located in the
city. The Tax Administrator, or his duly authorized agent, may compel the
production of papers and records and the attendance of all personal before him,
whether as parties or witnesses, whenever he believes such person has knowledge
of the name, address and telephone number of any tenant of residential real
property in the city.
   (c)   Any property owner or person that violates one or more of the
following shall be subject to §
891.99.
      (1)   Fails, refuses or neglects to timely file a written report required
by division (a) of this section;
      (2)   Makes an incomplete or intentionally false written report required
by division (a) hereof;
      (3)   Fails to appear before the Tax Administrator or any duly authorized
agent and to produce and disclose any tenant information pursuant to any order
or subpoena of the Tax Administrator as authorized in this section; or
      (4)   Fails to comply with the provisions of this section or any order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator.
(Ord. 2015-212, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 891.24 SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   This chapter shall not apply to any person, firm or corporation, or to any
property as to whom or which it is beyond the power of Council to impose the
tax herein provided for. Any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter
or any tax against or exception granted any individual or any of the several
groups of persons, or forms of income specified herein if found to be
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or
invalidity shall affect only such clause, sentence, section or part of this
chapter and shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or other parts of this chapter. It is hereby
declared to be the intention of Council that this chapter would have been
adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, or part hereof,
not been included therein.
(Ord. 2015-212, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 891.25 COLLECTION OF TAX AFTER TERMINATION OF CHAPTER.
   (a)   This chapter shall continue effective insofar as the levy of taxes is
concerned until repealed, and insofar as the collection of taxes levied
hereunder and actions or proceedings for collecting any tax so levied or
enforcing any provisions of this chapter are concerned, it shall continue
effective until all of said taxes levied hereunder in the aforesaid periods are
fully paid and any and all suits and prosecutions for the collection of said
taxes or for the punishment of violations of this chapter shall have been fully
terminated, subject to the limitations contained in §
891.12 and §
891.99.
   (b)   Annual returns due for all or any part of the last effective year of
this chapter shall be due on the date provided in §§
891.04 and
891.05 as though the same were continuing.
(Ord. 2015-212, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 891.26 ADOPTION OF RITA RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The city hereby adopts the Regional Income Tax Agency (RITA) Rules &
Regulations, including amendments that may be made from time to time, for use
as the city's Income Tax Rules and Regulations. In the event of a conflict with
any provision(s) of the city's Income Tax Ordinance and the RITA Rules &
Regulations, the ordinance will supersede. Until and if the contractual
relationship between the city and RITA ceases, this section will supersede all
other provisions within Ordinance 2014-147 regarding promulgation of rules and
regulations by the Tax Administrator.
(Ord. 2015-212, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 891.27   ELECTION TO BE SUBJECT TO R.C. 718.80 TO 718.95.
   (a)   The City of Solon hereby adopts and incorporates herein by reference
R.C. §§ 718.80 to 718.95 for tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2018.
   (b)   A taxpayer, as defined in division (c) of this section, may elect to
be subject to R.C. §§ 718.80 to 718.95 in lieu of the provisions of this
chapter.
   (c)   TAXPAYER has the same meaning as in R.C. § 718.01, except that
TAXPAYER does not include natural persons or entities subject to the tax
imposed under R.C. Chapter 5745. TAXPAYER may include receivers, assignees, or
trustees in bankruptcy when such persons are required to assume the role of a
taxpayer.
(Ord. 2018-60, passed 3-19-2018)
§ 891.99 VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.
   (a)   Whoever §§
891.04,
891.16(a) or
891.17 by failing to remit the city income taxes deducted and withheld from an
employee, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a term of up to
six months, or both. If the individual that commits the violation is an
employee, or official, of the city, the individual is subject to discharge from
employment or dismissal from office.
   (b)   Any person who discloses information received from the Internal
Revenue Service in violation of §
891.16(a) shall be guilty of a felony of the fifth degree and shall be subject
to a fine of not more than $5,000 plus the costs of prosecution, or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years, or both. If the individual
that commits the violation is an employee, or official, of the city, the
individual is subject to discharge from employment or dismissal from office.
   (c)   Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of §
891.16(a) constitutes a separate offense.
   (d)   If not otherwise specified herein, no person shall:
      (1)   Fail, neglect or refuse to make any return or declaration required
by this chapter;
      (2)   File any incomplete or false return;
      (3)   Fail, neglect or refuse to pay the tax, penalties or interest
imposed by this chapter;
      (4)   Refuse to permit the Tax Administrator or any duly authorized agent
or employee to examine his books, records, papers and federal and state income
tax returns relating to the income or net profits of a taxpayer;
      (5)   Fail to appear before the Tax Administrator and to produce his
books, records, papers or federal and state income tax returns relating to the
income or net profits of a taxpayer upon order or subpoena of the Tax
Administrator;
      (6)   Refuse to disclose to the Tax Administrator any information with
respect to the income or net profits of a taxpayer;
      (7)   Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator authorized hereby;
      (8)   Give to an employer false information as to his true name, correct
Social Security number, and residence address, or fail to promptly notify an
employer of any change in residence address and date thereof;
      (9)   Attempt to do anything whatsoever to avoid the payment of the whole
or any part of the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this chapter.
   (e)   Any person who violates any of the provisions in division (d) of this
section shall be subject to the penalties provided for in division (a) of this
section.
(Ord. 2015-212, passed 11-2-2015)
CHAPTER 892: HOTEL TAX
Section
   
892.01   Definitions
   
892.02   Levy and rate
   
892.03   Collection of tax
   
892.04   Appeals
   
892.05   Returns to be confidential
   
892.06   Violations
   
892.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Defrauding hotels, see §
642.17
   Power to levy, see R.C. § 5739.02
§ 892.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   EXCISE TAX. The tax made by the city on transactions by which lodging
by a hotel is furnished to transient guests.
   (b)   HOTEL. Every establishment, including motels, where sleeping
accommodations are offered to guests, in which five or more rooms are used for
the accommodation of such guests, whether such rooms are in one or several
structures.
   (c)   PERSON. Includes individuals, firms, partnerships, corporations or any
combination of individuals of any form.
   (d)   TRANSIENT GUESTS. Persons occupying a room or rooms for sleeping
accommodations for less than 30 consecutive days.
(Ord. 1975-128, passed 10-6-1975)
§ 892.02 LEVY AND RATE.
   There is hereby levied and imposed upon every person who is a transient
guest in a hotel and pays a charge for such lodging, a tax of 3% on the amount
paid for the lodging in such hotel, irrespective of whether such lodging is
paid by cash or credit card. The tax shall apply to every hotel within the city
for which a charge is made, notwithstanding that the reservation of the lodging
is made outside the city.
(Ord. 1975-128, passed 10-6-1975)
§ 892.03 COLLECTION OF TAX.
   (a)   Every person receiving any payment upon which a tax is levied under
this chapter shall collect the amount of the tax imposed from the person making
the lodging payment. The tax required to be collected under this chapter shall
be deemed to be held in trust by the person required to collect the same until
paid to the Director of Finance as herein provided. Any person required to
collect the tax imposed under this chapter who fails to collect the same, or
having collected the same, fails to remit the same to the Director in the
manner prescribed by this chapter, whether such failure is the result of his or
her own act or the result of acts or conditions beyond his or her control,
shall nevertheless be personally liable to the city for the amount of such tax,
and shall, unless the remittance is made as herein required, be guilty of a
violation of this chapter. The tax imposed hereunder shall be collected at the
time the lodging charge is paid by the transient guest seeking lodging in a
hotel and shall be reported and remitted by the person receiving the tax to the
Director in monthly installments and remittances therefor on or before the
thirtieth day of the month next succeeding the end of the monthly period in
which the tax is collected or received. The person receiving any payment for
lodgings from a transient guest shall make out a return upon such forms and
setting forth such information as the Director may require, showing the amount
of the tax upon lodgings for which he or she is liable for the preceding
monthly period, and shall sign and transmit the same to the Director with a
remittance for such amount. The Director may, in his or her discretion, require
verified annual returns from any person receiving lodging payments setting
forth such additional information as he or she may deem necessary to determine
correctly the amount of tax collected and payable, and failure to comply with
any requirement of the Director as to report and remittance of the tax as
required shall be a violation of this chapter.
   (b)   The books, records and accounts of any person collecting the tax
herein levied shall, as to lodging and tax collections, be at all reasonable
times subject to examination and audit by the Director. If the tax imposed by
this chapter is not paid when due, there shall be added, as a part of the tax,
interest at the rate of 1% per month from the time when the tax became due
until paid.
(Ord. 1975-128, passed 10-6-1975)
§ 892.04 APPEALS.
   Appeals from any ruling of the Director of Finance hereunder shall be made
to Council. Council shall have authority to annul, modify or affirm any such
ruling appealed from, in conformity with the intent and purpose of this
chapter.
(Ord. 1975-128, passed 10-6-1975)
§ 892.05 RETURNS TO BE CONFIDENTIAL.
   All returns and information relating to the business of any person required
to collect the tax imposed by this chapter and coming into the possession of
the Director of Finance and/or his or her agents and employees shall be held
confidential. No disclosures thereof shall be made unless ordered by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 1975-128, passed 10-6-1975)
§ 892.06 VIOLATIONS.
   No person charged by this chapter with the duty of collecting or paying the
tax imposed by this chapter shall willfully fail or refuse to charge and
collect or to pay such tax, or to make return to the Director of Finance as
required by this chapter, or to permit the Director or his or her duly
authorized agents to examine his or her books and other records, in or upon any
premises where the same are kept, to the extent necessary to verify any return
made or to ascertain and assess the tax imposed by this chapter if no return
was made, or to maintain and keep books, records and accounts for three years
or such lesser or greater time as may be permitted or required by the Director.
(Ord. 1975-128, passed 10-6-1975)
§ 892.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter, for which no
penalty is otherwise provided, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree
and shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or
both, for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
   (b)   Whoever violates §
892.05 shall, in addition to the penalty provided in division (a) hereof, be
disqualified from acting in any official capacity whatsoever in connection with
the assessment or collection of taxes under this chapter.
CHAPTER 894: ADMISSIONS TAX
Section
   
894.01   Definitions
   
894.02   Amount of tax
   
894.03   Admissions exempt from tax
   
894.04   Collection of tax
   
894.05   Certificate of registration; fee
   
894.06   Certificate of registration for temporary or transitory amusement
   
894.07   Rules and regulations
   
894.08   Appeals
   
894.09   Reports confidential
   
894.10   Violations
   
894.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Bingo, see §§
630.06
   Noise in places of entertainment, see §
634.15
   Private property used for public entertainment, see
Ch. 848
   Safety of crowds at live entertainment performances, see §
636.18
§ 894.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   ADMISSION CHARGE. The charge made for the right or privilege to enter
into a place. However, if such charge includes rental of property or services,
it shall be deemed to be an admission charge if so designated, unless the
charge is for rental or services and persons who do not use such property or
services are admitted free. If a lesser charge is made to persons who do not
desire to use the property or services offered, the lesser charge shall
constitute the admission charge. The designation of the charge as a rental or
service charge shall not be construed to avoid the application of the tax if it
is in effect a charge for admission.
   (b)   DIRECTOR. The Director of Finance.
   (c)   PERSON. Any individual, receiver, assignee, firm, copartnership, joint
venture, corporation, company, joint-stock company, association, society or any
group of individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal,
nonprofit or otherwise.
   (d)   PLACE. Includes, but shall not be restricted to, theaters, dance
halls, amphitheaters, auditoriums, stadiums, athletic pavilions and fields,
baseball and athletic parks, circuses, side shows, swimming pools, outdoor
amusement parks and such attractions as merry-go-rounds, Ferris wheels,
dodge’ems, roller coasters and observation towers.
(Ord. 1947-54, passed 11-6-1947)
§ 894.02 AMOUNT OF TAX.
   There is hereby levied and imposed upon every person who pays an admission
charge to any place:
   (a)   A tax of 3% on the amounts paid for admission to any place, including
admission by season ticket or subscription. The tax shall apply to every
admission within the city for which a charge is made, notwithstanding that the
sale of the ticket or other evidence of right of admission thereto is made
outside of the city;
   (b)   A tax of 3% on the excess of the amounts paid for tickets or cards of
admission to theaters, operas and other places of amusement, sold at
newsstands, hotels and places other than the ticket office of such theaters,
operas or other places of amusement, over and above the amounts representing
the established price therefor at such ticket offices, such tax to be returned
and paid in the manner provided in §
894.04 by the person selling the ticket;
   (c)   A tax of 3% on the amount paid for admission to any public performance
for profit at any roof garden, cabaret or other similar entertainment in case
the charge for admission is in the form of a service charge, cover charge or
other similar charge; and
   (d)   A tax of 3% on the amount paid as annual membership dues by every club
or organization maintaining a golf course, and a tax of 3% on greens fees paid
to golf courses, either under club or private ownership.
(Ord. 1947-54, passed 11-6-1947)
§ 894.03 ADMISSIONS EXEMPT FROM TAX.
   (a)   No tax shall be levied under this chapter with respect to any
admission, all the proceeds of which inure:
      (1)   Exclusively to the benefit of religious, educational or charitable
institutions, societies or organizations, societies or organizations for the
prevention of cruelty to children or animals, or societies or organizations
conducted for the sole purpose of maintaining symphony orchestras and receiving
substantial support from voluntary contributions, or of improving any municipal
corporation, or of maintaining a cooperative or community center moving picture
theater or swimming pool, if no part of the net earnings thereof inures to the
benefit of any private stockholder or individual;
      (2)   Exclusively to the benefit of persons in the military or naval
forces of the United States, or of National Guard organizations, reserve
officer associations or posts or organizations of war veterans, or auxiliary
units or societies of any such posts or organizations, if such posts,
organizations, units or societies are organized in the state and if no part of
their net earnings inures to the benefit of any private stockholder or
individual;
      (3)   Exclusively to the benefit of persons who have served in the
military or naval forces of the United States and are in need;
      (4)   Exclusively to the benefit of members of the police or fire
departments of any municipal corporation, or the dependents or heirs of such
members; and
      (5)   Exclusively to the benefit of any fund maintained by a municipal
corporation or exclusively to the benefit of any fund of any municipal
corporation under the control of a recreation commission or legislative body.
   (b)   The exemption from tax provided by this section shall, however, not be
allowed in case of admissions to wrestling matches, prize fights or boxing,
sparring or other pugilistic matches or exhibitions, unless exclusively for the
benefit of those organizations set forth in division (a) hereof, nor in the
case of admissions to any athletic game or exhibition the proceeds of which
inure wholly or partly to the benefit of any high school, academy, preparatory
or other school, in cases wherein the admission price is $1.01 or more, or
wholly or partly to the benefit of any college or university.
   (c)   Immediately after the event for which an exemption from admission tax
has been allowed, the treasurer of the institution, society or organization for
whose benefit such event was held shall file an itemized statement with the
Director setting forth the amount of money actually received by such treasurer,
together with the expenses of promoting and conducting such event. Such
statement shall be used as a basis of subsequent requests for exemption from
admissions tax for the benefit of such institution, society or organization
and, if such statement shows a disproportionate expenditure for the promoting
and conducting of such event, in relation to the profits, if any, no such
exemption shall thereafter be allowed to such institution, society or
organization.
   (d)   The exemption from tax provided in this section shall not be allowed
to any institution, society or organization which does not control the sale of
admissions to the event for which the exemption is requested, nor shall any
exemption be allowed where talent, services or other items are compensated for
on a percentage basis if such percentage results in a payment in excess of the
flat rate ordinarily charged for the same talent, services or other items.
(Ord. 1947-54, passed 11-6-1947; Ord. 2012-109, passed 4-16-2012)
§ 894.04 COLLECTION OF TAX.
   (a)   Every person receiving any payment on which a tax is levied under this
chapter shall collect the amount of the tax imposed from the person making the
admission payment. The tax required to be collected under this chapter shall be
deemed to be held in trust by the person required to collect the same until
paid to the Director as herein provided.
   (b)   Any person required to collect the tax imposed under this chapter who
fails to collect the same or, having collected the same, fails to remit the
same to the Director in the manner prescribed by this chapter, whether such
failure be the result of his or her own act or the result of acts or conditions
beyond his or her control, shall nevertheless be personally liable to the city
for the amount of such tax, and shall, unless the remittance be made as herein
required, be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
   (c)   The tax imposed hereunder shall be collected at the time the admission
charge is paid by the person seeking admission to any place and shall be
reported and remitted by the person receiving the tax to the Director in
monthly installments and remittances therefor on or before the thirtieth day of
the month next succeeding the end of the monthly period in which the tax is
collected or received. The first return and remittance under this chapter shall
be made on or before November 30, 1947, and shall cover the period from and
including October 1 to and including October 31 or a four or five-week policy
month period as the case may be.
   (d)   Payment or remittance of the tax collected may be made by check,
unless payment or remittance is otherwise required by the Director, but payment
by check shall not relieve the person collecting the tax from liability for
payment and remittance of the tax to the Director unless the check is honored
and is in the full and correct amount.
   (e)   The person receiving any payment for admissions shall make out a
return upon such forms setting forth such information as the Director may
require, showing the amount of the tax upon admissions for which he or she is
liable for the preceding monthly period, and shall sign and transmit the same
to the Director with a remittance for such amount. The Director may, in his or
her discretion, require verified annual returns from any person receiving
admission payments setting forth such additional information as he or she may
deem necessary to determine correctly the amount of tax collected and payable.
   (f)   Whenever any theater, circus, show, exhibition, entertainment or
amusement makes an admission charge which is subject to the tax herein levied,
and the same is of a temporary or transitory nature, of which the Director
shall be the judge, the Director may require the report and remittance of the
admission tax immediately upon the collection of the same, at the conclusion of
the performance or exhibition, or at the conclusion of the series of
performances or exhibitions, or at such other times as the Director shall
determine. Failure to comply with any requirement of the Director as to report
and remittance of the tax as required shall be a violation of this chapter.
   (g)   The books, records and accounts of any person collecting a tax herein
levied shall, as to admission charges and tax collections, be at all reasonable
times subject to examination and audit by the Director. If the tax imposed by
this chapter is not paid when due there shall be added, as part of the tax,
interest at the rate of 1% per month from the time when the tax became due
until paid.
(Ord. 1947-54, passed 11-6-1947)
§ 894.05 CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION; FEE.
   Any person conducting or operating any place for entrance to which an
admission charge is made shall, on a form prescribed by the Director, make
application to and procure from the Director a certificate of registration, the
fee for which shall be $1, which certificate shall continue valid until
December 31 of the year in which it is issued. Such certificate of
registration, or duplicate original copies thereof to be issued by the Director
without additional charge, shall be posted in a conspicuous place in each
ticket or box office where tickets of admission are sold.
(Ord. 1947-54, passed 11-6-1947)
§ 894.06 CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION FOR TEMPORARY OR TRANSITORY AMUSEMENT.
   Whenever a certificate of registration is obtained for the purpose of
operating or conducting a temporary or transitory amusement, entertainment or
exhibition by persons who are not the owners, lessees or custodians of the
building, lots or place where the amusement is to be conducted, the tax imposed
by this chapter shall be reported and remitted as provided in §
894.04 by the owner, lessee or custodian, unless paid by the person conducting
the place. The applicant for a certificate of registration for such purpose
shall furnish with the application therefor the name and address of the owner,
lessee or custodian of the premises upon which the amusement is to be
conducted, and such owner, lessee or custodian shall be notified by the
Director of the issuance of such certificate and the joint liability for
collection and remittance of such tax.
(Ord. 1947-54, passed 11-6-1947)
§ 894.07 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (a)   The Director shall have power to adopt rules and regulations not
inconsistent with the terms of this chapter for carrying out and enforcing the
payment, collection and remittance of the tax herein levied. A copy of such
rules and regulations shall be published in a newspaper having general
circulation in the city at least once before they shall become effective, and
copies shall be printed and made available in the office of the Director.
Failure or refusal to comply with any such rules and regulations shall be
deemed a violation of this chapter.
   (b)   Until such time as rules and regulations are promulgated under this
section, the rules and regulations of the Department of Taxation, State of
Ohio, relating to admission taxes in effect on August 31, 1947, except as the
same may conflict with the provisions of this chapter, shall be deemed to be
the rules and regulations hereunder.
(Ord. 1947-54, passed 11-6-1947)
§ 894.08 APPEALS.
   Appeals from any ruling of the Director hereunder shall be made to Council,
and Council shall have authority to annul, modify or affirm any such ruling
appealed from, in conformity with the intent and purpose of this chapter.
(Ord. 1947-54, passed 11-6-1947)
§ 894.09 REPORTS CONFIDENTIAL.
   All returns and information relating to the business of any person required
to collect the tax imposed by this chapter and coming into the possession of
the Director, his or her agents and employees, shall be held confidential. No
disclosures thereof shall be made unless ordered by a court of competent
jurisdiction, except, however, that the Director may furnish the Bureau of
Internal Revenue, Treasury Department of the United States, with copies of
returns filed.
(Ord. 1947-54, passed 11-6-1947)
§ 894.10 VIOLATIONS.
   No person charged with the duty of collecting or paying the taxes imposed by
this chapter shall willfully fail or refuse to charge and collect or to pay
such taxes, or to make return to the Director as required by this chapter, or
to permit the Director or his or her duly authorized agent to examine his or
her books and other records, in or upon any premises where the same are kept,
to the extent necessary to verify any return made or to ascertain and assess
the tax imposed by this chapter if no return was made, or to maintain and keep
books, records and accounts for three years or such lesser or greater time as
may be permitted or required by the Director.
(Ord. 1947-54, passed 11-6-1947)
§ 894.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter, for which no
penalty is otherwise provided, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree
and shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or
both, for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
   (b)   Whoever violates §
894.09 shall, in addition to the penalty provided in division (a) hereof, be
disqualified from acting in any official capacity whatsoever in connection with
the assessment or collection of taxes under this chapter.
PART TEN - STREETS, UTILITIES AND PUBLIC SERVICES CODE
         TITLE TWO - Street and Sidewalk Areas
            Chap.
1020.   Excavations
            Chap.
1022.   Parking Strips in Sidewalk or Tree Lawn Areas
            Chap.
1024.   Curb Cuts
            Chap.
1026.   Sidewalks, Driveway Aprons and Tree Lawns
         TITLE FOUR - Utilities
            Chap.
1040.   Utilities Generally
            Chap.
1042.   Sewers Generally
            Chap.
1044.   Industrial Wastes
            Chap.
1046.   Sewer Charges
            Chap.
1048.   Water
            Chap.
1050.   Electricity
            Chap.
1052.   Gas
         TITLE SIX - Other Public Services
            Chap.
1060.   Rubbish and Recycling Collection
            Chap.
1064.   Cemeteries
            Chap.
1068.   Swimming Pool
            Chap.
1070.   City Hall, Historical Society and City-Owned Property
            Chap.
1072.   Snow Removal Services
            Chap.
1074.   Emergency Alarms
TITLE TWO - STREET AND SIDEWALK AREAS
            Chap.
1020.   Excavations
            Chap.
1022.   Parking Strips in Sidewalk or Tree Lawn Areas
            Chap.
1024.   Curb Cuts
            Chap.
1026.   Sidewalks, Driveway Aprons and Tree Lawns
CHAPTER 1020: EXCAVATIONS
Section
   
1020.01   Deposit required
   
1020.02   Insurance
   
1020.03   Deposit return; fee
   
1020.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Curb cuts, see
Ch. 1024; §
1450.03
   Excavation liability, see R.C. §§ 723.49 et seq.
   Excavations for sewers, see §§
1042.16
   Openings by city, see R.C. § 723.02
   Sewer installers, see
Ch. 860
§ 1020.01 DEPOSIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   Before opening or excavating in any public street, road, right-of-way
or easement, a permit shall first be obtained from the city, by the person
desiring to perform such work, including when such work is to be done by a
public or private utility. At the time of securing such a permit, the applicant
shall deposit with the city a sum calculated in accordance with the provisions
of §
1424.11.
   (b)   Applicants for, and persons doing work under, permits authorized by
this section, shall remove all excavated earth and debris from the area and
shall properly dispose of it at their expense. All excavations shall be
backfilled with material specified by the City Engineer. Backfill materials
shall be compacted to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.
   (c)   Where a granular roadway berm has been disturbed, it shall be replaced
with six inches of screenings placed to a width at least equal to the existing
berm.
   (d)   Resurfacing, landscaping, repair and/or replacement of all damaged
facilities or disturbed areas shall be done in conformance with specifications
established by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 1979-33, passed 5-7-1979; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1020.02 INSURANCE.
   Each registrant shall furnish the city with a certificate of insurance which
shall state thereon the following:
   (a)   That the insurance covers work performed by the insured in the city;
   (b)   The limits of liability for comprehensive general liability for bodily
injury shall be a minimum of $250,000 for each person and $500,000 for each
accident;
   (c)   The limits of general liability insurance for comprehensive general
liability for property damage shall be a minimum of $100,000 for each accident
and $100,000 in the aggregate, $1,000,000 each occurrence and $2,000,000
general aggregate;
   (d)   Such insurance shall provide that in the event of its cancellation, at
least ten days’ written notice of cancellation will be given to the city; and
   (e)   The insurance policy shall include an agreement to hold the city
harmless from any claims, damages or injuries resulting from the work performed
by the insured and shall list the city as an additional insured.
§ 1020.03 DEPOSIT RETURN; FEE.
   (a)   Upon certification by the City Engineer or his/her duly authorized
representative that all work and restoration has been completed and damage to
property properly repaired or remedied, the deposit shall be returned to the
permit holder with inspection fees withheld as noted in §
1424.11.
   (b)   If the permit holder fails to fully comply with the conditions of §
1020.01 within a period of 45 days from commencement of work, dependent upon
the season and/or weather conditions, then the City Engineer may make
arrangements to have the unfinished portions completed and deduct the cost
thereof from the deposit.
(Ord. 1979-33, passed 5-7-1979; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1020.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not more than $500 or
imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both, for each offense. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
CHAPTER 1022: PARKING STRIPS IN SIDEWALK OR TREE LAWN AREAS
Section
   
1022.01   Permit required; owner may construct walk
   
1022.02   Owner to maintain area
   
1022.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Driving or parking on tree lawns, see §
432.22
   Maintenance of tree lawns, see §
660.20
   Off-street parking and loading, see Zoning Code
   Parking generally, see
Ch. 452
   Sidewalks generally, see
Ch. 1026
   Tree lawns generally, see
Ch. 1026
§ 1022.01 PERMIT REQUIRED; OWNER MAY CONSTRUCT WALK.
   No person shall construct a parking area, or otherwise pave or improve the
area normally reserved for sidewalks or tree lawns, without first obtaining a
permit from the City Engineer. If it is expected that sidewalks will be
constructed in the area under consideration within a reasonable time, the owner
will be required to construct a concrete sidewalk in accordance with the
specifications prescribed, and on file in the office of the City Engineer, at
his or her own expense or delay the proposed improvement until such time as the
city goes forward with the construction of sidewalks and the levying of
assessments therefor.
(Ord. 1960-141, passed 11-7-1960; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005; Ord. 2012-
118, passed 5-7-2012)
§ 1022.02 OWNER TO MAINTAIN AREA.
   In the event that a person constructs a parking area or otherwise paves or
improves the area normally reserved for sidewalks or tree lawns within the
street limits, then such person shall be thereafter responsible for the
maintenance of the area so improved and shall keep it in a state of good
repair.
(Ord. 1960-141, passed 11-7-1960)
§ 1022.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
CHAPTER 1024: CURB CUTS
Section
   
1024.01   Permit required
   
1024.02   Cut specifications
   
1024.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Driveway aprons, see
Ch. 1026
   Driving or parking on curbs, see §
432.22
   Excavations, see
Ch. 1020
   Notice to construct or repair curbs, see R.C. § 729.03
§ 1024.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No curbing on any of the public streets or highways within the city shall be
cut, chipped, broken or removed by any person without a permit issued by the
City Engineer. Permit fees shall be in accordance with the provisions of §
1424.11. If being done as part of a driveway replacement, the city shall cut
the curb or cause the curb to be cut at its expense.
(Ord. 1967-49, passed 4-3-1967; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1024.02 CUT SPECIFICATIONS.
   All curb cutting shall be done in a careful and workmanlike manner so that
no crack shall be made in the curbing below the paved surface of the street and
so that the remaining portion of any curbing shall remain above the level of
the pavement immediately adjacent thereto, and at such a distance above such
level as shall be designated by the City Engineer, so as to prevent the
collection of water, ice or snow in or about the curb and pavement.
(Ord. 1967-49, passed 4-3-1967)
§ 1024.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
CHAPTER 1026: SIDEWALKS, DRIVEWAY APRONS AND TREE LAWNS
Section
   
1026.01   Inspection and standards by City Engineer
   
1026.02   Repair by city; extent of city participation
   
1026.03   Statement of repair; notice to owner
   
1026.04   Conditions of deteriorated or defective sidewalks, driveway aprons or
tree lawn areas
   
1026.05   Construction standards
   
1026.06   Repair by owner or contractor; permit required
   
1026.07   Repair by city; assessment of cost
   
1026.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Concrete sidewalks, see §
1428.11
   Driveways generally, see
Ch. 1450
   Maintenance of sidewalks, see §
660.05
   Obstruction of sidewalks; damage or injury, see §
660.10
   Parking strips in sidewalk areas, see
Ch. 1022
§ 1026.01 INSPECTION AND STANDARDS BY CITY ENGINEER.
   The City Engineer or their duly authorized representative may, from time to
time, inspect the sidewalks, driveway aprons and tree lawns within the city to
determine whether it is necessary to construct, grade, repair or replace such
sidewalks, driveway aprons or tree lawns. The City Engineer shall prescribe, in
conformity with §
1026.04, standards and specifications for new construction, as well as for
reconstruction, grading, repairing or replacing such sidewalks, driveway aprons
and tree lawn areas.
(Ord. 1990-27, passed 9-4-1990; Ord. 2012-118, passed 5-7-2012)
§ 1026.02 REPAIR BY CITY; EXTENT OF CITY PARTICIPATION.
   (a)   The city will participate in sidewalk repairs throughout the city
based on sidewalk complaints received by the city or as determined by the City
Engineer, up to an amount of funds budgeted for that purpose in the calendar
year in which the repair is being undertaken. The level of funds to be
allocated towards sidewalk repairs shall be an amount as determined by City
Council on an annual basis. The city will participate in sidewalk repairs that:
      (1)   Meet the conditions of deteriorated or defective sidewalks in
conformance with §
1026.04;
      (2)   Are not part of the property owner’s driveway; and
      (3)   Are not damaged as a result of an act on the part of the property
owner.
   (b)   The city shall also pay the cost of replacing handicap ramps at
roadway intersections in accordance with standards and specifications
prescribed and on file in the office of the City Engineer. If funds are not
budgeted for sidewalk repairs in any given year, this section of the Codified
Ordinances of the city shall be null and void as if it never existed and all
other sections of
Chapter 1026 shall apply.
(Ord. 2012-118, passed 5-7-2012)
§ 1026.03 STATEMENT OF REPAIR; NOTICE TO OWNER.
   When the City Engineer or his or her duly authorized representative, upon
inspection, determines that it is necessary to construct, grade, repair or
replace any sidewalk, driveway apron or tree lawn area within the city in
accordance with standards and specifications prescribed and on file in the
office of the City Engineer, he or she shall prepare a statement of repair
showing the location of the sidewalk, driveway apron or tree lawn, the nature
of the construction, grading, repairs or replacement necessary, the materials
to be used and the estimated cost thereof, and shall serve such statement and
notice by certified United States mail to the owner of the property. If the
certified mail is returned unclaimed or not accepted, delivery of such
statement and notice shall be served via regular United States mail to the
owner of the property. The notice may be served by publishing once in a
newspaper of general circulation within the city if it cannot be served in a
manner provided above. The notice shall fix a time within which construction,
grading, repairs or replacement must be completed.
(Ord. 1990-27, passed 9-4-1990; Ord. 2012-118, passed 5-7-2012)
§ 1026.04 CONDITIONS OF DETERIORATED OR DEFECTIVE SIDEWALKS, DRIVEWAY APRONS OR
TREE LAWN AREAS.
   In determining whether it is necessary to construct, grade, repair or
replace any sidewalk, driveway apron or tree lawn area within the city, the
City Engineer shall consider, among other factors, improperly installed or
maintained public sidewalks, walks, driveways and driveway aprons which are in
defective condition in any of the following listed particulars:
   (a)   Any block having multiple cracks or any single crack larger than one-
fourth of an inch wide;
   (b)   Adjoining sections of block, or a portion thereof, the edges of which
differ vertically by three-fourths of an inch or more;
   (c)   Blocks having a transverse slope in excess of three-fourths of an inch
per horizontal foot toward the street;
   (d)   Blocks, having a reverse slope (toward the property), that impound
water to a depth of one-half inch or more;
   (e)   Blocks having depressions that impound water to a depth of one-half
inch or more; and/or
   (f)   Blocks having disintegrated or deteriorated areas.
(Ord. 1990-27, passed 9-4-1990)
§ 1026.05 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   Except as otherwise directed, concrete walks and driveway aprons shall be
constructed in accordance with standards and specifications prescribed and on
file in the office of the City Engineer.
(Ord. 1990-27, passed 9-4-1990)
§ 1026.06 REPAIR BY OWNER OR CONTRACTOR; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   If the construction, grading, repairs or replacement of sidewalks, driveways
and tree lawn is performed by the owner or his or her agent, the owner or his
or her agent shall first obtain a permit and pay any fees in accordance with
the provisions of §
1424.11. The work shall be performed under the supervision and to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer.
(Ord. 1990-27, passed 9-4-1990; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005; Ord. 2012-118,
passed 5-7-2012)
§ 1026.07 REPAIR BY CITY; ASSESSMENT OF COST.
   (a)   Should the owner, within the time stated in the notice, fail to
construct, grade, repair or replace the sidewalk, driveway apron or tree lawn
in accordance with the statement of repair, the City Engineer shall cause the
same to be done by the city or its agent and shall bill the cost to the
property owner in compliance with the requirements of the Ohio Revised Code. If
the owner fails to pay the cost within 30 days of such billing, the City
Engineer shall report the same to Council, which may thereupon assess the cost,
together with the expense of assessing and collecting the same, upon the
property and cause the assessment to be certified to the County Fiscal Officer
for collection.
(Ord. 1990-27, passed 9-4-1990; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005; Ord. 2012-118,
passed 5-7-2012)
   (b)   The remedy provided for herein shall be in addition to the penalty
provided in §
1026.99.
§ 1026.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $150 for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day, excluding permissible weather days,
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 2012-118, passed 5-7-2012)
TITLE FOUR - UTILITIES
            Chap.
1040.    Utilities Generally
            Chap.
1042.    Sewers Generally
            Chap.
1044.    Industrial Wastes
            Chap.
1046.    Sewer Charges
            Chap.
1048.    Water
            Chap.
1050.    Electricity
            Chap.
1052.    Gas
CHAPTER 1040: UTILITIES GENERALLY
Section
   
1040.01   Engineer’s permission required
   
1040.02   Application; inspection
   
1040.03   Permit issuance refusal
   
1040.04   Performance of work
   
1040.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Construction in subdivisions, see §§
1250.17
   Demolition and removal of structures, see §§
1454.02
   Easements for, see §
1248.04
   In flood hazard areas, see §
1462.04(b)
   Prosecutions for theft of utilities, see §
642.26
§ 1040.01 ENGINEER’S PERMISSION REQUIRED.
   The City Engineer is authorized and required to grant a permit to any public
utility to install, repair, maintain, remove or replace any pole, wire, cable,
anchor, pipe or conduit, or to remove or trim any tree, in any public highway
or ground within the city, on the terms hereinafter set forth. Any fees or
deposits associated with such permit shall be in accordance with the provisions
of §
1424.11.
(Ord. 1946-1, passed 1-7-1946)
§ 1040.02 APPLICATION; INSPECTION.
   Application for any such authority shall be in writing. The City Engineer
may require such written or oral description of the proposed work as he or she
may find necessary for the purposes of this chapter, and shall inspect the site
of the proposed work.
(Ord. 1974-8, passed 1-21-1974)
§ 1040.03 PERMIT ISSUANCE REFUSAL.
   If the City Engineer finds that the proposed work is reasonably necessary in
the conduct of the utility’s business, and can be done without damage, danger
or unreasonable inconvenience to the public, he or she shall issue a written
permit therefor; otherwise, he or she shall refuse such permission.
(Ord. 1946-1, passed 1-7-1946)
§ 1040.04 PERFORMANCE OF WORK.
   Acceptance of such permit, whether such acceptance is written or otherwise,
by the utility applying therefor, or performing any work covered by such
permit, shall constitute an agreement by the public utility to perform such
work promptly, safely and in a workmanlike manner, to provide all necessary or
appropriate guards and devices for the protection of the public during the
progress of the work, to restore the site of the work to its condition prior to
the commencement thereof, except for such changes as are authorized by the
permit, and to save the city harmless from all claims, liabilities or damages
growing out of the issuance of the permit or the performance of work
thereunder.
(Ord. 1946-1, passed 1-7-1946)
§ 1040.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
CHAPTER 1042: SEWERS GENERALLY
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted a Stormwater Management Plan by Ordinance 2003-187, passed
July 7, 2003. Copies of the ordinance and of the Plan may be obtained, at cost,
in the office of the Clerk of Council.
Section
   
1042.01   Definitions
   
1042.02   Connections and the like; permit required
   
1042.025   Fee for connection to the Aurora/Liberty sanitary sewer project
   
1042.03   Permit issuance; deposit
   
1042.04   Responsibility for installation of building sewers
   
1042.05   Owner to bear cost of installation
   
1042.06   Inspections
   
1042.07   Separate sewer for each building; exceptions; tie-in required
   
1042.08   Existing interior and exterior building sewers
   
1042.09   Pipe specifications
   
1042.10   Sewer grade and direction
   
1042.11   Joints gastight and watertight
   
1042.12   Minimum fall
   
1042.13   Pipe interior to be clean
   
1042.14   Location and depth
   
1042.15   Sewers crossing unstable soil or close to trees
   
1042.16   Excavations
   
1042.17   Separate trenches
   
1042.18   Backfilling
   
1042.19   Connection with wye branch
   
1042.20   Permit to open street; warning devices
   
1042.21   Repair or restoration of drains and lines
   
1042.22   Connections under sidewalks
   
1042.23   Incidental construction
   
1042.24   Test tees generally
   
1042.25   Test tees in driveways
   
1042.26   Owner doing own work
   
1042.27   Inspection and cleaning of laterals
   
1042.28   Temporary lift stations prohibited
   
1042.29   Notification concerning grinder pumps
   
1042.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Building sewers, see §
1406.07
   Connections to public sewers, see §
1482.08
   Plastic sewer pipe, see §
1406.07
   Sanitation, drainage and sewerage, see
Ch. 1482
   Sewer installers, see
Ch. 860
   Sewers in subdivisions, see §§
1250.04,
1250.15
§ 1042.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   BUILDING SEWER. That part of the sewer system which connects the
plumbing of the house or building to a public sewer.
   (b)   CITY. The City of Solon, Ohio.
   (c)   CITY ENGINEER. Means and designates the City Engineer of Solon, Ohio.
   (d)   DOMESTIC SEWAGE or SANITARY SEWAGE. Sewage derived principally from
dwellings, business buildings, industries, institutions and the like,
originating as wastes from kitchens, water closets, lavatories, bathrooms,
showers and laundries.
   (e)   FOUNDATION DRAINS. Subsurface drains laid around the foundation of a
building, either within or outside of the building foundation, for the purpose
of carrying ground or subsurface water to some point of disposal.
   (f)   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. The liquid wastes from industrial or commercial
processes, as distinct from domestic sewage.
   (g)   SANITARY SEWER. A pipe or conduit designed for the purpose of carrying
domestic sewage or industrial waste from the point of origin to a sewage
treatment or disposal works or to a place of disposal, and which is not
intended to carry storm, surface, cooling, ground or subsurface waters.
   (h)   SEWAGE. A combination of water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with
such ground, surface and stormwaters which may be present.
   (i)   SEWAGE WORKS. All of the facilities for collection, pumping, treating
and disposing of sanitary sewers.
   (j)   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN. A sewer which carries storm, surface,
cooling and drainage water, but which excludes domestic and industrial sewage.
(Ord. 1962-69, passed 6-4-1962)
§ 1042.02 CONNECTIONS AND THE LIKE; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or openings
into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the City Engineer. However, no new permit
shall be issued when it has been determined by the Approving Authority as
defined in §
1044.02, that there does not exist sufficient capacity in the sewage works,
including collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of wastes as may be
discharged by the applicant of such new permit.
(Ord. 1980-138, passed 4-6-1981)
§ 1042.025 FEE FOR CONNECTION TO THE AURORA/LIBERTY SANITARY SEWER PROJECT.
   (a)   No owner or occupant of property or other person, corporation,
partnership, association or other entity or any agent, independent contractor,
servant, lessee or tenant thereof (hereinafter referred to as “the applicant”)
shall connect or cause to be connected any structure or accessory structure
situated in the restricted service area, as established in Exhibit “B” attached
to original Ordinance 1995-51, passed April 3, 1995, unless the applicant shall
first have secured a permit for such purpose from the city.
   (b)   The fee for the permit described in division (a) hereof shall be set
by the Director of Finance on January 1 of each year, and shall be in addition
to the then current tap-in fees.
   (c)   The Clerk of Council is hereby authorized and directed to deliver a
certified copy of this section, together with the required filing fee, to the
Auditor of Cuyahoga County for recording pursuant to R.C. § 319.61.
(Ord. 1995-51, passed 4-3-1995; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1042.03 PERMIT ISSUANCE; DEPOSIT.
   (a)   Permits to open, alter, install or disturb any public or building
sewer or appurtenance thereof will be issued only to a person, firm or
corporation engaged in the business as a sewer installer and who is registered
with the city.
   (b)   The applicant shall deposit with the city the amount required in §
1424.11 for road openings to ensure that all restoration, repair and/or
replacement of facilities and/or disturbed areas will be completed to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer.
   (c)   Upon completion of the work and certification by the City Engineer
that all work and restoration has been completed and damages to the property
properly repaired and/or remedied, the deposit shall be returned to the permit
holder less the inspection fee required in §
1424.11.
   (d)   If the permit holder fails to fully comply with the conditions of this
section within a period of 45 days from the commencement of work, dependent
upon the season and/or weather conditions, then the City Engineer may make
arrangements to have the unfinished portions completed and deduct the cost
thereof from the deposit.
(Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1042.04 RESPONSIBILITY FOR INSTALLATION OF BUILDING SEWERS.
   The person to whom a building sewer permit is issued will be held
responsible for the proper installation of the building sewer in accordance
with the terms of this chapter and constructed in accordance with standards and
specifications prescribed and on file in the office of the City Engineer shall
indemnify and save harmless the city from any loss or damage that may directly
or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
(Ord. 1962-69, passed 6-4-1962)
§ 1042.05 OWNER TO BEAR COST OF INSTALLATION.
   All cost and expense incidental to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner.
(Ord. 1962-69, passed 6-4-1962)
§ 1042.06 INSPECTIONS.
   (a)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the City
Engineer at least 24 hours in advance of commencement of work. He or she shall
request inspections from the City Engineer or his or her representative for the
following items:
      (1)   All building sewer pipe laid in trench;
      (2)   All connections to existing building sewers;
      (3)   All repairs, corrections and/or additions to existing building
sewers; and
      (4)   Test tee and riser inspections as specified in §
1042.24.
   (b)   No backfilling of any of the above items shall be done until the work
under such items has been duly inspected and approved by the City Engineer and/
or his or her representative. Such tests as are necessary to ensure that there
are no storm drains connected to the sanitary sewer, or sanitary sewage drains
connected to the storm sewer, may be required by the City Engineer and/or his
or her representative.
(Ord. 1979-33, passed 5-7-1979)
§ 1042.07 SEPARATE SEWER FOR EACH BUILDING; EXCEPTIONS; TIE-IN REQUIRED.
   Where a sanitary sewer is available in the street on which premises abut,
the owner of such premises shall be required to provide a separate and
independent building sewer connecting to every occupied residence or building
on such premises, except that where one residence or building stands at the
rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be
constructed to the rear residence or building through an adjoining alley,
court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front residence or
building may be extended to the rear residence or building, and except that
where the City Engineer finds it desirable to allow adjoining property owners
to join in a common sewer, they may do so, provided a proper easement for use
and maintenance of the sewer is stated on the application. No foundation drains
shall be tied into the sanitary sewer.
(Ord. 1970-140, passed 9-8-1970)
§ 1042.08 EXISTING INTERIOR AND EXTERIOR BUILDING SEWERS.
   Existing interior building sewers may be used if deemed acceptable by the
Chief Building Official. Exterior building sewers shall conform to the pipe
specifications as set forth in § 1042.09 or if deemed acceptable by the City
Engineer and/or his or her representative.
(Ord. 1979-33, passed 5-7-1979)
§ 1042.09 PIPE SPECIFICATIONS.
   The building sewer shall be constructed of a size not less than six inches,
internal diameter and shall be of PVC sewer pipe, current A.S.T.M.
specification (D3034) SDR 35 with premium gasketed joints or equal, ductile
iron soil pipe, current A.S.T.M. specification A-74 or equal, or other suitable
material depending on the depth of the sewer approved by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 1962-69, passed 6-4-1962; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1042.10 SEWER GRADE AND DIRECTION.
   The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment
insofar as possible. All changes in direction and/or depth shall be made
through the use of pipe fittings meeting the same specifications as set forth
in §
1042.09 to tie in existing building sewers and the test tee required at the
property line. No angles, either horizontal or vertical, shall be greater than
45 degrees along the length of the building sewer.
(Ord. 1979-33, passed 5-7-1979)
§ 1042.11 JOINTS GASTIGHT AND WATERTIGHT.
   All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. The City
Engineer may require the sewer tapper to demonstrate the watertightness of the
joints by such tests as may be necessary.
(Ord. 1962-69, passed 6-4-1962)
§ 1042.12 MINIMUM FALL.
   The building sewer shall have a minimum fall of one-eighth inch per linear
foot from the building to the public sewer. The City Engineer may, by special
permission in each case, authorize the building sewer to be constructed with a
fall less than one-eighth inch per linear foot if he or she determines such
procedure to be necessary and desirable.
(Ord. 1962-69, passed 6-4-1962)
§ 1042.13 PIPE INTERIOR TO BE CLEAN.
   The interior of each length of pipe shall be made perfectly clean and free
from offsets, fins and projections before the next length is connected thereto.
All building sewers shall be graded by line and pole, the line being first
leveled from the building to the lateral or public sewer and then lowered at
the lateral end to obtain the required fall.
(Ord. 1962-69, passed 6-4-1962)
§ 1042.14 LOCATION AND DEPTH.
   Building sewers shall not be constructed closer than three feet to any
exterior wall, cellar, basement or cistern, and the depth shall be sufficient
to afford protection from frost.
(Ord. 1962-69, passed 6-4-1962)
§ 1042.15 SEWERS CROSSING UNSTABLE SOIL OR CLOSE TO TREES.
   Where the building sewer will cross unstable soil or be close to a tree
where roots may enter the joints, extra heavy cast-iron pipe with suitable
joints may be required.
(Ord. 1962-69, passed 6-4-1962; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1042.16 EXCAVATIONS.
   All excavation required for the installation of a building sewer shall be
open trench unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer with substantially
vertical sides, using such sheeting as may be necessary. The bottom of the
trench granular backfill shall be shaped as nearly as possible to fit the lower
half of the sewer to provide for uniform bearing. In the event the trench is
excavated below the required grade of the pipe, the excess space shall be
filled with gravel in accordance with the city standards and specifications
prescribed and on file in the office of the City Engineer. No backfill shall be
placed until the work has been inspected.
(Ord. 1962-69, passed 6-4-1962; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1042.17 SEPARATE TRENCHES.
   Water, gas service and building storm sewers shall not be laid in the same
trench as the building sanitary sewer.
(Ord. 1962-69, passed 6-4-1962)
§ 1042.18 BACKFILLING.
   The building sewer shall be backfilled and compacted in accordance with city
standards and specifications prescribed and on file in the office of the City
Engineer. Frozen soil or soil containing stones larger than one inch in the
greatest dimension shall not be used as backfill. The standards and
specifications shall apply to all conditions especially when sewers or
appurtenances are located under driveways, sidewalks, paving and the like shall
have the excavated material removed and replaced with granular material as
specified in the standards and specifications.
(Ord. 1979-33, passed 5-7-1979; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1042.19 CONNECTION WITH WYE BRANCH.
   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made by
the wye branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. The cap or
plug must be removed with care to avoid damage to the bell of the branch or to
the lateral sewer. The slope of the wye branch shall be verified by the sewer
installer in accordance with the city standards and specifications prescribed
and on file in the office of the City Engineer prior to the connection being
made where no wye branch is available, the sewer installer shall install a wye
branch connection as approved by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 1962-69, passed 6-4-1962)
§ 1042.20 PERMIT TO OPEN STREET; WARNING DEVICES.
   The person to whom a permit is issued shall be responsible for obtaining any
required permits from the City Engineer to open cut any street, road or alley.
He or she shall enclose each opening which he or she may make in the public
streets, roads or alleys with sufficient barriers, and shall maintain the same
at night and take all necessary precautions to guard the public effectually
against all accidents from the beginning of the work.
(Ord. 1962-69, passed 6-4-1962)
§ 1042.21 REPAIR OR RESTORATION OF DRAINS AND LINES.
   The permit holder will be required to repair or restore any drains or
service lines damaged or disturbed by him or her during the construction of the
building sewer to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.
(Ord. 1962-69, passed 6-4-1962)
§ 1042.22 CONNECTIONS UNDER SIDEWALKS.
   All connections passing under sidewalks shall be bored or the sidewalk
replaced to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.
(Ord. 1962-69, passed 6-4-1962; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1042.23 INCIDENTAL CONSTRUCTION.
   All other construction incidental to the installation of the sanitary sewer
connection shall be in accordance with the standard specifications used by the
city for the same type of improvement.
(Ord. 1962-69, passed 6-4-1962)
§ 1042.24 TEST TEES GENERALLY.
   (a)   In residential, retail commercial and industrial zoning districts,
storm and sanitary test tees shall be installed at a distance of approximately
13 feet outside the right-of-way line if a utility easement exists or at or
near the right-of-way if no utility easement exists. Sanitary and storm test
tees and risers shall have a minimum inside diameter of six inches. The risers
shall be set an elevation of four inches to 6 inches below the established
grade. The tees and riser pipe material shall be of the same type as specified
in §
1042.09. If it is necessary to cut a length of pipe in order to conform to the
required riser height, a rubber spigot ring shall be used on the spigot end of
the pipe so that a watertight connection is achieved. The cap or plug installed
on the top of the riser shall consist of a properly sized polystop or its
equivalent. In addition, an approved steel or cast iron disc must be placed in
or around the polystop for additional strength and detection purposes.
   (b)   Test tee risers must be carefully backfilled to grade, compacting the
backfill material to the surface, so that the test tee alignment shall be plumb
and vertical from the top to the flow line. The entire flow line of the
building sewer shall be visible. The backfill material used shall conform to
the requirements of §
1042.18.
   (c)   When test tees are installed in asphalt or concrete surfaces, a steel
casting in accordance with the standards and specifications prescribed and on
file in the office of the City Engineer shall be installed to grade in
accordance with the standard specifications of the city.
   (d)   In commercial and industrial zoning districts, an inspection manhole
shall be installed at or near the property line in accordance with the standard
specifications of the city as prescribed and on file in the office of the City
Engineer.
   (e)   The owners of premises which do not have test tees and/or manholes
which comply with the provisions of this section at the effective date of this
section shall provide test tees and/or manholes on their premises in full
compliance with this section within 30 days after receiving notice to do so
from the City Engineer.
(Ord. 1979-33, passed 5-7-1979; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1042.25 TEST TEES IN DRIVEWAYS.
   When, upon inspection by the City Engineer or his or her representative, it
is determined that a test tee that has been installed in a driveway in a
residential area must be repaired or replaced, the city will repair or replace
it, or cause it to be repaired or replaced, at its expense. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the owner of the premises shall be responsible for any repair or
replacement of the driveway, apron or sidewalks that are around or that cover
the test tee. The city shall be responsible for the repair of any damage to a
driveway apron that is caused by a manhole or water main line valve.
(Ord. 1988-120, passed 7-18-1988)
§ 1042.26 OWNER DOING OWN WORK.
   Nothing contained herein shall prevent an owner of land from making his or
her own building sewer connection solely with his or her own labor without a
license, provided the City Engineer is satisfied that the owner has the
capacity, material and equipment to do the work as required by this chapter,
and provided further that the owner complies fully with all of the other
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 1962-101, passed 8-6-1962)
§ 1042.27 INSPECTION AND CLEANING OF LATERALS.
   When, upon inspection of building sewers by the City Engineer or his or her
representative, the City Engineer determines that a sanitary or storm lateral
sewer must be cleaned, the city may clean or cause to be cleaned at its expense
that portion of the sewer between the test tee and the main in the street. The
expense of cleaning such laterals between the test tee and the premises being
served shall be borne by the owner. If the owner does not have a test tee, the
city will not assume responsibility for cleaning the laterals. The city is only
responsible for the portion of the building sewer from the utility easement or
right-of-way line, regardless of the location of the test fee, to the sanitary
sewer main.
(Ord. 1972-116, passed 9-18-1972)
§ 1042.28 TEMPORARY LIFT STATIONS PROHIBITED.
   After the effective date of this section, the City Engineer shall not issue
any permit pursuant to §
1042.02 to any person whose sanitary sewer will contain a temporary lift
pumping station not required by or in accordance with the city’s Master
Sanitary Sewer Plan.
(Ord. 1978-85, passed 5-22-1978)
§ 1042.29 NOTIFICATION CONCERNING GRINDER PUMPS.
   In any situation where the sewer system requires a builder to install a
grinder pump, the builder shall, as a condition of obtaining an occupancy
permit, furnish information to the Chief Building Official that the builder
has, in writing, notified the purchaser of the house that a grinder pump has
been installed and that the purchaser is responsible for maintaining the pump.
A signature of the purchaser attesting to the receipt of the notification
required by this section shall relieve the builder of any further
responsibility under this section. The Chief Building Official is authorized to
promulgate such rules and forms as he or she deems necessary to administer this
section.
(Ord. 1994-35, passed 4-4-1994)
§ 1042.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1432.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
(Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
CHAPTER 1044: INDUSTRIAL WASTES
Section
General Provisions
   
1044.01   Purpose and policy
   
1044.02   Definitions
Prohibited Discharges
   
1044.03   Sanitary sewers; admissions prohibited
   
1044.04   Storm sewers; admissions and consent
   
1044.05   Public sewers; general discharge prohibitions
   
1044.055   Local limits
   
1044.06   Special agreements; admissions
   
1044.07   National categorical pretreatment standards
   
1044.073   Calculation of equivalent mass and concentration limits
   
1044.076   Net/gross calculation
   
1044.08   State requirements
   
1044.09   Right of revision
   
1044.10   Dilution
   
1044.11   Notification of accidental discharges
   
1044.12   Employees informed of accidental discharge requirements
   
1044.13   Accidental discharge preventive measures
   
1044.14   Equalized facilities
   
1044.145   Bypass
   
1044.15   Industrial pretreatment
   
1044.16   Grease and oil interceptors
Control of Admissible Wastes
   
1044.17   General prohibition
   
1044.18   Baseline report
   
1044.19   Time extension request
   
1044.20   Compliance deadlines
   
1044.203   Ninety day compliance report
   
1044.206   Periodic compliance reports
   
1044.209   Notification of changes in discharge including hazardous wastes
   
1044.21   Hazardous waste notification requirements
   
1044.213   Notice of potential problems, including slug loading
   
1044.216   Reports of significant industrial users not subject to categorical
pretreatment standards
   
1044.219   Monitoring and analysis
   
1044.22   Signatory requirements
   
1044.223   Standards modification
   
1044.226   Issuance of permits
   
1044.23   Control manholes
   
1044.24   Measurement of flow; water meters
   
1044.25   Measurement of flow; special meters
   
1044.26   Inspection and sampling
   
1044.27   Analyses of wastes
   
1044.28   Confidential information
   
1044.29   Records retention
   
1044.30   Removal credits
   
1044.305   NPDES permit application
Industrial Waste Surcharges
   
1044.31   Surcharge regulations
   
1044.32   Surcharge computation
   
1044.33   Surcharge review and revision
Billing Practice
   
1044.34   Quarterly billing
   
1044.35   Payment; effective date; late charge
Enforcement
   
1044.353   Enforcement response plans
   
1044.355   Discharge application
   
1044.356   Control mechanisms
   
1044.36   Emergency suspension of service
   
1044.37   Revocation of services
   
1044.38   Notification of violation
   
1044.39   Show cause hearing
   
1044.40   Judicial proceedings
   
1044.41   Annual publication
   
1044.42   Right of appeal
   
1044.43   Operating upsets
Remedies and Penalties
   
1044.44   Delinquency; lien
   
1044.45   Discontinuance of service; charges
   
1044.46   Restoration of service
   
1044.47   Ownership and occupancy
   
1044.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Industrial Districts, see Zoning Code
   Industrial landscaping, see §
1428.12
   Sewers generally, see
Ch. 1042
   Streets abutting industrial lots, see §
1250.12
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1044.01 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   (a)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for discharges by
industrial users into the city wastewater collection and treatment systems, and
enables the Authority to protect public health in conformity with all
applicable local, state and federal laws relating thereto.
   (b)   The objectives of this chapter are:
      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the sewage treatment
plant which will interfere with the normal operation of the system or
contaminate the resulting municipal sludge;
      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the sewage treatment
plant which do not receive adequate treatment, and which will pass through the
system into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be compatible with
the system; and
      (3)   To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and
sludge from the system.
   (c)   This chapter provides for the regulation of discharges into the sewage
disposal works through the enforcement of administrative regulations.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1044.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   APPROVING AUTHORITY or AUTHORITY. The City Engineer and the Director
of the Water Reclamation Department or other designated official of the city,
or their duly authorized deputy, agent or representative. It can also be used
to describe the city’s sewage disposal works and sewage treatment plant.
   (b)   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER.
      (1)   A president, secretary, treasurer or vice-president of a
corporation;
      (2)   A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a
partnership or sole proprietorship respectively; or
      (3)   A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in
division (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section if:
         A.   The authorization is made in writing by the individual described
in division (b)(1) or (b)(2);
         B.   The written authorization is submitted to the Authority; and
         C.   The AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE must be a manager authorized to
make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility
including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital
investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive
measures to assure long term environmental compliance with environmental laws
and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or
actions taken to gather complete and accurate information control mechanism
requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or
delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
   (c)   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES. Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to implement
the prohibitions listed in O.A.C. 3745-3-04 and in §
1044.05 of this chapter. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating
procedures and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks,
sludge or waste disposal or drainage from raw materials storage.
   (d)   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen, expressed in
parts per 1,000,000 by weight, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic
matter under standard laboratory conditions for five days at a temperature of
20°C. The laboratory determinations shall be made in accordance with procedures
set forth in Standard Methods, as defined in division (ss) hereof.
   (e)   BYPASS. The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of
an industrial user’s treatment facility.
   (f)   CITY. The City of Solon, Ohio.
   (g)   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
chemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures
expressed in parts per 1,000,000 by weight, in accordance with procedures set
forth in Standard Methods, as defined in division (ss) hereof.
   (h)   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. The BOD, suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform
bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES permit if the
publicly owned treatment works was designated to treat such pollutants, and in
fact does remove such pollutants to a substantial degree. Examples of such
additional pollutants may include:
      (1)   COD;
      (2)   Total organic carbon;
      (3)   Phosphorus and phosphorus compounds;
      (4)   Nitrogen and nitrogen compounds; and
      (5)   Fats, oils and greases of animal or vegetable origin except as
prohibited under §
1044.05 of this chapter.
   (i)   CONSISTENT REMOVAL. The reduction in the amount of a pollutant or
alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater treatment plant to
a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent, provided that the plant meets
the NPDES permit limits established for that pollutant and the sludge meets all
applicable requirements for the preferred method of disposal.
   (j)   COOLING WATER. The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is
heat.
   (k)   DAILY AVERAGE CONCENTRATION. The method used to describe surcharge
concentrations, as determined by the analysis of a grab sample, the arithmetic
average of multiple grab samples in a 24-hour period or the analysis of a 24-
hour composite sample.
   (l)   DAILY MAXIMUM DISCHARGE CONCENTRATION. The method used to describe
prohibited discharge limits, as determined by the analysis of a grab sample,
the arithmetic average of multiple grab samples in a 24-hour period or the
analysis of a 24-hour composite sample.
   (m)   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Water Reclamation Department or his or
her duly authorized deputy, agent or representative.
   (n)   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. The United States
Environmental Protection Agency, or, when appropriate, the term may also be
used as a designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized official
of said agency.
   (o)   FEDERAL ACT or ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments
of 1972, Pub. L. No. 92-500, being 33 USC 1251 et seq., and any amendments
thereto, as well as any guidelines, limitations and standards promulgated by
the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Act.
   (p)   GARBAGE. The residue from the preparation and dispensing of food, and
from the handling, storage and sale of food products and produce.
   (q)   GROUND GARBAGE. The residue from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such degree that all particles
will be carried freely in suspension under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than one-half inch in any
dimension.
   (r)   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Any pollutant which is not a compatible
pollutant as defined in division (h) hereof.
   (s)   INDUSTRIAL USER or USER. Any nonresidential user who discharges an
effluent into the city sewage treatment plant by means of pipes, conduits,
pumping stations, force mains, constructed drainage ditches, surface water
intercepting ditches and all constructed devices and appliances appurtenant
thereto. This shall include the introduction of pollutants into the sewage
disposal works from any non-domestic source regulated under § 307(b), (c) or
(d) of the Act, being 33 USC 1347.
   (t)   INDUSTRIAL WASTE.
      (1)   Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged, permitted to
flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business
establishment or process, or from the development, recovery or processing of
any natural resource.
      (2)   INDUSTRIAL WASTE is further defined as being process or trade waste
as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.
   (u)   INTERFERENCE. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, both:
      (1)   Inhibits or disrupts the authorities facilities, its treatment
processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
      (2)   Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the
Authority’s NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of
a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal.
   (v)   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT
STANDARD. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by
the United States EPA in accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1347) which applies to a specific category of industrial users. This term
includes prohibitive discharge limits established to 40 C.F.R. Part 403.5.
   (w)   NEW SOURCE. Any building, structure, facility or installation from
which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under § 307
(c) of the Act, being 33 USC 1347 which will be applicable to such source if
such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section,
provided that:
      (1)   The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at
a site at which no other source is located;
      (2)   The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaced
the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at
an existing source; or
      (3)   The production or wastewater generating processes of the building,
structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an
existing source at the same site.
   (x)   NORMAL STRENGTH SEWAGE OR WASTES. For the purpose of determining
surcharge, means sewage having an average daily suspended solids concentration
of not more than 300 parts per 1,000,000, an average daily BOD concentration of
not more than 250 parts per 1,000,000, an average daily oil and grease (hexane
or suitable alternative solvent) concentration of not more than 100 parts per
1,000,000, an average daily phosphate (measured as P) concentration of not more
than 20.0 parts per 1,000,000, and an average daily ammonia (measured as N)
concentration of not more than 15.0 parts per 1,000,000.
   (y)   NPDES PERMIT. The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
permit issued to the City of Solon.
   (z)   PARTS PER MILLION (PPM). A weight-to-weight ratio; the parts-per-
1,000,000 value multiplied by the factor 8.345 shall be equivalent to pounds
per 1,000,000 gallons of water. MILLIGRAMS PER LITER (mg/l) is a synonymous
term.
   (aa)   PASS THROUGH. A discharge which exits the Authority’s sewage
treatment facility into water of the United States in quantities or
concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges
from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the
Authority’s NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of
a violation).
   (bb)   PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association,
society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
   (cc)   pH. The logarithm, base ten, of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration expressed in moles per liter. It shall be determined in
accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods, as defined in
division (ss) hereof.
   (dd)   POLLUTANT. The dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
wastewater, garbage, wastewater sludge, munition, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, commercial,
domestic and agricultural waste discharged into water.
   (ee)   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of
the city. It also includes sewers within or outside the city boundaries that
serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the city sanitary sewer
system even though those sewers may not have been constructed with city funds.
   (ff)   REGIONAL ADMINISTRATOR or ADMINISTRATOR. The appropriate United
States EPA regional Administrator.
   (gg)   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a
combination of both, and into which storm, surface and ground waters or
unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
   (hh)   SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE. Substantial physical damage to property,
damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or
substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be
expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE does not
mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
   (ii)   SEWAGE. The water-carried human, animal and household waste in a
public or private drain, and may include ground water infiltration, surface
drainage and industrial wastes.
   (jj)   SEWAGE DISPOSAL WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping,
treating and disposing of sewage and industrial waste, and includes sewerage as
well as the sewage treatment facilities.
   (kk)   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. An assemblage of devices, structures and
equipment for treatment of sewage and industrial waste.
   (ll)   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste
liquids, including storm, surface and ground water drainage.
   (mm)   SEWERAGE. The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage and industrial waste.
   (nn)   SHALL; MAY.  SHALL is mandatory; MAY is permissible.
   (oo)   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU).
      (1)   Except as provided in division (oo)(2) thereof, the term
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER includes:
         A.   All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards; and
         B.   Any other industrial user that discharges an average of 25,000
gallons per day or more of process waste water to the Authority; contributes a
process waste stream which makes up 5% or more of the average dry weather
hydraulic or organic capacity of the Authority’s treatment plant; or has a
reasonable potential, in the opinion of the Director, to adversely affect the
sewage disposal works operation or to violate any pretreatment standard or
requirement.
      (2)   The Authority may at any time, on its own initiative or in response
to a petition received from an industrial user, determine that a noncategorical
industrial user is not a significant industrial user if the industrial user has
no reasonable potential to adversely affect the sewage disposal works operation
or to violate any pretreatment standard or requirement.
   (pp)   SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE. Shall be applicable to all significant
industrial users (or any other industrial user that violates divisions (pp)(3),
(pp)(4) or (pp)(8) of this section) and shall mean:
      (1)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month
period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum or the average limit for the
same pollutant parameter;
      (2)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those
in which 33% or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter
taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily
maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4
for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants, except
pH);
      (3)   Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum
or longer term average) that the Authority determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including
endangering the health of Authority personnel or the general public);
      (4)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment
to human health, welfare or the environment or has resulted in the Authority’s
exercise of emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
      (5)   Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or
attaining final compliance;
      (6)   Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, required
reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports,
periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules;
      (7)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance;
      (8)   Any other violation or group of violations which the Authority
determines will affect or has adversely affected the operation or
implementation of the city’s pretreatment program; and
      (9)   Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best
management practices, which the Director determines will adversely affect the
operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
   (qq)   SLUDGE. Any solid, semi-solid or liquid waste generated by a
municipal, commercial or industrial wastewater treatment plant, water supply
treatment plant or air pollution control facility or any other waste having
similar characteristics and effects as defined in standards issued under §§ 402
and 405 of the Act, being 33 USC 1342 and 1345 and in the applicable
requirements under §§ 2001, 3004 and 4004 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (Pub.
L. No. 94-580), being 42 USC 6901 et seq.
   (rr)   SLUG. All discharges of such quantity or concentration which result
in interference or pass through and includes, but is not limited to, any
discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in concentration of any
given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of longer
duration than 15 minutes more than five times its average hourly concentration
or flow.
   (ss)   STANDARD METHODS. The current edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, as published by the American Public Health
Association, American Water Works Association and Water Pollution Control
Federation.
   (tt)   STORM SEWER. A sewer that carries storm, surface and ground water
drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes.
   (uu)   STORMWATER RUNOFF. That portion of rainfall that is drained into the
sewers.
   (vv)   SURCHARGE. The assessment, in addition to the user charge, which is
levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in strength than the
concentration values established as representative of normal sewage.
   (ww)   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are
in suspension or will settle in, water, sewage or industrial waste, and that
are removable by a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of
SUSPENDED SOLIDS shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in
Standard Methods, as defined in division (ss) hereof.
   (xx)   TOXIC POLLUTANT. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants which is
or can potentially be harmful to public health or the environment, including
those listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of CWA § 307(a) or other
Acts.
   (yy)   UNPOLLUTED WATER; UNPOLLUTED LIQUID. Any water or liquid containing
none of the following: free or emulsified grease or oil; acids or alkalis;
substances that may impart taste and odor or color characteristics; toxic or
poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution; odorous or
otherwise obnoxious gases. It shall contain not more than 2,500 parts per
1,000,000 by weight of dissolved solids and not more than ten parts per
1,000,000 each of suspended solids or biochemical oxygen demand (BOD).
Analytical determinations shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth
in Standard Methods, as defined in division (ss) hereof.
   (zz)   UPSET. An exceptional incident in which an industrial user
unintentionally and temporarily is in a state of noncompliance with the
standards set forth in this chapter due to factors beyond the reasonable
control of the industrial user, and excluding noncompliance to the extent
caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities,
inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance or careless or
improper operation thereof.
   (aaa)   USER CHARGE. The basic assessment levied on all users of the public
sewer system, representing a proportionate share of the costs of operation and
maintenance, including replacement of all waste treatment services provided.
   (bbb)   WASTEWATER. The liquid and water-carried or domestic wastes from
dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions,
together with any ground water, surface water and stormwater that may be
present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted
to enter the city sewage disposal works.
   (ccc)   WATER RECLAMATION DEPARTMENT. The department of the city charged
with the management and operations of the sewage disposal works.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991; Ord. 1998-21, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 2005-152,
passed 6-20-2005; Ord. 2010-89, passed 4-19-2010)
PROHIBITED DISCHARGES
§ 1044.03 SANITARY SEWERS; ADMISSIONS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface drainage,
subsurface drainage, ground water, roof runoff, cooling water or unpolluted
water into any sanitary sewer.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
§ 1044.04 STORM SEWERS; ADMISSIONS AND CONSENT.
   Stormwater, surface drainage, subsurface drainage, ground water, roof
runoff, cooling water or unpolluted water may be admitted to storm sewers which
have adequate capacity for this accommodation. No person shall use such sewers
without first having obtained the consent of the Approving Authority.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
§ 1044.05 PUBLIC SEWERS; GENERAL DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
   No industrial user shall discharge or cause to be discharged, directly or
indirectly, any of the following described substances into the wastewater
disposal system or otherwise to the facilities of the Authority:
   (a)   Any solids, liquids or gases which, by themselves or by interaction
with other substances, may cause fire or explosion hazards, including, but not
limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140°F or
60°C using the test method specified in 40 C.F.R. Part 261.21;
   (b)   Any noxious or malodorous solids, liquids or gases, which, either
singly or by interaction with other substances, are capable of creating a
public nuisance or hazard to life, or preventing entry into sewers for their
maintenance and repair;
   (c)   Any solids, greases, slurries or viscous material of such character or
in such quantity that may cause an obstruction to the flow in the sewer or
otherwise cause interference;
   (d)   Any discharge which will cause the Authority’s facilities to violate
its NPDES and/or other disposal system permits;
   (e)   Any discharge that causes or contributes to interference or pass
through of the treatment plant;
   (f)   Any liquids having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 12.0, or having
any corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment or personnel of the sewage disposal works;
   (g)   Any discharge which may cause the sewage treatment plant’s treatment
residues, sludges or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and re-use or
disposal or to interfere with the reclamation or disposal process in use or
contemplated for use;
   (h)   Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity at the sewage treatment plant, resulting in interference, but in no
case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant
which exceeds 40°C (104°F);
   (i)   Any discharge with objectionable color not removed in the treatment
process, such as, but not limited to, dye, wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions;
   (j)   Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD and the
like) released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration
which will cause interference or pass through or which is a slug load;
   (k)   Any unpolluted water, including, but not limited to, non-contact
cooling water;
   (l)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such
half-life or concentration as exceed limits established in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations;
   (m)   Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life, creates a public
nuisance or is in any other way injurious to persons, property, animals or the
operation of the sewage disposal works;
   (n)   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction, to injure or interfere with any wastewater
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or exceed the
limitations set forth in the national categorical pretreatment standards;
   (o)   Any garbage, whole, ground or shredded, except as may be allowed and
subject to control in volume and concentration by the Authority;
   (p)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil
origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
   (q)   Any discharge or pollutants which result in the presence of toxic
gases, vapors or fumes in the sewage disposal works in a quantity that may
cause acute worker health and safety problems;
   (r)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, including industrial and septic
wastes, into any location of the sewer disposal works at any time;
   (s)   Any wastewater exceeding the local limits established by the Water
Reclamation Department and approved by Ohio EPA. The local limits currently
implemented may be viewed at: https://www.solonohio.org/DocumentCenter/View/
12628/Local-Limits-Table
   (t)   Any wastewater exceeding the daily average concentration for the
following parameters is prohibited unless the wastewater is assessed for
surcharge:
Pollutant Daily\Average Concentration (mg/l)
Pollutant                  Daily\Average Concentration (mg/l)
Ammonia (NH3)              15
Biochemical oxygen demand  250
(BOD)
Oil and grease*1,*2 (OG)   100
Phosphorous (total) (TP)   20
Suspended solids (SS)      300
*1   A grab sample, multiple grab samples or a composite sample will be
analyzed to determine daily average concentrations for oil and grease.
*2   Hexane or a suitable alternative solvent will be used to perform the
oil and grease test.
 
   (u)   Any discharge determined by the Authority to be unacceptable as set
forth below:
      (1)   Contains materials or discharges which would constitute a hazard to
life and limb of personnel engaged in inspection, maintenance and operation of
the system;
      (2)   Contains materials or discharges which are toxic as defined in §
1044.02(xx) of this chapter;
      (3)   Contains materials or discharges which are in any way deleterious
to any part of the sewage disposal works;
      (4)   Contains concentrations of any toxic or deleterious materials or
discharges in excess of any limits set thereon in accordance with this chapter;
      (5)   Causes the Authority to incur additional operating expenses in the
handling or treatment thereof;
      (6)   Is incompatible with the treatment process or inhibits the
performance of the treatment process at the Authority’s treatment facility;
      (7)   Is of such volume or contains such a quantity of solids, or other
material load, which would cause the treatment facility to exceed its design
capacity;
      (8)   Causes a treatment facility of the Authority not to meet effluent
requirements set by state or federal regulatory agencies or causes, such
effluent to have a degradive effect on the receiving body of the facility;
      (9)   Contains viable pathogenic organisms in such quantity as to be a
hazard to public health; and
      (10)   Causes a treatment facility of the Authority not to meet effluent
requirements as established by the Authority’s NPDES permit.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991; Ord. 1994-177, passed 11-7-1994; Ord. 1998-
21, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 2001-130, passed 5-7-2001; Ord. 2005-74, passed 3-21-
2005; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005; Ord. 2010-89, passed 4-19-2010; Ord.
2011-187, passed 9-19-2011; Ord. 2015-31, passed 4-20-2015; Ord. 2022-203,
passed 9-19-2022)
§ 1044.055 LOCAL LIMITS.
   The Authority shall continue to develop specific limits as necessary to
implement the prohibitions listed in §
1044.05 of this chapter and shall effectively enforce such limits.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991; Ord. 2010-89, passed 4-19-2010)
§ 1044.06 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS; ADMISSIONS.
   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting any
special agreement or arrangement between the city and any person whereby an
industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be admitted to the sewage
disposal works, either before or after pretreatment, provided there is no
impairment of the functioning of the sewage disposal works by reason of the
admission of such wastes and provided no additional costs are incurred by the
city without recompense by such person. However, no agreement may be reached
which violates state or federal regulations, including categorical standards.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
§ 1044.07 NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   National categorical pretreatment standards, as promulgated by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the Act, shall be met
by all industrial users of the regulated industrial categories. An application
for modification of the national categorical pretreatment standards may be
considered for submittal to the Regional Administrator by the Authority, when
the Authority’s wastewater treatment plant achieves consistent removal of the
pollutants.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
§ 1044.073 CALCULATION OF EQUIVALENT MASS AND CONCENTRATION LIMITS.
   (a)   When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed
only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the Authority may
convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed as mass of pollutant
discharged per day of effluent concentration for purposes of calculating
effluent limitations applicable to industrial users pursuant to the procedure
set forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 403.6(c).
   (b)   Equivalent limitations calculated in accordance with this section
shall be deemed pretreatment standards for the purposes of § 307(d) of the Act
and this chapter. Industrial users will be required to comply with the
equivalent limitations in lieu of the promulgated categorical standards from
which the equivalent limitations were derived.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
§ 1044.076 NET/GROSS CALCULATION.
   The Authority may elect to adjust categorical pretreatment standards to
reflect the presence of pollutants in the industrial user’s intake water
pursuant to the procedure contained in 40 C.F.R. Part 403.15.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
§ 1044.08 STATE REQUIREMENTS.
   State requirements and limitations on discharges to the sewage treatment
plant shall be met by all industrial users which are subject to such standards
in any instance in which they are more stringent than federal requirements and
limitations or those in this or any other applicable ordinance.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
§ 1044.09 RIGHT OF REVISION.
   The Authority reserves the right to amend this chapter to provide for more
stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the sewage treatment
plant where deemed necessary to comply with the objectives set forth in §
1044.01 of this chapter.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991; Ord. 2010-89, passed 4-19-2010)
§ 1044.10 DILUTION.
   Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable regulation, no
industrial user shall increase the use of potable or process waste in any way,
mix separate waste streams for the purpose of diluting a discharge or in any
other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the standards set forth in this
chapter. The Authority may impose mass limitations on industrial users which
are suspected of using dilution to meet the pretreatment standards or
requirements of this chapter, or in other cases where the imposition of mass
limitations is deemed appropriate by the Authority.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
§ 1044.11 NOTIFICATION OF ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES.
   (a)   Industrial users shall immediately notify the treatment plant operator
on duty in responsible charge upon the accidental discharge of wastes in
violation of this chapter to enable countermeasures to be taken to minimize
damage to the wastewater treatment plants, treatment processes and the
receiving waters. The notification shall include location of discharge, date
and time thereof, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective
actions.
   (b)   This notification shall be followed, within five days of the date of
occurrence, by a detailed written statement describing the causes of the
accidental discharge and the measures being taken to prevent future occurrence.
   (c)   Such notification will not relieve industrial users of liability for
any fines provided for in §
1044.99 of this chapter, or for any expense, loss or damage to the sewer
system, treatment plant or treatment process, or for any fines imposed on the
city on account thereof.
(Ord. 1998-21, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 2010-89, passed 4-19-2010)
§ 1044.12 EMPLOYEES INFORMED OF ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE REQUIREMENTS.
   In order that employees of industrial users be informed of city
requirements, industrial users shall make available to their employees copies
of this chapter together with such other wastewater information and notices
which may be furnished by the city from time to time directed toward more
effective water pollution control. A notice shall be furnished and permanently
posted on the industrial user’s bulletin board advising employees whom to call
in case of an accidental discharge in violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
§ 1044.13 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE PREVENTIVE MEASURES.
   Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited or regulated materials or substances established by this chapter.
Any direct or indirect connection or entry point for persistent or deleterious
wastes to the discharger’s plumbing or drainage system shall be eliminated.
Where such action is impractical or unreasonable the industrial user shall
appropriately label such entry points to warn against discharge of such wastes
in violation of this chapter. Where necessary, facilities to prevent accidental
discharge of prohibited material shall be provided and maintained at the
industrial user’s expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating
procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the Director for
review and shall be approved by the Director before construction of the
facility. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not
relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify this facility as
necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1044.14 EQUALIZED FACILITIES.
   Each person producing a discharge into the public sewers in excess of
100,000 gallons in any one day may, at the discretion of the Approval
Authority, be required to construct and maintain, at his or her own expense, a
suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of discharge
over a 24-hour period. This facility shall have a capacity of at least 50% of
the total normal volume of a 24- hour production period, and the outlet to the
sewer shall be equipped with a rate-discharge controller or other approved
device, the regulation of which shall be directed by the Approving Authority.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
§ 1044.145 BYPASS.
   (a)   An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
an applicable pretreatment standard to be violated, but only if it also is for
essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not
subject to the provision of division (c) hereof.
   (b)   An industrial user is required to provide notice of bypass as follows.
      (1)   If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it
shall submit prior notice to the Authority at least ten days before the date of
the bypass.
      (2)   An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the Authority within
24 hours from the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. A
written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the
industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall
contain a description of the bypass and its cause, the duration of the bypass,
including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the
anticipated time it is expected to continue, and steps taken or planned to
reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the bypass. The Authority may waive
the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received
within 24 hours.
   (c)   Bypass is prohibited, and the Authority may take enforcement action
against an industrial user for a bypass unless:
      (1)   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury or
severe property damage;
      (2)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use
of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes or maintenance
during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if
adequate back-up equipment should have been installed, in the exercise of
reasonable engineering judgment, to prevent a bypass which occurred during
normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and
      (3)   The industrial user submitted notices as required under division
(b) hereof.
   (d)   The Authority may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its
adverse effects, if the Authority determines that it will meet the three
conditions listed in division (c) hereof.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
§ 1044.15 INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT.
   (a)   Pretreatment may be required of compatible industrial wastes with
concentrations exceeding the “normal strength” limitations when, in the opinion
of the Approving Authority, it is determined that such wastes cannot be
satisfactorily treated without adverse affects to the collection and/or
treatment systems.
   (b)   Discharge of wastes exceeding “normal strength” shall be subject to
and require a surcharge to compensate the city for all costs associated with
the collection, conveyance, treatment and final disposal for all excess
concentrations as hereinafter provided in §§
1044.31 through
1044.33.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
§ 1044.16 GREASE AND OIL INTERCEPTORS.
   For grease, oil and inorganic material such as sand, grit and the like,
interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Approving Authority,
they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing
floatable grease in excessive amounts, as specified in §
1044.05 of this chapter, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful
ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private
living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the Approving Authority, and shall be located as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining
of these interceptors the owner(s) shall be responsible for the proper removal
and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain
records of the dates and means of disposal, which are subject to review by the
Approving Authority. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not
performed by the owner(s)’ personnel must be performed by currently licensed
waste disposal firms.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991; Ord. 2010-89, passed 4-19-2010)
CONTROL OF ADMISSIBLE WASTES
§ 1044.17 GENERAL PROHIBITION.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge sewage and/or industrial wastes to any
sewer within the jurisdiction of the Authority, and/or to the sewage treatment
plants, without having first complied with the terms of this chapter.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
§ 1044.18 BASELINE REPORT.
   (a)   Within 90 days after passage of this chapter, existing industrial
users discharging industrial wastes to a public sewer shall prepare and file
the report required by this section if they have not already done so or shall
modify, if necessary any report previously filed with the Authority. Within 180
days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, existing
industrial users subject to such standards and currently discharging or
scheduled to discharge shall be required to prepare and file the report
required by this section. Any industrial user operating on the basis of a
previous report submittal shall submit to the Authority, within 180 days after
the promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard, the
additional information required by divisions (c)(10) and (c)(11) hereof.
   (b)   New sources, and sources that become industrial users subsequent to
the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall, at least 90 days
prior to commencement of discharge, be required to submit to the Authority a
report which contains the information listed in this section. New sources shall
also be required to include in this report information on the method of
pretreatment the source intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment
standards. New sources shall give estimates of the information required in
divisions (c)(8) and (c)(9) hereof.
   (c)   The baseline report of the industrial user shall be made on written
forms provided by the Authority and shall include:
      (1)   Disclosure of the name, address and location of the facility,
including the name of the operator and owners;
      (2)   Disclosure of any environmental control permits held by or for the
facility;
      (3)   A brief, detailed description of the nature of activities,
facilities and plant processes on the premises, average rate of production and
standard industrial classification (Standard Industrial Classification Manual,
Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended) of the operations carried out by the
industrial user. This description should include a schematic process diagram
which indicates points of discharge to the Authority from the regulated process
and all materials which are or may be discharged to the sewage disposal works
of the Authority;
      (4)   Disclosure of time and duration of discharge;
      (5)   Disclosure of site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing
plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, inspection manholes,
sampling chambers and appurtenances by size, location and elevation, in
addition to that required by division (c)(3) hereof.
      (6)   Disclosure of each product produced by type, amount, process and
rate of production;
      (7)   Disclosure of the type and amount of raw materials utilized;
      (8)   A.   Information showing the dischargers measured average daily and
maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the Authority from each of the
following:
            1.   Regulated process streams; and
            2.   Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined waste
stream formula of 40 C.F.R. Part 403.6 (e). (See §
1044.219(c) of this chapter.)
         B.   The Authority may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows
where justified by cost or feasibility considerations.
      (9)   A measurement of pollutants as set forth below:
         A.   The industrial user shall identify the pretreatment standards
applicable to each regulated process;
         B.   In addition, the industrial user shall submit the results of
sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (or mass, where
required by the standard or the Authority) of regulated pollutants in the
discharge from each regulated process. Both daily maximum and average
concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be
representative of daily operations. Sampling and analysis shall be conducted in
accordance with §
1044.219 of this chapter;
         C.   The Authority may allow the submission of a baseline report which
utilizes only historical data so long as the data provide information
sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures; and
         D.   The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of
sampling, and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and
analysis are representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant
discharges to the Authority.
      (10)   A statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the
discharger (as defined in §
1044.02(b) of this chapter and certified to by a qualified professional,
indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis,
and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O and M) and/or
additional pretreatment is required for the discharger to meet the pretreatment
standards and requirements;
      (11)   If additional pretreatment and/or O and M will be required to meet
the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the discharger will
provide such additional pretreatment and/or O and M. The completion date in
this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the
applicable pretreatment standard.
         A.   Where the industrial user categorical pretreatment standard has
been modified by a removal allowance (40 C.F.R. Part 403.7), the combined waste
stream formula (40 C.F.R. Part 403.6(e)) and/or a fundamentally different
factors variance (40 C.F.R. Part 403.13) at the time the industrial user
submits the report required by division (b) hereof, the information required by
divisions (c)(8) and (c)(9) hereof shall pertain to the modified limits.
         B.   If the categorical pretreatment standard is modified by a removal
allowance (40 C.F.R. Part 403.7), the combined waste stream formula (40 C.F.R.
Part 403.6(e)) and/or a fundamentally different factors variance (40 C.F.R.
Part 403.13) after the industrial user submits the report required by division
(b) hereof, any necessary amendments to the information requested by divisions
(c)(10) and (c)(11) hereof shall be submitted by the industrial user to the
Authority within 60 days after the modified limit is approved.
      (12)   The following conditions shall apply to the schedule required by
division (c)(11) hereof:
         A.   The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the
industrial users to meet the applicable categorical pretreatment standards
(e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final
plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction,
completing construction and the like);
         B.   No increment referred to in division (c)(12)A. hereof shall
exceed nine months;
         C.   Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and
the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a progress
report to the Authority, including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied
with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on
which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for
delay and the steps being taken by the industrial user to return the
construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine
months elapse between such progress reports to the Authority; and
         D.   The Authority will evaluate the complete report and data
furnished by the industrial user and may require additional information. Within
30 days after full evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the
Authority shall notify the industrial user of the Authority’s acceptance
thereof.
      (13)   When determined to be necessary by the Director, user will submit
documentation indicating compliance with applicable BMP(s).
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991; Ord. 2010-89, passed 4-19-2010)
§ 1044.19 TIME EXTENSION REQUEST.
   When it can be demonstrated that circumstances exist which would create an
unreasonable burden on the person to comply with the time schedule imposed by §
1044.18 of this chapter, a request for extension of time may be presented for
consideration of the Approving Authority.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991; Ord. 2010-89, passed 4-19-2010)
§ 1044.20 COMPLIANCE DEADLINES.
   (a)   Compliance by existing sources with categorical pretreatment standards
shall be within three years of the date the standard is effective unless a
shorter compliance time is specified in the appropriate subject of 40 C.F.R.
Chapter I, Subchapter N. Industrial users with NPDES permits modified or re-
issued to provide a variance pursuant to § 301(i)(2) of the Act shall be
required to meet compliance dates set in any applicable categorical
pretreatment standard.
   (b)   Existing sources which become industrial users subsequent to
promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard shall be
considered existing industrial users except where such sources meet the
definition of a new source as defined in §
1044.02(w) of this chapter.
   (c)   New sources shall install and have in operating condition, and shall
“start up,” all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable
pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge. Within the shortest
feasible time (not to exceed 90 days), new sources must meet all applicable
pretreatment standards.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991; Ord. 2010-89, passed 4-19-2010)
§ 1044.203 NINETY DAY COMPLIANCE REPORT.
   (a)   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards set forth in these regulations, or, in the case of a new
source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the
Authority’s facilities, any industrial user subject to these regulations shall
submit to the Authority a report containing the information described in §§
1044.18(c)(8) and (c)(9) and
1044.22 of this chapter.
   (b)   For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration
limits established by the Authority in accordance with §
1044.073 of this chapter, this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the
industrial user’s long term production rate. For all other industrial users
subject to pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant
discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report
shall include the industrial user’s actual production during the appropriate
sampling period.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005; Ord. 2010-
89, passed 4-19-2010)
§ 1044.206 PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.
   (a)   Any categorical industrial user subject to limitations and
prohibitions set forth in this chapter, after the compliance date of such
limitations and prohibitions, or, in the case of a new source, after
commencement of the discharge to the Authority, shall submit to the Authority
during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently by the
Authority, a report indicating the nature and concentration of prohibited or
regulated substances in the effluent. In addition, this report shall include a
record of all measured or estimated average daily flows during the reporting
period. Flows shall be reported on the basis of actual measurement, provided,
however, that where cost or feasibility considerations justify it, the
Authority may accept reports of average flows estimated by verifiable
techniques. The Authority, for good cause shown, considering such factors as
local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles or other extenuating
factors, may authorize the submission of said reports in months other than
those specified above.
   (b)   Where the Authority has imposed mass limitations on the industrial
user, as provided for by §
1044.10 of this chapter, the report required by division (a) hereof shall
indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the
discharge of the industrial user.
   (c)   For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration
limits established by the Authority in accordance with §
1044.073 of this chapter, this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the
industrial user’s long-term production rate. For all other industrial users
subject to pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant
discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report
shall include the industrial user’s actual production during the appropriate
sampling period.
   (d)   The report required by this section shall be based upon data obtained
through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period covered
by the report, which data are representative of conditions occurring during the
reporting period. The Authority shall require a frequency of monitoring
necessary to assess and assure compliance with applicable pretreatment
standards.
   (e)   When determined to be necessary by the Director, user will submit
documentation indicating compliance with applicable BMP(s).
   (f)   The reports required by this section must comply with the signatory
requirements set forth in §
1044.22 of this chapter.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991; Ord. 2010-89, passed 4-19-2010)
§ 1044.209 NOTIFICATION OF CHANGES IN DISCHARGE INCLUDING HAZARDOUS WASTES.
   All industrial users shall promptly notify the Authority at least 60 days in
advance of any substantial changes in the volume or character of pollutants in
their discharge, including, but not limited to, the listed or characteristic
hazardous wastes for which the industrial user has submitted initial
notification under 40 C.F.R. Part 403.12(p) and §
1044.21 of this chapter.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991; Ord. 2010-89, passed 4-19-2010)
§ 1044.21 HAZARDOUS WASTE NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Industrial users who commence discharging after the effective date of
this chapter shall, no later than 180 days after the discharge of the listed or
characteristic hazardous waste, notify the Authority, the United States EPA
Regional Waste Management Division Director and the Ohio EPA Division of Solid
and Hazardous Waste Management, in writing, of any discharge to the Authority
of a substance, which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste
under 40 C.F.R. Part 261. Any notification under this section need be submitted
only once for each hazardous waste discharged although notification of changed
discharges must be submitted under §
1044.209 of this chapter. This notification requirement does not apply to
pollutants already reported under the self monitoring requirements of §§
1044.18,
1044.203 and
1044.206 of this chapter.
   (b)   The required notification must include:
      (1)   The name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 261;
      (2)   The EPA hazardous waste number;
      (3)   The type of discharge (continuous, batch or other); and
      (4)   If the industrial user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such
waste per calendar month to the Authority, the notification shall also include
the following information to the extent it is known and readily available to
the industrial user:
         A.   An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the
wastes;
         B.   An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents
in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month; and
         C.   An estimation of the mass of constituents in the water stream
expected to be discharged during the following 12 months.
   (c)   Industrial users are exempt from the requirements of divisions (a) and
(b) hereof during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15
kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as
specified in 40 C.F.R. Parts 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15
kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity
of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 C.F.R. Parts 261.30(d) and 261.33
(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the
industrial user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do
not require additional notification.
   (d)   In case of any new regulations under § 3001 of the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), identifying additional characteristics of
hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the
industrial user must notify the Authority, United States EPA and Ohio EPA of
the discharge of such substances within 90 days of the effective date of such
regulations.
   (e)   In the case of any notification under this section, the industrial
user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and
toxicity of hazardous wastes to the degree it has determined to be economically
practical.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
§ 1044.213 NOTICE OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS, INCLUDING SLUG LOADING.
   All dischargers shall notify the Authority immediately of all discharges
that could cause problems to the Authority, including any slug loadings, as
defined in §
1044.02(rr) of this chapter, by the industrial user.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991; Ord. 2010-89, passed 4-19-2010)
§ 1044.216 REPORTS OF SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS NOT SUBJECT TO CATEGORICAL
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   Significant noncategorical industrial users shall submit to the Authority at
least once every six months (on dates specified by the Authority) a description
of the nature, concentration and flow of the pollutants required to be reported
by the Authority. These reports shall be based on sampling and analysis
performed in the period covered by the report and performed in accordance with
the techniques described in 40 C.F.R. Part 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40
C.F.R. Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the
pollutant in question or where the Administrator determines that the Part 136
sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in
question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated
analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures,
including procedures suggested by the Authority or other persons approved by
the Administrator. This sampling and analysis may be performed by the Authority
in lieu of the significant noncategorical industrial user. Where the Authority
itself collects all the information required for the report, the noncategorical
significant industrial user will not be required to submit the report.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
§ 1044.219 MONITORING AND ANALYSIS.
   Any sampling or analysis done as part of the reports required by §§
1044.18,
1044.203,
1044.206 and
1044.216 of this chapter shall be performed as follows.
   (a)   Grab samples must be used for pH, hexavalent chromium, cyanide, total
phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organics. For sampling required
in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day compliance reports required by
Section
1044.18,
1044.203 of this chapter, a minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH,
hexavalent chromium, cyanide, total phenols, oils and grease, sulfide and
volatile organics for facilities for which historical sampling data do not
exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the
Authority may authorize a lower minimum. Using protocols (including appropriate
preservation) specified in 40 C.F.R. Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance,
multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior
to the analysis as follows: for hexavalent chromium, cyanide, total phenols and
sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for
volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the
laboratory. For all other pollutants, 24 hour composite samples must be
obtained through flow proportional composite sample techniques where feasible.
The Authority may waive flow proportional composite sampling for any industrial
user that demonstrates that flow proportional sampling is infeasible. In such
cases, samplings may be obtained through time-proportional composite sampling
techniques or through grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will
provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged.
   (b)   The industrial user shall take a minimum of one representative sample
to compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this section.
   (c)   Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment
facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process
if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated
wastewater prior to pretreatment, the industrial user should measure the flows
and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula
of 40 C.F.R. Part 403.6(c) in order to evaluate compliance with pretreatment
standards. Where an alternative concentration or mass limit has been calculated
in accordance with 40 C.F.R. 403.6(c), this adjusted limit along with
supporting data shall be submitted to the Authority.
   (d)   Reports of industrial users shall contain all results of sampling and
analysis of this discharge, including the flow, the type of sample, and the
nature and concentration, or production and mass where required or requested by
the Authority, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the
applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring by the
industrial user shall be as prescribed by the Authority. All analysis shall be
performed in accordance with 40 C.F.R. Part 136 and amendments thereto. Where
40 C.F.R. Part 136 does not include a sampling or analytical technique for the
pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance
with the procedures set forth in the EPA publication Sampling and Analysis
Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluents for Priority Pollutants,
April, 1977, and amendments thereto, or with any other sampling and analytical
procedures approved by the Authority.
   (e)   If sampling performed by the industrial user indicates a violation,
the user shall notify the Authority within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
violation. The industrial user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and
submit the results of the repeat analysis to the Authority within 30 days after
becoming aware of the violation, whether the violation is detected by the
industrial user or Authority personnel, except that no resampling is required
if:
      (1)   The Authority performs sampling at the industrial user at a
frequency of at least once per month; or
      (2)   The Authority performs sampling at the industrial user between the
time when the industrial user performs its initial sampling and the time when
the industrial user receives the results of this sampling.
   (f)   If sampling performed by the Authority, in lieu of the industrial
user, indicates a violation, the Authority shall repeat the sampling and
analysis within 30 days of becoming aware of the violation unless it notifies
the user of the violation and requires the user to perform the repeat sampling
and analysis.
   (g)   If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirements of this
chapter monitors any pollutant more frequently then required by the Authority,
using the procedures prescribed in divisions (a) through (e), the results of
this monitoring shall be included in the report.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991; Ord. 2010-89, passed 4-19-2010; Ord. 2022-
203, passed 9-19-2022)
§ 1044.22 SIGNATORY REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Any reports required by this chapter shall be signed by an authorized
representative of the industrial user and shall include a certification
statement as follows:
      “I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage
the system or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information,
the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true,
accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations.”
   (b)   If an authorization under §
1044.02(b) of this chapter is no longer accurate because a different individual
or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new
authorization satisfying the requirements of §
1044.02(b) of this chapter must be submitted to the Authority prior to or
together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991; Ord. 2010-89, passed 4-19-2010)
§ 1044.223 STANDARDS MODIFICATION.
   The Authority reserves the right to amend this chapter and the terms and
conditions hereof in order to assure compliance by the Authority with
applicable laws and regulations. The industrial user shall be informed of any
proposed changes in this chapter at least 30 days prior to the effective date
of change. Any changes or new conditions in this chapter shall include a
reasonable time schedule for compliance.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
§ 1044.226 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   The Director may issue permits to any industrial user to assure compliance
with any requirements under this chapter, including applicable national
categorical pretreatment standards, other discharge limits and reporting
requirements. Such permits shall be in the form of a directive signed by the
Director and may include, but shall not be limited to, a list of pollutants to
be monitored, location of sampling points, type of sample, frequency of
sampling, compliance schedules to meet discharge limits, and compliance
schedule progress reports.
(Ord. 1998-21, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1044.23 CONTROL MANHOLES.
   (a)   Each person discharging industrial wastes into a public sewer shall
construct and maintain one or more control manholes or access points to
facilitate observation, measurement and sampling of his or her wastes,
including domestic sewage.
   (b)   Control manholes or access facilities shall be located and built in a
manner acceptable to the Approving Authority. If measuring devices are to be
permanently installed they shall be of a type acceptable to the Approving
Authority.
   (c)   Control manholes, access facilities and related equipment shall be
installed by the person discharging the waste, at his or her expense, and shall
be maintained by him or her so as to be in safe condition, accessible and in
proper operating condition at all times. Plans for the installation of the
control manholes or access facilities and related equipment shall be approved
by the Approving Authority prior to the beginning of construction.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
§ 1044.24 MEASUREMENT OF FLOW; WATER METERS.
   (a)   The volume of flow used for computing industrial waste surcharges
shall be the metered water consumption of the person as shown in the records of
meter readings maintained by the city itself or through the Cleveland Water
Department.
   (b)   If the person discharging industrial wastes into the public sewers
procures any part or all of his or her water from sources other than the city
water system, all or a part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the
person shall install and maintain at his or her expense, water meters of a type
approved by the Approving Authority for the purpose of determining the volume
of water obtained from those other sources.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
§ 1044.25 MEASUREMENT OF FLOW; SPECIAL METERS.
   (a)   Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required
by the Approving Authority if these volumes cannot be determined from the
metered water consumption records.
   (b)   Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be
installed, owned and maintained by the person. Following approval and
installation, such meters may not be removed without the consent of the
Approving Authority.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
§ 1044.26 INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.
   (a)   The Authority shall randomly sample and analyze the effluent from
industrial users and conduct surveillance activities in order to identify,
independently of information supplied by industrial users, occasional and
continuing noncompliance with pretreatment standards. The Authority shall
inspect and sample the effluent from each significant industrial user at least
once a year and evaluate, at least once every control mechanism cycle, whether
each such significant industrial user needs a plan to control slug discharges.
For purposes of this division (a), a SLUG DISCHARGE is any discharge of a non-
routine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or
a non-customary batch discharge. If the Authority decides that a slug control
plan is needed, the plan shall contain the following elements:
      (1)   A description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges;
      (2)   A description of stored chemicals;
      (3)   A procedure for immediately notifying the Authority of slug
discharges, including any discharge that would violate a prohibition under §
1044.05 of this chapter, with procedures for follow-up written notification
within five days; and
      (4)   If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental
spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and
transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site
run-off, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment,
measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents) and/or
measures and equipment for emergency response.
   (b)   The Authority may, for any purpose, including those listed in division
(a) hereof, inspect the facilities of any industrial user to determine
compliance with the requirements of this Code. The industrial user shall allow
the Authority or its representatives, upon presentation of credentials of
identification, to enter upon the premises of the industrial user at all
reasonable hours, for the purposes of inspection, sampling or records
examination and copying. The Authority shall have the right to set up on the
industrial user’s property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling,
inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991; Ord. 2010-89, passed 4-19-2010)
§ 1044.27 ANALYSES OF WASTES.
   (a)   Laboratory procedures used in the examination of wastewater shall
conform to the methods published in 40 C.F.R. Part 136 and §
1044.219 of this chapter.
   (b)   Determination of the character and concentration of the industrial
wastes shall be made by a qualified person or testing laboratory designated by
the Approving Authority. The person whose wastes are being tested shall
promptly reimburse the city for the taking of samples, the per diem rate
established in §
1046.04 of this chapter for each day, or part thereof, that such samples are
taken. The fee for analyzing such samples shall be reimbursed in accordance
with the fee schedule in effect at the time. The person or testing laboratory
designated by the Approving Authority for the testing of the samples shall
submit its invoices for the costs of such testing directly to the person whose
samples were tested, and such invoices shall be promptly paid thereafter
directly to the tester.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991; Ord. 2010-89, passed 4-19-2010)
§ 1044.28 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   (a)   All information and data acquired by any means authorized in this
chapter shall be available to the public or any other governmental agency
without restriction except as hereinafter provided for.
   (b)   Information and data may be deemed confidential by the Approving
Authority upon written request by any person for confidentiality, provided,
however, that the person is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Approving Authority that the release or publication of such information would
divulge information, methods, processes or other trade secrets which may
jeopardize the applicants competitive position.
   (c)   Information, data or material deemed confidential shall not be
available for public inspection but shall be available to any governmental
agency for studies and/or judicial review, provided that such confidential
information shall not be provided to anyone until and unless adequate
notification is given to the applicant.
   (d)   All records containing confidential material shall be stored in locked
files.
   (e)   Wastewater characteristics and constituents will not be considered as
confidential information.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
§ 1044.29 RECORDS RETENTION.
   All industrial users subject to this chapter shall retain and preserve, for
no less than three years, any records, books, documents, memoranda, reports,
correspondence and any and all summaries thereof, relating to monitoring,
sampling and chemical analyses made by or in behalf of an industrial user in
connection with its discharge. All records which pertain to matters which are
the subject of enforcement or litigation activities brought by the Authority
pursuant hereto shall be retained and preserved by the industrial user until
all enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with
respect to any and all appeals have expired.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
§ 1044.30 REMOVAL CREDITS.
   Where applicable, the Authority may elect to initiate a program of removal
credits as part of this chapter to reflect the sludge treatment plant’s ability
to remove pollutants in accordance with 40 C.F.R. Part 403.7.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
§ 1044.305 NPDES PERMIT APPLICATION.
   The Authority shall comply with all applicable requirements, including 40
C.F.R. Parts 122.21 (j)(1 through 4), when submitting its NPDES permit renewal
application.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
INDUSTRIAL WASTE SURCHARGES
§ 1044.31 SURCHARGE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Normal concentrations. All persons discharging industrial waste into
the public sewers shall be subjected to a surcharge, in addition to any other
sewer-service charges, if these wastes have a concentration greater than the
following normal concentrations:
      (1)   A five-day, 20°C biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) concentration of
250 parts per 1,000,000;
      (2)   A suspended solids concentration of 300 parts per 1,000,000;
      (3)   A phosphorous (measured as P) concentration of 20 parts per
1,000,000;
      (4)   An ammonia (measured as N) concentration of 15 parts per 1,000,000;
or
      (5)   An oil and grease (hexane extractable or suitable alternative
solvent) concentration of 100 parts per 1,000,000.
(Ord. 1998-21, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 2002-32, passed 2-4-2002; Ord. 2010-89,
passed 4-19-2010)
   (b)   Items contained in surcharge. The amount of surcharge shall reflect
the cost incurred by the city in removing the excess biochemical oxygen demand
(BOD), suspended solids, phosphates, ammonia, and oil and grease of the waste
load. This surcharge may include a proportionate share of the following:
      (1)   Fixed charges and amortization costs for the sewage disposal works
based upon an average useful life of 25 years and an annual interest rate of 5%
and under the assumption that the capital investment will be retired at a
uniform rate throughout the life of the facilities. Such basis of fixed charges
shall be recalculated each five years or at the end of major construction
periods, whichever is shorter; and
      (2)   The annual cost of operation of the sewage treatment plants,
including repairs and maintenance and the cost of administering this chapter.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
§ 1044.32 SURCHARGE COMPUTATION.
   The surcharge per person shall be determined as follows. The excessive
pounds of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), suspended solids, phosphates,
ammonia, and oil and grease will be computed by multiplying the person’s sewage
flow volume in 1,000,000 gallons per day by the constant 8.345 and then
multiplying this product by the difference between the person’s concentrations
of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), suspended solids, phosphates, ammonia, and
oil and grease and the aforementioned normal concentrations in §
1044.31(a) of this chapter in parts per 1,000,000 by weight. The surcharge for
each constituent will then be determined by multiplying the excess pounds of
each constituent by the appropriate rate of surcharge listed in §
1046.04 of this chapter. This product will then be multiplied by the number of
days in the billing period to determine the surcharge. Concentration figures in
the above calculations shall be daily averages determined in accordance with
the provisions of §
1044.18 through
1044.305 of this chapter.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991; Ord. 2010-89, passed 4-19-2010)
§ 1044.33 SURCHARGE REVIEW AND REVISION.
   The rates of surcharge shall be reviewed and calculated annually in
accordance with the federally approved user charge system by the Approving
Authority in order to determine whether or not they are sufficient to defray
the fixed charges, amortization costs and annual cost of operation as
determined from the sewage treatment plant records. If the difference between
the revenue derived from the rates of surcharge and the total annual cost is
sufficient to justify an increase or decrease in the rates, the Approving
Authority shall make the appropriate change. The rates of surcharge shall be as
set forth in §
1046.04 of this chapter.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991; Ord. 1997-123, passed 12-15-1997; Ord. 2010-
89, passed 4-19-2010)
BILLING PRACTICE
§ 1044.34 QUARTERLY BILLING.
   Industrial waste surcharges provided for in this chapter shall be billed by
the city as a separate charge over and above the regular bill for sewer charges
and shall be payable in four quarterly payments each year.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
§ 1044.35 PAYMENT; EFFECTIVE DATE; LATE CHARGE.
   The industrial waste surcharge levied shall take effect on July 1, 1970, and
shall thereafter be billed on the first day of each calendar quarter, or as
soon in such calendar quarter as billing data become available, and shall be
payable at the office of the Director of Finance within 30 days after billing.
In case of failure to pay any bill for the surcharge when due, a penalty of 10%
of such charge shall be added to the bill.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 1044.353 ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE PLANS.
   The Authority shall develop and implement an enforcement response plan. This
plan shall contain detailed procedures indicating how the Authority will
investigate and respond to instances of industrial user noncompliance. The plan
shall include:
   (a)   Describe how the Authority will investigate instances of
noncompliance;
   (b)   Describe the types of escalating enforcement responses the Authority
will take in response to all anticipated types of industrial user violations
and the time periods within which responses will take place;
   (c)   Identify (by title) the official(s) responsible for each type of
response; and
   (d)   Adequately reflect the authority’s primary responsibility to enforce
all applicable pretreatment requirements and standards, as detailed in 40
C.F.R. Parts 403.8 (f)(1) and (f)(2).
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
§ 1044.355 DISCHARGE APPLICATION.
   (a)   When requested by the Director, a user must submit information
regarding the nature of their business activity, the characteristics and flow
of its wastewater and other information deemed necessary by the Director.
   (b)   The Director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may
periodically require users to update this information.
      (1)   The Authority may sample and analyze the effluent from users and
conduct inspection and/or surveillance activities to verify information
provided by the user.
      (2)   The user shall be responsible for the charges for sampling and
analysis as outlined in
Chapter 1046.
(Ord. 2010-89, passed 4-19-2010)
§ 1044.356 CONTROL MECHANISMS.
   The Authority has the legal authority to control, and shall control through
permit, order or similar means, the contribution to the sewage disposal works
by each industrial user to ensure compliance with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements. In the case of industrial users identified as
significant under §
1044.02(oo) of this chapter, this control shall be achieved through permits or
equivalent individual control mechanisms issued to each such user. Such control
mechanisms shall be enforceable and contain the following conditions:
   (a)   A statement of duration (in no case more than five years);
   (b)   A statement of non-transferability without, at a minimum, prior
notification to the Authority and provision of a copy of the existing control
mechanism to the new owner or operator;
   (c)   Narrative and/or numeric limits to include best management practices
(BMP), as defined in §
1044.02(c) of this chapter, based on applicable pretreatment standards, local
limits and state and local law;
   (d)   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting notification and record-keeping
requirements, including an identification of the pollutants to be monitored,
sampling location, sampling frequency and sample type, based on the applicable
general pretreatment standards categorical pretreatment standards, local
limits, and state and local law;
   (e)   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation
of pretreatment standards and requirements and any applicable compliance
schedule. Such schedules may not extend the compliance date beyond applicable
federal deadlines; and
   (f)   Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the Director
to be necessary.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991; Ord. 2002-203, passed 9-18-2002; Ord. 2010-
89, passed 4-19-2010)
§ 1044.36 EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF SERVICE.
   The Authority may, for good cause shown, suspend the wastewater treatment
service to an industrial user when it appears to the Authority that an actual
or threatened discharge presents or threatens an imminent or substantial danger
to the health or welfare of persons, a substantial danger to the environment,
an interference with the operation of the sewage treatment plants, or a
violation of any pretreatment limits imposed by this chapter. Any industrial
user notified of the suspension of the Authority’s wastewater treatment service
shall, within a reasonable period of time, as determined by the Authority,
cease all discharges. In the event of failure of the industrial user to comply
voluntarily with the suspension order within the specified time, the city shall
have the right to remove or close sewer connections and enter upon the property
for accomplishing such purposes. The Authority shall reinstate the wastewater
treatment service pending proof by the industrial user of the elimination of
the noncomplying discharge or conditions creating the threat of imminent or
substantial danger as set forth above.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
§ 1044.37 REVOCATION OF SERVICES.
   The Authority may seek to terminate the wastewater treatment services to any
industrial user that:
   (a)   Fails to factually report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
   (b)   Fails to report significant changes in wastewater constituents or
characteristics;
   (c)   Refuses reasonable access to the discharger’s premises by
representatives of the Authority for the purpose of inspection or monitoring;
or
   (d)   Violates the conditions of this chapter, or any final judicial order
entered with respect thereto.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
§ 1044.38 NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION.
   Whenever the Authority finds that any industrial user has engaged in conduct
which justifies termination of wastewater treatment services, pursuant to §
1044.37 of this chapter, the Authority shall serve or cause to be served upon
such industrial user, a written notice, either personally or by certified or
registered mail, return receipt requested, stating the nature of the alleged
violation. The industrial user shall respond personally or in writing to the
Authority within the time period specified in the notice, advising of its
position with respect to the allegations. Thereafter, the parties shall meet at
the discretion of the Director of Water Reclamation Department or his/her
designee to ascertain the veracity of the allegations and, where necessary,
establish a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991; Ord. 2010-89, passed 4-19-2010)
§ 1044.39 SHOW CAUSE HEARING.
   Where the violation of §
1044.37 of this chapter is not corrected by timely compliance, the Authority
may order any industrial user that causes or allows conduct prohibited by §
1044.37 of this chapter to show cause, before the Authority or its duly
authorized representative, why the proposed service termination action should
not be taken. A written notice shall be served on the industrial user by
personal service, certified or registered, return receipt requested, specifying
the time and place of a hearing to be held by the Authority or its designee
regarding the violation, the reasons why the enforcement action is to be taken,
the proposed enforcement action, and directing the industrial user to show
cause before the Authority or its designee why the proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served no less than ten
days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent, officer, or
authorized representative of an industrial user. The proceedings at the hearing
shall be considered by the Authority which shall then enter appropriate orders
with respect to the alleged improper activities of the discharge. Appeal of
such order may be taken by the industrial user in accordance with applicable
local law.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991; Ord. 2010-89, passed 4-19-2010)
§ 1044.40 JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS.
   (a)   The Authority shall have the legal authority, enforceable in any court
of competent jurisdiction, to apply and enforce the requirements of §§ 307(b)
and (e) and 402(b)(8) of the Act, any regulations implementing those sections
and any provision of this chapter.
   (b)   Following the entry of any order by the Authority with respect to the
conduct of an industrial user contrary to the provisions the Act, any
regulations implementing the Act or §
1044.356 of this chapter, the attorney for the Authority may, after the
authorization of such action by the Authority, commence an action for
appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
§ 1044.41 ANNUAL PUBLICATION.
   At least annually, the Authority shall publish, in the local newspaper with
the largest circulation in the city, a list of all industrial users which, at
any time during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with
applicable pretreatment requirement, as defined in §
1044.02(pp) of this chapter.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991; Ord. 2005-74, passed 3-21-2005; Ord. 2010-89,
passed 4-19-2010)
§ 1044.42 RIGHT OF APPEAL.
   Any industrial user or any interested party shall have the right to request,
in writing, an interpretation or ruling by the Authority on any matter covered
by this chapter and shall be entitled to a prompt written reply. In the event
that such inquiry is by an industrial user and deals with matters of
performance or compliance with this chapter for which enforcement activity
relating to an alleged violation is the subject, receipt of an industrial
user’s request shall stay all enforcement proceedings pending receipt of the
aforesaid written reply. Appeal of any final judicial order entered pursuant to
this chapter may be taken in accordance with applicable local law.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
§ 1044.43 OPERATING UPSETS.
   (a)   Any industrial user which experiences an upset in operations which
places the industrial user in a temporary state of noncompliance with this
chapter shall inform the Authority thereof within 24 hours of first awareness
of the commencement of the upset. Where such information is given orally, a
written follow-up report thereof shall be filed by the industrial user with the
Authority within five days. The report shall specify:
      (1)   A description of the upset, the cause thereof and the upset’s
impact on an industrial user’s compliance status;
      (2)   The duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and time of
noncompliance, and if the noncompliance continues, the time by which compliance
is reasonably expected to occur; and
      (3)   All steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent
recurrence of such upset or other conditions of noncompliance.
   (b)   A documented and verified bona fide operating upset shall be an
affirmative defense to any enforcement action brought by the Authority against
the industrial user for any noncompliance with this chapter which arises out of
violations alleged to have occurred during the period of the upset. An
industrial user who wishes to establish such an affirmative defense shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other
relevant evidence, that:
      (1)   An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause(s)
of the upset;
      (2)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
      (3)   The industrial user has complied with the requirement of division
(a) hereof.
   (c)   In any enforcement proceeding the industrial user seeking to establish
the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
   (d)   In case of an upset, the industrial user shall control production or
all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with the
standards of this chapter upon reduction, loss or failure of its treatment
facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment
is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other
things, the primary service of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost
or fails.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
REMEDIES AND PENALTIES
§ 1044.44 DELINQUENCY; LIEN.
   Industrial waste surcharges levied in accordance with this chapter shall be
a debt due the city and shall be a lien upon the property. If this debt is not
paid within 30 days after it shall be due and payable, it shall be deemed
delinquent and may be recovered by civil action in the name of the city against
the property owner, the person or both.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
§ 1044.45 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE; CHARGES.
   (a)   In the event of failure to pay sewer service or surcharges after they
become delinquent, the city shall have the right to discontinue sewer service,
or to remove or close sewer connections and enter upon the property for
accomplishing such purposes.
   (b)   The expense of such discontinuance, removal or closing, as well as the
expense of restoring service, shall likewise be a debt due the city and a lien
upon the property, and may be recovered by a civil action in the name of the
city against the property owner, the person or both.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
§ 1044.46 RESTORATION OF SERVICE.
   Sewer service shall not be restored until all charges, including the
expenses of removal, closing and restoration, have been paid.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
§ 1044.47 OWNERSHIP AND OCCUPANCY.
   Change of ownership or occupancy of premises found delinquent shall not be
cause for reducing or eliminating the penalties provided for in §§
1044.44 through
1044.46 inclusive.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991)
§ 1044.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   Civil fines. If an industrial user is found to have violated an order
of the Authority or has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter,
regulations or rules of the Authority or orders of any court of competent
jurisdiction, the Authority may assess a civil penalty not to exceed $5,000 for
each violation against the industrial user or may seek said penalty in the
appropriate court. If the industrial user violates pretreatment standards and
requirements, the penalty shall be at least $1,000 per violation. Each day on
which any such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
   (b)   Liability to city for expenses incurred. Any industrial user violating
any of the provisions of this chapter, or who discharges or causes a discharge
producing a deposit or obstruction, or causes damage to or impairs the
Authority’s wastewater disposal system, shall be liable to the Authority for
any expense, loss or damage caused by such violation or discharge. The
Authority shall bill the industrial user for the costs incurred by the
Authority for any cleaning, repair or replacement work caused by the violation
or discharge. Refusal to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a violation of
this chapter.
   (c)   Criminal prosecution.
      (1)   A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this
chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder,
or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree, punishable by the maximum fine
allowed or imprisonment for not more than 180 days, or both. Any such violation
shall be considered a separate violation for each day said condition giving
rise to the violation persists after the violator has been initially cited,
punishable as a misdemeanor of the first degree for each day the violation
persists.
      (2)   A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into
the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and be subject to
the maximum fine allowable under the law, or be subject to imprisonment for not
more than 180 days or both. This penalty shall be in addition to any other
cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state
law.
      (3)   A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations or
certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other documentation
filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter, industrial
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies,
tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under this chapter, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor
of the first degree and be subject to the maximum fine allowable under the law,
or be subject to imprisonment for not more than 180 days or both.
      (4)   In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished by
the maximum fine allowable under the law per violation, per day, or
imprisonment as allowed by the law, or both.
(Ord. 1991-239, passed 12-2-1991; Ord. 2010-89, passed 4-19-2010)
CHAPTER 1046: SEWER CHARGES
Section
   
1046.01   Definitions
   
1046.02   Imposition of charges
   
1046.03   Sewer Revenue Fund
   
1046.04   Charges levied
   
1046.041   Sewer Billing Review Board
   
1046.045   Charges for analytical testing
   
1046.05   Additional charges
   
1046.06   City of Solon billing charge
   
1046.065   Summer Use Adjustment Program
   
1046.07   Payment of bills; surcharge for delinquency
   
1046.08   Annual review and approval of charges
   
1046.09   Remedy of city for nonpayment
   
1046.10   Treatment of nonacceptable wastes required
   
1046.11   Discharge of nonacceptable wastes prohibited
   
1046.12   Homestead Exemption Program
   
1046.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Billing practice re industrial wastes, see §§
1044.34,
1044.35
   Costs of installations, see §
1042.05
   Industrial waste surcharges, see §§
1044.31 through
1044.33
   Industrial wastes, see
Ch. 1044
   Sewer rates, see R.C. §§ 729.49, 729.52
   Sewers generally, see
Ch. 1042
§ 1046.01 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this chapter shall be as follows or as defined in §
1044.02.
   (a)   ACCEPTABLE INDUSTRIAL WASTES. Liquid organic waste materials not
containing toxic or explosive elements or other substances injurious to sewers
or sewerage treatment processes or otherwise in violation of the provisions of
Chapter 1044, which result from any commercial, manufacturing or industrial
operation or process.
   (b)   DEBT SERVICE. The payment requirements to retire the water reclamation
facility debt through cash generated during the period of time that the debt is
outstanding. An incremental charge for the recovery of debt service may be
added to the user charge.
   (c)   NONACCEPTABLE INDUSTRIAL WASTES. Liquid wastes in which are
incorporated minerals, oils, acid, toxic, metallic or chemical substances
resulting from any commercial, manufacturing or industrial operation or
process.
   (d)   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS. All expense of collecting, pumping,
treating and disposing of wastewater.
   (e)   REPLACEMENT COSTS. Expenditures for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the service
life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which
such works were designed and constructed. Unless specifically excluded, the
term “operation and maintenance” includes replacement.
   (f)   SANITARY SEWERAGE. The waste from water closets, urinals, lavatories,
sinks, bathtubs, showers, household laundries, cellars, floor drains, bars,
soda fountains, cuspidors, refrigerator drips and drinking fountains, and any
other water-borne waste not constituting an industrial waste.
   (g)   SUMMER QUARTERS. The third and fourth quarters. The third quarter is
approximately April 20th through May, June to July 20, and the fourth quarter
is approximately July 20 through August, September to October 20. These are
defined based on water meter read dates performed by Cleveland Division of
Water to be utilized in the Sewer Summer Use Adjustment Program, unless as
otherwise specified in §
1046.065.
   (h)   USERS CHARGE. The charge to each recipient of waste treatment services
within the city’s service area representing a proportionate share of the costs
of operation and maintenance, including replacement of all waste treatment
service provided.
   (i)   USERS CLASS. The division of users within the city’s service area, by
the origin of the sewage discharged and by the similarity of the function of
such users.
   (j)   WINTER QUARTERS. The first and second quarters. The first quarter is
approximately October 20 through November, December to January 20, and the
second quarter is approximately January 20 through February, March to April 20.
These are defined based on actual water meter read dates performed by Cleveland
Division of Water to be utilized in the Sewer Summer Use Adjustment Program.
(Ord. 1980-138, passed 4-6-1981; Ord. 2011-13, passed 1-18-2011)
§ 1046.02 IMPOSITION OF CHARGES.
   It is hereby determined and declared to be necessary for the due protection
of the public health, safety and welfare of the city to operate the sewerage
system of the city, or as hereafter enlarged or improved, as a public utility,
and to establish and collect use charges for the use of the system upon all
lots, lands and premises serviced by or having connection with the system. It
is further determined and declared to be necessary that the establishment and
collection of such use charges shall be in compliance with the United States
Environmental Protection Agency rules and regulations as published in the
Federal Register, August 21, 1973 (38 C.F.R. Part 22523) and subsequent
amendments thereto.
(Ord. 1980-138, passed 4-6-1981)
§ 1046.03 SEWER REVENUE FUND.
   The funds received from the collection of the rates and charges hereinafter
provided shall be deposited as received with the Director of Finance, who shall
keep the same in a separate fund designated Sewer Revenue Fund. Subject to the
provisions of the ordinance and indenture of mortgage securing mortgage revenue
bonds for the system, monies in the Fund shall be used for the payment of the
cost and expense of the operation, maintenance, replacement, repair and
management of the system and for payment of debt charges on bonds issued for
extensions and improvements of the system, provided, however, that the sums of
money established by the federally approved user charge system as necessary for
replacement costs shall be used solely for replacement parts or equipment or
shall be deposited in a Replacement Fund to be used for the purpose of
replacement as defined in §
1046.01(e). In no event shall any of the monies be used for any other purpose
which would be contrary to the purposes permitted under R.C. § 729.52.
(Ord. 1980-138, passed 4-6-1981)
§ 1046.04 CHARGES LEVIED.
   For the purposes provided in §
1046.02, there is hereby levied and charged upon each lot, parcel of land or
premises having a connection available with the system, or otherwise
discharging sewerage, industrial wastes, water or other liquids either directly
or indirectly into the system, sewer charges payable as hereinafter provided,
based on actual water consumption per 1,000 cubic feet, or portions thereof,
and in amounts to be determined as follows.
   (a)   (1)   For industrial, commercial and residential users that have water
meters showing actual water consumption, whether privately owned or connected
to a public water supply, the rate shall be as follows:
 
Year Sewer Use (per 1,000 cubic feet of Homestead (per 1,000 cubic feet of
     water)                             water)
2025 $41.37/MCF                         $31.02/MCF
 
      (2)   New rates become effective for the first full billing quarter of
that year.
      (3)   If any such user can show, to the satisfaction of the Sewer Billing
Review Board (see §
1046.041), that a substantial portion of the water so metered does not enter
the sewerage system, a credit may be allowed to such user in an amount
determined by the Board to be fair and reasonable and in accordance with the
proof furnished by the user and as corroborated by independent investigation of
the Sewer Review Board.
(Ord. 2009-245, passed 10-5-2009; Ord. 2010-248, passed 11-15-2010; Ord. 2011-
13, passed 1-18-2011; Ord. 2011-207, passed 11-7-2011; Ord. 2015-190, passed
10-5-2015; Ord. 2016-209, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 2018-282, passed 12-17-2018;
Ord. 2020-172, passed 11-16-2020; Ord. 2023-38, passed 2-6-2023; Ord. 2025-21,
passed 2-18-2025)
   (b)   (1)   Residences, per unit, and apartments, per unit, which do not
have water meters and are, therefore, not charged under division (a) hereof,
shall be charged as follows:
 
Year Sewer Use (per quarter) Homestead (per quarter)
2025 $103.95                 $77.97
 
      (2)   All other users of the system, including retail, commercial and
industrial establishments, which are not connected to a public water supply and
metered, shall be required to install water meters and shall pay the sewer
service charge specified in division (a) hereof. During any period when meters
are not available to retail, commercial and industrial establishments, the
charge shall be as follows:
 
Year Sewer Use Homestead
2025 $71.49    N/A
 
(Ord. 1998-16, passed 1-20-1998; Ord. 2002-224, passed 10-7-2002; Ord. 2003-
126, passed 5-19-2003; Ord. 2004-212, passed 11-15-2004; Ord. 2011-13, passed
1-18-2011; Ord. 2012-10, passed 1-17-2012; Ord. 2015-190, passed 10-5-2015;
Ord. 2016-209, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 2018-282, passed 12-17- 2018; Ord. 2020-
172, passed 11-16-2020; Ord. 2023-38, passed 2-6-2023; Ord. 2025-21, passed 2-
18-2025)
   (c)   The rates of surcharge for each pollutant as listed in § 1044.31 to be
applied to quantities in excess of the limitations as set forth therein shall
be as follows:
 
    Pollutant        Total Rate/Pound
(1) BOD              0.206
(2) Suspended solids 0.259
(3) Phosphorous (TP) 3.861
(4) Ammonia (NH3)    1.296
(5) Oil and grease   0.692
 
(Ord. 1998-22, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 2002-32, passed 2-4-2002; Ord. 2007-102,
passed 4-16-2007; Ord. 2010-134, passed 6-7-2010; Ord. 2011-13, passed 1-18-
2011; Ord. 2014-108, passed 6-16-2014; Ord. 2021-75, passed 4-19-2021; Ord.
2022-92, passed 4-18-2022; Ord. 2023-88, passed 4-17-2023; Ord. 2025-139,
passed 7-7-2025)
   (d)   The charge for taking samples as required in § 1044.26 shall be $60
for each day, or part thereof, that such samples are taken.
(Ord. 1991-214, passed 11-4-1991; Ord. 1997-123, passed 12-15-1997)
   (e)   The charge for an initial connection to the city sanitary sewer system
shall be payable in advance of such initial connection at the following rates:
Application Type Current Charges
Application Type                        Current Charges
Residential
NOTE: Additional fees may apply in restricted sewer districts
Multi-family/two-family                  
   One bedroom                       $1,812.50 per unit
   Two bedroom                       $2,175 per unit
   Three bedroom                     $2,537.50 per unit
Single-family residence                 $2,900 per unit
Nursing homes, assisted living          $1,087.50 per resident/patient
   Business - Commercial
NOTE: Additional fees may apply for Commercial, Industrial, Office facilities
with showers, wash bowls, and vehicle washing facilities
Beauty salons, spas, barber shops       $1,000 per basin or $3,000 whichever is
                                        greater
Nail salons                             $225 per basin or $3,000 whichever is
                                        greater
   Business - Commercial
Dry cleaners with laundry service       $2,250 per washing machine
Laundries/laundromat per machine        $2,900 per washing machine
Exercise/fitness studios & centers,     $50 per occupant based on maximum
athletic clubs, health clubs - without  occupancy or $3,000 whichever is
showers                                 greater
Exercise/fitness studios & centers,     $75 per occupant based on maximum
athletic clubs, health clubs - with     occupancy or $3,000 whichever is
showers                                 greater
Financial institutions, banks           $145 per employee or $3,000 whichever
                                        is greater
Medical facilities - overnight          $2,175 per bed or $3,000, whichever is
                                        greater
Medical facilities - outpatient         $580 per examining room or $3,000,
(including medical & dental offices)    whichever is greater
Restaurants
   Fast food, fast casual            $181.25 per seat or $3,000, whichever
                                        is greater
   Full service                      $181.25 per seat or $3,000, whichever
                                        is greater
   Take-out (only)                   $3,000
   Seasonal seating                  25% of regular fee per seat
Retail stores (per employee)            $145 per employee or $3,000, whichever
                                        is greater
   Business - Industrial, Office
Industrial buildings                    $181.25 per employee or $3,000,
                                        whichever is greater
Office                                  $145 per employee or $3,000, whichever
                                        is greater
Storage facilities                      $145 per employee or $3,000, whichever
                                        is greater
Paratransit                             $181.25 per employee or $3,000,
                                        whichever is greater
   Educational facilities
K-12, colleges, universities, trade     $145 per pupil or $3,000, whichever is
schools, business schools               greater
Child day care, pre-school, early       $108.75 per pupil or $3,000, whichever
education                               is greater
Animal day care                         $45.00 per kennel/cage or $3,000,
                                        whichever is greater
   Miscellaneous
Assembly halls, conference centers,     $14.50 per seat or $3,000, whichever is
private clubs, cultural centers -       greater, based on maximum seating
without food service
Assembly halls, conference centers,     $50 per seat or $3,000, whichever is
banquet centers, private clubs,         greater, based on maximum seating
cultural centers - with kitchen service occupancy
   Miscellaneous
Golf courses                            $145 per employee + $28 per parking
                                        space
Golf courses with kitchen service       $145 per employee + $50 per parking
                                        space
Bowling alleys                          $543.75 per lane or $3,000, whichever
                                        is greater
Outdoor/Indoor games and recreational   $145 per employee + $28 per parking
activities                              space or $3,000, whichever is greater
Outdoor/Indoor games and recreational   $145 per employee + $50 per parking
activities with kitchen service         space or $3,000, whichever is greater
Government buildings, post office       $145 per employee or $3,000, whichever
                                        is greater
Funeral homes                           $72/100 sq. ft. or $3,000 whichever is
                                        greater
Movie theaters                          $36.25 per seat
Museums, art galleries                  $21.50 per parking space or $3,000
                                        whichever is greater
Public transportation                   $145 per employee + $28 per parking
                                        space or $3,000, whichever is greater
Religious institutions/places of        $36.25 per seat or $3,000, whichever is
worship                                 greater
Motels, hotels and substantially        $725 per unit or $3,000, whichever is
similar uses                            greater
                                        $21.75 per swimmer based on maximum
Swimming pools                          design capacity of $3,000 whichever is
                                        greater
   Vehicles/Transportation
Service stations, gas stations, vehicle $3,625 per pump island and/or per
repair & maintenance                    maintenance bay
Towing facilities                       $145 per employee or $3,000, whichever
                                        is greater
Vehicle washing facilities, car washes  If recycled water used, rates below
                                        reduced by 50%
   Conveyor                          $54,568 per bay
   In-bay                            $29,000 per bay
   Self-serve                        $8,600 per bay
If application type is not listed above, the City of Solon, in its sole
discretion, will determine the substantially similar use that will apply
For purposes of this fee schedule, the number of employees shall be calculated
with the following ratios: Office: 1:200, Manufacturing 1:800, Warehouse 1:
1200. All others will be calculated on max employees working per day.
 
 
(Ord. 2017-131, passed 8-7-2017; Ord. 2024-203, passed 11-18-2024)
   (f)   The charge for an increase in sanitary flow from an existing source
caused by an expansion or change of use shall be calculated only in accordance
with the per unit formula listed in division (e) of this section for the
designated use and the alternate flat fee shall not apply.
      (1)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and directed to
deposit and apply all fees collected hereunder in the Replacement and
Improvement Fund for the sewer system. Expenditures from this Fund shall
include, but not be limited to, expenditures for the improvement, modification
or expansion of the water reclamation plant or sewer collector system.
      (2)   To facilitate the expansion of the city’s sewer system and in
consideration of additional costs for closing existing residential septic
systems and connecting to newly available sewer lines, an allowance of $2,900
shall be applied against the fee required under this section to property owners
who are required to close existing residential septic systems and tie into
newly available lines under § 1042.07, provided that such connection is made
within 120 days from the date of receipt of notice to connect to the system,
unless a shorter time period is mandated by a state or county regulatory
authority.
(Ord. 1995-22, passed 3-20-1995)
   (g)   Residential users who are required to connect to newly constructed
extensions of the sewerage system shall be afforded a four-month period from
the date of notice to connect to the system.
   (h)   When the owner of a parcel of land desires to connect to any sewerage
system operated by the city and it is determined that such parcel of land or
any part thereof was not assessed, for any reason, at the time of the levying
of the assessments for the payment of the sewerage system or sewage treatment
plant into which the connection is desired, such owner shall be required to pay
to the city, in addition to any other connection charges levied under this
chapter, a sum equal to the amount which such parcel of land would have been
assessed under the method of assessment used when the original assessments were
levied.
   (i)   The foregoing connection charges shall not apply to existing lots for
which a builder has contracted to build a house.
   (j)   All connection charges calculated using the parameters noted above
shall be tripled for entities outside of the city that are granted permission
to connect to the city’s sewer system.
(Ord. 1995-22, passed 3-20-1995; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005; Ord. 2006-2,
passed 2-6-2006; Ord. 2006-25, passed 2-6-2006; Ord. 2006-161, passed 12-4-
2006; Ord. 2011-13, passed 1-18-2011; 2023-88, passed 4-17-2023)
§ 1046.041 SEWER BILLING REVIEW BOARD.
   (a)   There is hereby established a Sewer Billing Review Board to hear
complaints from sanitary sewer users regarding their sanitary sewer charges. It
shall consist of the Director of Water Reclamation and Director of Finance and
the Mayor or a designee appointed by the Mayor. The Board shall maintain
minutes of all proceedings, copies of which will be submitted to the Public
Works Committee.
   (b)   The Board shall meet as needed to review complaints from users about
their sanitary sewer charges and the related usage, if the amounts of the
questioned charges exceed $2,500 or are the result of an appeal of a finding of
the Director of Finance pursuant to division (c) below. It shall have the
authority to investigate a user’s complaint and request additional data and/or
proof to evaluate such complaint. After completing its review, the Board may
authorize the Director of Finance to adjust a user’s sanitary sewer charges
based upon what has been determined to be the actual usage.
   (c)   For complaints or claims for adjustment that involve amounts equal or
less than $2,500, the Director of Finance is authorized to, after appropriate
review and consultation with the Director of Water Reclamation, make
adjustments to sanitary sewer accounts. Users who dispute or otherwise disagree
with the findings of the Director of Finance for claims equal or less than
$2,500 may appeal their claim to the Sewer Billing Review Board in accordance
with division (b) above.
(Ord. 2011-13, passed 1-18-2011; Ord. 2015-96A, passed 6-1-2015; Ord. 2024-30,
passed 2-20-2024)
§ 1046.045 CHARGES FOR ANALYTICAL TESTING.
   Over and above the rates and charges established by §
1046.04, industrial users shall be charged not more than the following fees for
testing and analysis services performed by, or for, the Solon Water Reclamation
Department as part of the National Pretreatment Program and Solon Industrial
Surcharge Program. Such fees shall be based on the current costs of the
analysis including administrative costs.
Parameter Charge
Parameter                            Charge
Ammonia                              $16
BOD                                  $36
Chloride                             $14.50
Chlorine                             $14
COD                                  $18
Cyanide                              $23
Fecal coliform                       $22
MBAS                                 $40
Mercury (EPA Method 245.2)           $26
Mercury (Low Level, EPA Method 1631) $62
Metals (ICP) (per metal)             $10
Metals Scan (ICP)                    $75
Nitrates                             $14.50
Nitrites                             $12
Oil/grease                           $30
pH                                   $9
Phosphorous                          $14
SS                                   $10
Surfactant, Cationic                 $30
Surfactant, Nonionic                 $40
Total coliform                       $22
Total Toxic Organics                 $360
TS                                   $10
VSS                                  $14
 
(Ord. 1998-22, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 2005-74, passed 3-21-2005; Ord. 2005-152,
passed 6-20-2005; Ord. 2011-13, passed 1-18-2011)
§ 1046.05 ADDITIONAL CHARGES.
   Over and above the rates and charges established by §
1046.04, there may be established in special instances, and upon special
agreement between the city and the owner of any premises served by the system,
such additional charges for industrial wastes of unusual strength or
composition which are accepted by the city for treatment as may be determined
to be fair and equitable. Similarly, rates in lieu of or supplemental to those
established by §
1046.04 may also be established by special agreement in any case not clearly
defined in §
1046.04 or where satisfactory provision shall have been made for direct
measurement of the quantity of sewerage discharged to the system. Each such
special agreement and the charges established thereby shall not become
effective until ratified by ordinance duly passed by Council.
(Ord. 1980-138, passed 4-6-1981)
§ 1046.06 CITY OF SOLON BILLING CHARGE.
   The city shall apply a fee of $4 to each quarterly user charge for the
purpose of offsetting the cost of processing of sewer charges as set forth in §
1046.04.
(Ord. 2011-13, passed 1-18-2011; Ord. 2024-30, passed 2-20-2024)
§ 1046.065 SUMMER USE ADJUSTMENT PROGRAM.
   A Summer Use Adjustment Program is provided for owner occupied one-, two-,
three- and four- family residential accounts in good standing. The adjustment
shall be applied to the third and fourth quarter (summer months) consumption
meter readings based on the historical typical consumption established in the
first and second quarter readings (winter months). If for any reason actual
readings are not available to establish typical use, the program will utilize
the last two actual winter quarter readings. In the case that summer use is
less than historical typical use, no adjustment would be necessary. If an
actual summer reading is not available, the program will default to the last
actual summer reading.
(Ord. 2003-126, passed 5-19-2003; Ord. 2011-13, passed 1-18-2011)
§ 1046.07 PAYMENT OF BILLS; SURCHARGE FOR DELINQUENCY.
   (a)   The sewer charges levied, at the rates established by §
1046.04, shall take effect on September 1, 1962, and shall thereafter be billed
on the first day of each calendar quarter, or as soon in the calendar quarter
as water meter readings become available, and be due within 30 days after
billing date. Connection charges shall be payable in advance of connection as
provided in §
1046.04. In case of failure to pay any bill for sewer charges when due, a
penalty of 5% of the unpaid account balance shall be added to the bill. If the
bill is not paid by the due date of the next and any subsequent quarter’s bill,
another 5% penalty shall be added for each past due bill.
   (b)   The Director of Finance may abate all or part of any penalties applied
to a sewer billing account(s) if the user(s) can show just cause for non-
payment. Additionally, if a resident can provide evidence that immediate
payment of a past due balance will cause a hardship, the city may provide a
payment plan not to exceed three years. To request an abatement of any and all
penalties, the resident must submit to the Director of Finance the proper
standardized form, together with evidence of hardship.
   (c)   The Director of Finance can waive or delay the application of the
delinquency surcharge for all user accounts for a specific quarterly billing
period if an approval is granted by the Sewer Billing Review Board to make such
a blanket waiver. The Board will provide the Public Works Committee with a copy
of the approval of the blanket waiver.
(Ord. 1980-138, passed 4-6-1981; Ord. 2001-94, passed 4-2-2001; Ord. 2002-224,
passed 10-7-2002; Ord. 2011-13, passed 1-18-2011; Ord. 2024-30, passed 2-20-
2024)
§ 1046.08 ANNUAL REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF CHARGES.
   The Director of Water Reclamation and the Director of Finance shall annually
review the system of user charges to determine if they are in accordance with
divisions (a), (b) and (c) of this section and to report to the Public Works
Committee. The Public Works Committee will determine whether revisions to the
sewer use charge schedule are warranted and, if so determined, will make a
recommendation to the Council for incorporation into the city ordinances.
   (a)   The system shall result in the distribution of the costs of operation
and maintenance of the treatment works within the Department’s jurisdiction to
each user class in proportion to such user’s contribution to the total
wastewater loading of the treatment works. Factors such as strength, volume and
delivery flow rate characteristics shall be considered and included as the
basis for the user’s contribution to ensure a proportional distribution of
operation and maintenance, including replacement costs, to each user’s class.
   (b)   The system of charges shall be reviewed annually and revised
periodically to reflect actual treatment works operation and maintenance costs.
   (c)   The system of charges shall generate sufficient revenue to offset the
costs of all treatment works operation and maintenance provided by the
Department and such other expenditures that may be authorized.
(Ord. 1980-138, passed 4-6-1981; Ord. 2001-94, passed 4-2-2001; Ord. 2011-13,
passed 1-18-2011)
§ 1046.09 REMEDY OF CITY FOR NONPAYMENT.
   Each sewer charge if not paid 60 days after its due date, may be certified
to the Cuyahoga County Fiscal Officer, who shall place the same on the property
tax duplicate, with the interest and penalties allowed by law, to be collected
as other municipal property taxes and special assessments are collected. The
city shall also have the right, in the event of non-payment, to proceed to
collect such delinquent charges in a civil action.
(Ord. 1980-138, passed 4-6-1981; Ord. 2001-94, passed 4-2-2001; Ord. 2011-13,
passed 1-18-2011; Ord. 2024-30, passed 2-20-2024)
§ 1046.10 TREATMENT OF NONACCEPTABLE WASTES REQUIRED.
   (a)   Where investigation reveals the presence in the system of
nonacceptable industrial wastes, as set forth in §
1044.05, emanating from any lot, land, building or premises, the owner, lessor,
lessee or occupant of the lot, land, building or premises shall be required to
treat, neutralize or in other ways prepare the noxious substance therein, to
the satisfaction of the Approving Authority, in order to convert the same into
acceptable industrial wastes. Failure to do so within 30 days after written
notice, or within such other longer period of time as may be specified by the
Approving Authority, shall serve as authority for the Approving Authority, with
the concurrence of the Mayor, to take whatever steps are necessary to prevent
the nonacceptable industrial wastes from being discharged into the sewer
system.
   (b)   If the nonacceptable industrial wastes are such that they may cause
imminent danger of injury or damage to persons or property, the Approving
Authority may, with the concurrence of the Mayor, take immediate steps, without
notice, to prevent such industrial wastes from being discharged into the sewer
system, including the disconnecting of the public sewer main from the premises
producing the nonacceptable industrial wastes.
(Ord. 1980-138, passed 4-6-1981)
§ 1046.11 DISCHARGE OF NONACCEPTABLE WASTES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall discharge nonacceptable industrial wastes, as defined in §
1046.01(c), into the system, whether directly or indirectly.
(Ord. 1980-138, passed 4-6-1981)
§ 1046.12 HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION PROGRAM.
   The Director of Finance is authorized to implement a Homestead Exemption
Program. The program will provide for a reduced rate of sewer charges, as
defined in §
1046.04, for qualified residents that provide evidence of income below a
specific threshold or of a full disability status. The Director of Finance will
define the qualifications and standards of review for determining the
eligibility for the homestead exemption program.
(Ord. 1997-266, passed 12-15-1997; Ord. 2011-13, passed 1-18-2011; Ord. 2024-
30, passed 2-20-2024)
§ 1046.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not more than $500 or
imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both, for each offense. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
CHAPTER 1048: WATER
Section
   
1048.01   Water delivery charge (Repealed)
   
1048.02   Water for swimming pools (Repealed)
   
1048.03   Disposition of money
   
1048.04   Tap-in charge generally
   
1048.043   Tap-in charge for connection in the Gemma Subdivision
   
1048.047   Tap-in charge for connection with the Chagrin River Road water line
   
1048.05   Sprinkling bans
   
1048.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Access to water supply, see §
1454.06
   Power to provide and regulate water system, see R.C. §§ 715.08, 717.01,
743.01
   Supply required prior to issuance of building permits, see §
1424.11
   Water in subdivisions, see §
1250.03
   Water meters, see §§
1044.24,
1044.25
§ 1048.01 WATER DELIVERY CHARGE (REPEALED).
Editor’s note:
   Section 1048.01 was repealed by Ordinance 2005-152, passed June 20, 2005.
§ 1048.02 WATER FOR SWIMMING POOLS (REPEALED).
Editor’s note:
   Section 1048.02 was repealed by Ordinance 2005-152, passed June 20, 2005.
§ 1048.03 DISPOSITION OF MONEY.
   The charge shall be collected from the person to whom the water is delivered
at the time of delivery, shall be paid into the city treasury and shall be
placed in the General Fund.
(Ord. 1955-41, passed 5-4-1955)
§ 1048.04 TAP-IN CHARGE GENERALLY.
   The connection charge for initial connection, whether direct or indirect, to
the city’s water system, payable in advance of making such connection, shall be
$100 each. Such charge shall not be made for connections to premises which have
theretofore been assessed for the construction of a water main in excess of
eight inches in diameter.
(Ord. 1968-109, passed 5-6-1968; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1048.043 TAP-IN CHARGE FOR CONNECTION IN THE GEMMA SUBDIVISION.
   (a)   No owner or occupant of property or other person, corporation,
partnership, association or other entity or any agent, independent contractor,
servant, lessee or tenant thereof (hereinafter referred to as the “applicant”)
shall connect or cause to be connected any structure or accessory structure to
the water line in the Gemma Subdivision or service any parcel situated in the
restricted service area from the water line in the Gemma Subdivision, as
established in Exhibit “A” attached to original Ordinance 1995-204, passed
November 6, 1995, being Permanent Parcel Nos. 952-037-008, 952-037-014, 952-
037-019, 952-038-009, 952-038-011 and 952-038-013, unless the applicant shall
have first paid a connection fee for such purpose to the city.
   (b)   The connection fee described in division (a) hereof shall be $3,100.
   (c)   The proceeds from the permit set forth in division (b) hereof shall be
used to reimburse Dr. Charles Gemma and Carlette Gemma, 5274 SOM Center Road,
Solon, Ohio, for their costs for construction of a water line as a result of
the Gemma lot split.
   (d)   The fee required in division (a) hereof shall only be required of any
potential applicant until December 31, 2015. After December 31, 2015, no permit
shall be required and this connection fee requirement shall be null and void.
   (e)   The Clerk of Council is hereby authorized and directed to deliver a
certified copy of this section, together with the required filing fee, to the
Auditor of Cuyahoga County for recording pursuant to R.C. § 319.61.
(Ord. 1995-204, passed 11-6-1995)
§ 1048.047 TAP-IN CHARGE FOR CONNECTION WITH THE CHAGRIN RIVER ROAD WATER LINE.
   (a)   No owner or occupant of property or other person, corporation,
partnership, association or other entity or any agent, independent contractor,
servant, lessee or tenant thereof (hereinafter referred to as the “applicant”)
shall connect or cause to be connected any structure or accessory structure to
the Chagrin River Road water line from the Bentleyville line to the
intersection of Franklin Road, or service any parcel situated in the restricted
service area as established in Exhibit “A” attached to original Ordinance 1995-
203, passed November 6, 1995, being Permanent Parcel No. 955-05-008, from such
water line, unless the applicant shall have first paid a connection fee for
such purpose to the city.
   (b)   The connection fee described in division (a) hereof shall be $15,000.
   (c)   The proceeds from the fee set forth in division (b) hereof shall be
used for a pro-rata reduction of the assessments of those properties which abut
on Chagrin River Road and which are being assessed on a front-footage basis for
the construction of the Chagrin River Road water line.
   (d)   The fee required by division (a) hereof shall no longer be needed
after December 31, 2015. After December 31, 2015, this section shall be null
and void.
   (e)   The Clerk of Council is hereby authorized and directed to deliver a
certified copy of this section, together with the required filing fee, to the
Auditor of Cuyahoga County for recording pursuant to R.C. § 319.61.
(Ord. 1995-203, passed 11-6-1995)
§ 1048.05 SPRINKLING BANS.
   The Mayor is hereby authorized to impose sprinkling bans when, in his or her
judgment, such action is necessary to conserve the city’s water supply for
other more essential uses. Any sprinkling ban so imposed shall be enforced by
the Police Department, which shall first warn the water users that such a ban
is in effect. No person shall fail to observe the ban after such warning.
(Ord. 1970-104, passed 6-15-1970)
§ 1048.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
CHAPTER 1050: ELECTRICITY
Editor’s note:
   The city contracts, from time to time, with the Cleveland Electric
Illuminating Company and the Ohio Edison Company for electrical service. Copies
of the latest relevant legislation may be obtained, at cost, from the Clerk of
Council.
   Ordinance 2000-164, passed July 17, 2000, and approved by the voters on
November 7, 2000, authorized an electricity aggregation program with opt-out
provisions, pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4928.20.
   There are no sections in Chapter 1050. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Appropriation of property by electric companies, see R.C. § 4933.15
   Contracts with municipal corporation for light, see R.C. § 4933.04
   Gas or electric companies may manufacture and supply both electricity and
gas, see Ohio R.C. 4933.02
   Powers of electric light and power companies, see R.C. § 4933.13
   Prosecutions for theft of utilities, see §
642.26
   Wiring plans, see §
1428.07
CHAPTER 1052: GAS
Editor’s note:
   The city contracts, from time to time, with the East Ohio Gas Company for
natural gas service. Copies of the latest relevant legislation may be obtained,
at cost, from the Clerk.
   There are no sections in Chapter 1052. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Gas company may extend mains beyond city, see R.C. § 4933.05
   Gas meters, see R.C. §§ 4933.08 et seq.
   Gas or electric companies may manufacture and supply both electricity and
gas, see R.C. § 4933.02
   Prosecutions for theft of utilities, see §
642.26
TITLE SIX - OTHER PUBLIC SERVICES
            Chap.
1060.   Rubbish and Recycling Collection
            Chap.
1064.   Cemeteries
            Chap.
1068.   Swimming Pool
            Chap.
1070.   City Hall, Historical Society and City-Owned Property
            Chap.
1072.   Snow Removal Services
            Chap.
1074.   Emergency Alarms
CHAPTER 1060: RUBBISH AND RECYCLING COLLECTION
Section
   
1060.01   Scope
   
1060.02   Definitions
   
1060.03   Authority of Director of City Services
   
1060.04   Collection practices
   
1060.05   Recycling policy
   
1060.06   Collection of recyclable materials
   
1060.07   Container regulations
   
1060.08   Placing containers; removal
   
1060.09   Litter around receptacles
   
1060.10   Oversize items; bulk refuse; construction debris; collection
procedure
   
1060.11   Bulk refuse; preparation; collection procedure
   
1060.12   Construction debris; collection procedure
   
1060.13   Storage regulations for apartment and condominium buildings
   
1060.14   Container regulations at shopping centers
   
1060.15   Burning of refuse prohibited
   
1060.99   Violations; penalties
§ 1060.01 SCOPE.
   The city, through its Service Department established pursuant to
Article VI, § 1 of the City Charter, shall collect and dispose of refuse and
recyclables from single-family and two-family residential properties located
upon public streets which are not considered private developments and whereas
the right-of-way has been dedicated to the city. Furthermore, at such other
properties within the city where an agreement for refuse and recycling
collection between the city and the property owners was in existence prior to
the passage of this chapter. The city does not collect refuse or recycling in
any other zoning classifications within the city. The Director of City Services
shall have the authority to designate the time and manner of such refuse and
recycling collection consistent with this chapter.
(Ord. 2013-46, passed 3-18-2013)
§ 1060.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter and the regulations
arising from this chapter are defined as follows:
   ALUMINUM. Aluminum cans, aluminum foil and aluminum containers or trays used
in packaging, preparation or cooking of food.
   AUTHORIZED LITTER RECEPTACLES. Receptacles for the use of the general public
placed outdoors by the city or by private persons on either public or private
property. The receptacles shall be designed so as to prevent the escape of
litter onto any public or private property.
   AUTHORIZED RECYCLING RECEPTACLE. A recycling receptacle provided by the city
or paper leaf bag used to contain yard waste.
   AUTHORIZED AND APPROVED REFUSE RECEPTACLES. Authorized recycling receptacles
and authorized rubbish receptacles.
   AUTHORIZED AND APPROVED RUBBISH RECEPTACLES. Up to a 95- or 65-gallon
rubbish receptacle provided by the city that contain rubbish generated by
owners or occupants for collection pursuant to this chapter. Residents may, at
their option and according to their need, obtain a maximum of one second
container from the city at a cost of $70.
   BRUSH WASTE. Tree limbs resulting from tree trimming, woody vines, branches
and twigs longer than two feet in length and one-half inch in diameter.
   CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS. Concrete, asphalt, framing lumber, gypsum wallboard,
rubble, roofing materials, plumbing fixtures, windows, insulation, garage
doors, railroad ties (weathered), bricks, blocks and siding.
   CORRUGATED CARDBOARD. Paper in which a portion has been made to have a wavy
surface (alternating ridges and grooves) and is placed between two flat
surfaces for the sake of strength, and which is commonly used to form cartons.
   GLASS CONTAINERS. Bottles and jars of any color, made of silica, sand, soda
ash, and limestone, being transparent or translucent, and used for packaging or
bottling various materials. This does not include plastics or glass products
such as window glass, blue glass, flat glass, mirrors, plate glass, light
bulbs, dishes or ceramics.
   HOUSEHOLD RECYCLING RECEPTACLES. A container authorized and approved by the
city, used to store recyclables before they are collected in the curbside
recycling program.
   LEAVES. Deciduous and coniferous seasonal deposition from trees.
   LITTER. All refuse, and includes any other waste material which, if thrown
or deposited as prohibited in this chapter, tends to create a danger or
nuisance to public health, safety or welfare.
   MAGAZINES. Publications printed on glossy, clay-coated paper.
   NEWSPAPER. Newsprint-grade paper, the common, inexpensive machine-finished
paper made chiefly from wood pulp, which is printed and distributed, and not
include newspaper soiled by food, paint, petroleum products, oil or oil
solvents, or other solid wastes that are not recyclable.
   OCCUPANT. Any person living, sleeping or cooking in, or conducting any
commercial or nonprofit activity, or having actual possession of any building
or part thereof.
   OWNER. Any person or entity which alone or jointly or severally with others:
      (1)   Shall have legal or equitable title to any private property with or
without accompanying actual possession thereof; or
      (2)   Shall have charge, care or control of any private property as owner
or agent or as executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of
the owner or any other person in a representative capacity.
   PAPER LEAF BAG. A sanitary kraft paper sack or equal of 30-gallon capacity,
two-ply 50-pound wet strength with decomposing glue and reinforced self-
supporting square bottom closure.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Any type of refuse designated by the Service
Department through rules and regulations issued under this chapter to be
separated for recycling or composting.
   RECYCLABLE PLASTIC.  Clear and colored plastic bottles and jugs marked #1-#7
with the exception of styrofoam and plastic film or bags.
   REFUSE. All solid waste generated by occupiers of land and designated for
handling, collection and disposal pursuant to this chapter excluding
construction demolition debris.
   REASONABLE ACCUMULATION. The normal accumulation of refuse on a weekly basis
from a residential dwelling.
   RUBBISH. All refuse excluding recyclable materials.
   SECONDARY RECYCLABLES. Computers, printers, small appliances, batteries,
propane cylinders, light metals, household hazardous waste items such as,
paints, stains, pool chemicals, fertilizers, oil, anti-freeze and used fire
extinguishers.
   TREE LAWN. The portion of the street right-of-way between the traveled and/
or paved portion of the roadway to the nearest line of any existing sidewalk or
to the street right-of-way boundary.
   WHITE GOODS. Major kitchen and laundry application including, but not
limited to, stoves, washers, refrigerators and dryers. Nothing in this
definition shall waive compliance with the rules and regulations for the
generation, transportation, storage and disposal of hazardous waste.
   YARD WASTE. Grass clippings, weeds, hedge clippings, garden waste, and twigs
and brush not longer than two feet in length and one-half inch in diameter.
(Ord. 2013-46, passed 3-18-2013)
§ 1060.03 AUTHORITY OF DIRECTOR OF CITY SERVICES.
   The Director of City Services shall maintain regular schedules of refuse and
recycling collection and shall publicize the schedules by appropriate means.
The Director of City Services shall have the authority to designate the days of
collection.
(Ord. 2013-46, passed 3-18-2013)
§ 1060.04 COLLECTION PRACTICES.
   (a)   Frequency of collection. Refuse and recyclables accumulated by
residences shall be collected once per week.
   (b)   (1)   Limitation on quantity. The Director of City Services shall
collect a reasonable accumulation of refuse or rubbish from single family and
two family homes during a collection period.
      (2)   Special refuse problems. The removal of large amounts of refuse or
rubbish which are generated by the homeowner, contractor, landlord or other
agents of the property shall be the responsibility or the homeowner for
disposal at their own cost. The city will not be responsible for the collection
of these items.
(Ord. 2013-46, passed 3-18-2013)
§ 1060.05 RECYCLING POLICY.
   (a)   Purpose and declaration of policy. This section has been created
because of the great interest of the city in preserving the environment by
reducing the amount of refuse sent to landfills and in reducing cost to the
city incurred by way of disposal fees. It shall be the policy of the city to
reduce the amount of solid waste generated and to encourage residential and
city participation in recycling of recyclable materials to the fullest extent
possible.
   (b)   Establishment of program. There is established a program for the
separation of certain recyclable materials from refuse which shall apply to
properties covered by this chapter and shall be carried out under the
supervision of the Director of City Services and his or her designees.
   (c)   Separation of recyclable materials. Each owner or occupant covered by
this chapter shall be encouraged to separate all designated recyclable
materials from other refuse in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
and the regulations arising from this chapter. These recycling requirements
shall apply to all properties covered by this chapter. Each owner or occupant
of a property which receives city solid waste collection service shall be
encouraged to separate from other refuse all recyclable materials designated by
the Director of City Services in rules and regulations issued under this
chapter. This policy shall also apply to all city-owned buildings and schools
receiving such services.
(Ord. 2013-46, passed 3-18-2013)
§ 1060.06 COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.
   (a)   During the fall leaf collection season, owners or occupants shall
place their leaves on the treelawn for collection. Other than during the fall
leaf collection season all yard waste shall be placed in paper leaf bags.
However, if the owner or occupant employs a commercial landscaping company, the
landscaping company is responsible for complying with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (b)   The preparation and placement of recyclables shall be accomplished in
accordance with rules and regulations to be issued by the Director of City
Services under this chapter.
   (c)   All recycling containers and receptacles shall be placed for
collection on the curbside, so as not to obstruct the free passage of
pedestrians, or in such other place and on days specified by the Director of
City Services in rules and regulations to be issued under this chapter.
   (d)   Carpet padding shall be tied in compact bundles not to exceed 50
pounds in weight and four feet in length.
   (e)   Secondary recyclables shall be placed curbside for collection during
the first full week of every month on the regularly scheduled refuse collection
day. Items shall be placed in a manner as to not obstruct either collection
process.
   (f)   Recyclables shall not be placed in black plastic garbage bags for
collection, removal or disposal. Recyclables shall not be placed in the same
refuse containers as rubbish or mixed with rubbish or litter for collection,
removal or disposal.
   (g)   Upon placement of recyclables for the city or its designee at the
curbside, pursuant to this subsection, such recyclables shall become the
property of the city. It shall be a violation of this section if any person,
other than authorized agents of the city acting in the course of their
employment or contract, collects or causes to be collected any recyclable so
placed. Each and every such collection in violation of this subdivision from
one or more locations shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. In
addition to the penalty provided in this section, the violator of this
subsection shall make restitution to the city for the value of recyclables
illegally removed.
   (h)   The recyclable materials to be separated shall be designated by the
Director of City Services in rules and regulations to be issued under this
section. If the Director of City Services designates a material as recyclable,
such designation shall govern the treatment of such material, notwithstanding
the provisions of any ordinance to the contrary.
(Ord. 2013-46, passed 3-18-2013)
§ 1060.07 CONTAINER REGULATIONS.
   Whoever desires the removal of refuse and recycling from private property
pursuant to this chapter shall cause the refuse of and recycling to be placed
in authorized refuse and recycling receptacles and shall be placed in
accordance to §
1060.06(e). Any refuse or recycling materials placed in unauthorized
receptacles or placed on the ground next to receptacles will not be collected.
(Ord. 2013-46, passed 3-18-2013)
§ 1060.08 PLACING CONTAINERS; REMOVAL.
   Authorized refuse and recycling receptacles shall be placed at the
streetline on or before 7:00 a.m. on the day designated for collection but not
before 7:00 p.m. on the day prior to refuse collection as designated by the
Director of City Services. Receptacles shall not be placed for collection at
the streetline of the property before 7:00 p.m. of the day prior to any of the
following days: Sunday or the following legal holidays: New Year’s Day, Martin
Luther King, Jr. Day, Presidents’ Day, Good Friday, Memorial Day, Independence
Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and the day following Thanksgiving and
Christmas Day. Upon collection, all receptacles shall be removed from the
streetline no later than 7:00 p.m on the day of collection. The authorized
refuse receptacles shall not be placed in a manner to inconvenience the use of
the sidewalk by pedestrians. Only rubbish should be placed in authorized
rubbish receptacles and only recyclable material shall be placed in authorized
recycling receptacles and shall be placed on opposite sides at the end of the
driveway apron adjacent to the street, pursuant to §
1060.06(e).
(Ord. 2013-46, passed 3-18-2013; Ord. 2018-01, passed 2-20-2018)
§ 1060.09 LITTER AROUND RECEPTACLES.
   It shall be the duty of each owner/occupant to keep the area around
receptacles free from rubbish and litter. The city shall not be responsible for
garbage or litter around receptacles and shall only be required to accept the
contents of the receptacle at the time of collection.
(Ord. 2013-46, passed 3-18-2013)
§ 1060.10 OVERSIZE ITEMS; BULK REFUSE; CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS; COLLECTION
PROCEDURE.
   Large oversized items of refuse such as refrigerators, air conditioners,
appliances, construction debris and bulky refuse will be collected by the city
by special arrangement with the Service Department, with 24-hour notice
required. The Director of City Services or Manager of Solid Waste may establish
procedures for the handling, collecting and disposing of such items.
(Ord. 2013-46, passed 3-18-2013)
§ 1060.11 BULK REFUSE; PREPARATION; COLLECTION PROCEDURE.
   Refuse that is larger than can be contained in the authorized refuse
receptacles shall be securely tied in compact bundles not to exceed 50 pounds
in weight and two feet in length. Carpeting and carpet padding shall be tied in
compact bundles not to exceed 50 pounds in weight and four feet in length.
Large cardboard cartons shall be flattened down no larger than three feet by
three feet; such items may be collected for recycling only, and may not be used
as refuse receptacles. Such bulk refuse shall be set out in the same place and
under the same restrictions.
(Ord. 2013-46, passed 3-18-2013)
§ 1060.12 CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS; COLLECTION PROCEDURE.
   Construction debris shall be limited to small amounts of owner/occupant
generated construction debris which does not exceed more than two cubic yards
for weekly collection. Amounts of debris which exceeds such amounts shall be
the responsibility of the owner/occupant to arrange for commercial disposal.
Refer to section §
1454.11 (Disposal of Waste Material).
(Ord. 2013-46, passed 3-18-2013)
§ 1060.13 STORAGE CONTAINER REGULATIONS FOR APARTMENT AND CONDOMINIUM
BUILDINGS.
   The owner of any condominium or apartment dwelling, building or structure
within the city which contains six or more dwellings shall provide a storage
container of sufficient size and capacity to accommodate the rubbish of the
occupants of the dwelling units. The storage containers shall be maintained in
good working condition and shall be tightly sealed at all times to eliminate
odors, rodent problems and any other unsightly or unsanitary conditions. The
container shall be constructed to be watertight and must contain any liquids
from spilling out of the container.
(Ord. 2013-46, passed 3-18-2013)
§ 1060.14 CONTAINERS REGULATIONS AT SHOPPING CENTERS.
   The owner of any building or structure in the retail district shall provide
storage containers of sufficient size and capacity to accommodate the rubbish
of the occupants of the building or structure. The storage containers shall be
maintained in good condition and shall be tightly sealed at all times to
eliminate odors, rodent problems and other unsightly and unsanitary conditions.
All rubbish shall be contained within the storage containers, and no exposed
rubbish shall be permitted. The container shall be constructed to be watertight
and must contain any liquids from spilling out of the container.
(Ord. 2013-46, passed 3-18-2013)
§ 1060.15 BURNING OF REFUSE PROHIBITED.
   The burning of leaves and other refuse is strictly prohibited.
(Ord. 2013-46, passed 3-18-2013)
§ 1060.99 VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.
   Any person who violates any section of this chapter shall be subject to a
fine not exceeding $25. Each day’s violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
   (A)   Disseminating information regarding the Program. The city shall
publicize the provision of this chapter through the media, signs,
advertisements, flyers, leaflets, announcements on radios and television,
newspaper articles and through any other appropriate means, so that all
citizens covered by this chapter will have the opportunity to become informed
about the legal duties of property owners and occupants, pedestrians and
motorists, and about the city recycling, refuse and anti-litter services.
   (B)   Rules and regulations. The Director of City Services, with the
approval of the City Council, may promulgate rules and regulations for the
implementation of this chapter.
(Ord. 2013-46, passed 3-18-2013)
CHAPTER 1064: CEMETERIES
Section
   
1064.01   Animals at large prohibited; exceptions
   
1064.02   Buildings restricted
   
1064.03   Charge for burial lots
   
1064.04   Grave opening charges
   
1064.05   Charges for concrete foundations; size of foundations
   
1064.06   Construction of concrete foundations; size of foundations
   
1064.07   Charge for removal of bodies
   
1064.08   Collection and disposition of fees
   
1064.09   Permanent fund for care of lots in cemeteries
   
1064.10   Lot designation inscriptions on headstone
   
1064.11   Headstone height limitation in the expended area of the Mt. Hope and
Roselawn Cemeteries
   
1064.12   Forfeiture of deeds for cemetery lots
   
1064.13   Repurchase of cemetery lots by city
   
1064.14   Planting restrictions and requirements
   
1064.15   Vault required
   
1064.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Abuse of a corpse, see §
634.24
   Burials may be prohibited, see R.C. § 759.05
   Cemetery Sexton, see §
244.02
   Management and control, see R.C. § 759.09
§ 1064.01 ANIMALS AT LARGE PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   No person, cemetery association or other organization owning, operating,
managing or in charge of any cemetery in the city shall keep, maintain, harbor
or allow to remain upon any of the property within the bounds of such cemetery
any horses, mules, cattle, sheep, goats, swine, dogs, cats, geese, ducks,
turkeys, guineas, chickens or other domesticated animals, except that
domesticated fowl and animals may be kept by any keeper or custodian of such
cemetery, provided the same are kept from trespassing upon the graves in such
cemetery, and except that such horse or horses as may be necessary in the
operation and maintenance of such cemetery grounds may be kept thereon but not
allowed to roam at large about the cemetery.
(Ord. 1996-50, passed 3-4-1996)
§ 1064.02 BUILDINGS RESTRICTED.
   No buildings or structures of any kind other than such as are necessary in
the maintenance and operation of the cemetery shall be erected, altered or
maintained upon any cemetery property within the city, except that in
connection with any keeper’s house, a detached garage for housing not more than
three automobiles may be erected and maintained, and such sheds and out-
buildings as are usually incidental and appurtenant to houses in the same
locality.
(Ord. 1996-50, passed 3-4-1996)
§ 1064.03 CHARGE FOR BURIAL LOTS.
   The charge for cemetery lots shall be $774 for each grave for residents of
the city or former residents of the city who are property owners. Commencing in
2014 and each year thereafter, the Cemetery Sexton, in consultation with the
Director of Finance, shall adjust the charge for cemetery lots so as to reflect
the change in the United States Department of Labor’s Consumer Price Index, for
All Urban Consumers, for prior calendar year. When purchasing graves, payments
must be made in full. No payment plan shall be allowed unless approved by the
Safety and Public Properties Committee. There will be no holding of graves for
any length of time. The maximum purchase shall be of two lots or ten graves.
(Ord. 1996-50, passed 3-4-1996)
§ 1064.04 GRAVE OPENING CHARGES.
   (a)   The charges for opening graves in the city cemeteries shall be as
follows:
 Charge
                                                                      Charge
Ashes, when there is no casket, residents or Solon property owners on $264
Saturdays, Sundays or holidays
Ashes, when there is no casket, nonresidents on weekdays              $353
Ashes, when there is no casket, residents or Solon property owners on $174
weekdays
Ashes, when there is no casket, nonresidents on Saturdays, Sundays or $532
holidays
Infants, nonresidents on Saturdays, Sundays or holidays               $708
Infants, nonresidents on weekdays                                     $443
Infants, residents on Saturdays, Sundays or holidays                  $443
Infants, residents on weekdays                                        $264
Nonresidents on Saturdays, Sundays or holidays                        $1,063
Nonresidents on weekdays                                              $891
Residents or Solon property owners on Saturdays, Sundays or holidays  $799
Residents or Solon property owners on weekdays                        $619
 
   (b)   The foregoing grave opening charges shall be applicable during the
calendar year 2013. Commencing January 1, 2014, and annually thereafter, the
foregoing charges shall be automatically adjusted so as to reflect the change
in the United States Department of Labor’s Consumer Price Index, for All Urban
Customers, for the prior calendar year.
(Ord. 1996-50, passed 3-4-1996)
§ 1064.05 CHARGES FOR CONCRETE FOUNDATIONS; SIZE OF FOUNDATIONS.
   (a)   The charge for the construction and installation of concrete
foundations for grave markers shall be as follows:
 
                                                Charge
Solid small concrete foundation 15" x 27" x 4"  $134
Solid medium concrete foundation 18" x 32" x 4" $144
Solid large concrete foundation 15" x 51" x 4"  $154
Solid XL concrete foundation 18" x 64" x 4"     $198
 
   (b)   All such concrete foundations shall be a thickness of four inches and
no such concrete foundation shall be more than one and one-half feet wide or
more than five feet long.
§ 1064.06 CONSTRUCTION OF CONCRETE FOUNDATIONS; SIZE OF FOUNDATIONS.
   All labor and materials required for the construction of concrete
foundations for monuments and markers shall be furnished by the city, upon
required payment, to the city. No monument or marker shall be placed on a grave
unless the concrete foundation is adequate to support the weight and size of
the monument or marker as determined by the Cemetery Sexton. No monument or
marker shall be larger than one and one-half feet wide or more than five feet
in length unless otherwise waived by the Safety and Public Properties Committee
for good cause shown.
§ 1064.07 CHARGE FOR REMOVAL OF BODIES.
   The charge for removal of bodies from graves shall be the charge for grave
openings as set forth in §
1064.04 of this chapter, plus $270.
(Ord. 1996-50, passed 3-4-1996)
§ 1064.08 COLLECTION AND DISPOSITION OF FEES.
   All fees prescribed in this chapter shall be collected by the Cemetery
Sexton and turned over to the Director of Finance. Any money remaining after
the payment for labor and materials used in the operation of the cemetery shall
be credited to the General Fund and thereafter used for maintenance of the city
cemeteries.
(Ord. 1996-50, passed 3-4-1996)
§ 1064.09 PERMANENT FUND FOR CARE OF LOTS IN CEMETERIES.
   (a)   The Director of Finance may accept monies by agreement, gift, devise,
bequest or otherwise and hold such monies as a permanent fund for the city’s
cemeteries. Monies so accepted shall be pledged for the perpetual care of the
lots designated and may include flowers and decorations. On receipt of the
monies so designated, the Director shall issue therefor a written receipt in
acknowledgment thereof, binding the faith and credit of the city to forever
hold such monies as a permanent fund to provide perpetual care of the lots
named therein. The Director shall enter the receipt and income of the monies
and expenditures thereof in detail on books of account, keeping each case
separately.
   (b)   All such monies received by the Director shall be deposited, as well
as interest earnings thereon, into a special Cemetery Endowment Trust Fund as
required by R.C. § 5705.09(H). The Director shall transfer interest earnings on
such endowments to the Cemetery Operating Fund to defray the cost of grave care
for which such endowment was accepted. The Director shall invest such funds and
keep them invested, to the extent possible, in interest bearing bonds or in
interest bearing certificates of deposit in financial institutions within the
city. The Director shall report annually to Council all monies received and
disbursed in the management of the Fund.
(Ord. 1996-50, passed 3-4-1996)
§ 1064.10 LOT DESIGNATION INSCRIPTIONS ON HEADSTONES.
   All headstones installed at the Roselawn Cemetery shall contain a correct
description of the section and lot number of the burial lot. All headstones
installed in the Mount Hope Cemetery shall contain a correct description of the
lot number of the burial lot.
(Ord. 1996-50, passed 3-4-1996)
§ 1064.11 HEADSTONE HEIGHT LIMITATION IN THE EXPENDED AREA OF THE MT. HOPE AND
ROSELAWN CEMETERIES.
   All headstones in the Mt. Hope and Roselawn Cemeteries shall be limited to a
maximum height of three feet including a base under the headstone if
applicable, unless otherwise waived by the Safety and Public Properties
Committee for good cause shown. Although it is not mandatory, it is highly
recommended that all headstones installed as of January 1, 2013 have a base
underneath the headstone to prevent the possibility of damage which may result
from the need to temporarily move a headstone to allow for burial operations or
damage which may occur during maintenance within the cemetery. The city high
recommends the purchase of this option when placing a headstone request with
the city.
(Ord. 1996-50, passed 3-4-1996)
§ 1064.12 FORFEITURE OF DEEDS FOR CEMETERY LOTS.
   Commencing August 7, 1990, all deeds for cemetery lots shall contain a
provision that burial must take place within 75 years of the deed. If no burial
takes place within that time period, then the lot owner will be notified by
certified mail, return receipt requested, or by legal public notice, or both,
that the deed has been forfeited. After notice of such forfeiture, the deed may
be resold. All individuals purchasing a deed for a cemetery lot in the city’s
cemeteries shall sign a receipt indicating that they have been informed of this
provision, and this provision shall be printed on all cemetery deeds.
(Ord. 1996-50, passed 3-4-1996)
§ 1064.13 REPURCHASE OF CEMETERY LOTS BY CITY.
   At any time prior to use or forfeiture, the city will repurchase any
cemetery lot at the original purchase price or a minimum of $200, upon
presentation of the original deed. All individuals purchasing a deed for a
cemetery lot in the city’s cemeteries shall sign a receipt indicating that they
have been informed of this provision, and this provision shall be printed on
all cemetery deeds.
(Ord. 1996-50, passed 3-4-1996)
§ 1064.14 PLANTING RESTRICTIONS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   The following restrictions and requirements shall govern all plantings on
cemetery lots within city cemeteries:
   (a)   No shrubs or bushes shall be permitted to be planted on grave sites
except those which are in place and continue to be maintained as of January 1,
2013.
   (b)   No glass containers or vases will be permitted on grave sites.
   (c)   Flower beds are permitted as long as the width does not exceed the
base of the monument stone and are not excavated more than 12 inches in depth.
   (d)   No flower beds will be permitted to be planted in the center of any
individual grave site.
   (e)   No rose bushes or vegetative plant which incorporates or produces
thorns or barbs or creeping vines will be permitted to be planted on any
individual grave site.
   (f)   No full grave covering shall be permitted, except those which are in
place now, and continue to be maintained as of January 1, 2013.
   (g)   No single plants in the center of any individual grave site will be
permitted.
   (h)   All plantings shall be maintained by the lot owners or their agents.
Plantings which are not properly maintained or do not conform to the
requirements set forth in this section will be removed.
   (i)   Winter wreaths may be in place only from November 15 to March 1 of
each year. After that time, all wreaths will be removed from individual grave
sites.
(Ord. 1996-50, passed 3-4-1996)
§ 1064.15 VAULT REQUIRED.
   No burial shall occur at any cemetery located within the city unless the
body is encased in either a steel or cement vault. However, nothing herein
contained shall be construed to require the encasement of the body in a vault
for burial at any cemetery or part thereof owned, operated or leased by or in
conjunction with a religious organization, or at any other cemetery or part
thereof if a religious organization so requests, provided that all burial sites
are properly and safely located and maintained by the cemetery.
(Ord. 1998-112, passed 6-15-1998)
§ 1064.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not more than $500 or
imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both, for each offense. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
(Ord. 1996-50, passed 3-4-1996)
CHAPTER 1068: SWIMMING POOL
Section
   
1068.01   Fees (Repealed)
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Recreation Department, see
Ch. 256
   Swimming pools, see Zoning Code
§ 1068.01 FEES (REPEALED).
Editor’s note:
   Section 1068.01 was repealed by Ordinance 1996-168, passed September 16,
1996. See §
1424.11 of the Building and Housing Code.
CHAPTER 1070: CITY HALL, HISTORICAL SOCIETY AND CITY-OWNED PROPERTY
Section
   
1070.01   Rules for use of City Hall
   
1070.02   Charge and deposit for use of City Hall and Solon Historical Society
property
   
1070.03   Limitation on use of basement of Historical Society property
   
1070.04   Displays for city-sponsored events on city-owned property
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Deposit for damage to public property, see §
1426.02
   Possession of public property, see §
642.23
   Registry of historic landmarks, see R.C. § 149.55
   State Historical Society, see R.C. §§ 149.30 et seq.
   Tax levy to support historical museums, see R.C. § 5705.19
§ 1070.01 RULES FOR USE OF CITY HALL.
   (a)   Local organizations composed of residents of the city, organized and
operated for the benefit of such organizations of the city as a whole, shall
have the free use of City Hall.
   (b)   Local individuals or organizations not covered by division (a) hereof
shall pay $7 per day, of which the city shall pay $5 to the custodian for his
or her services in connection with such use, and such individuals or
organizations shall have the use of the dining room and kitchen in the basement
only.
   (c)   The use of other parts of the City Hall by local individuals or
organizations listed in division (b) hereof shall be granted and the price
therefor fixed by special action of Council.
   (d)   Nonlocal organizations or individuals may use City Hall, or parts
thereof, and permission for such use and the price thereof shall be fixed by
special action of Council.
(Ord. 1943-16, passed 6-7-1943)
   (e)   Before the granting of any permit, a request shall be made to the city
upon forms to be provided by the city, which forms shall state, among other
things, the name, address and purpose of the organization desiring the permit,
the date and hours when the building is to be used, and the size of the space
or the number of rooms desired by the applicant. Such forms shall be signed by
a responsible person, agent or officer of the applicant and shall guarantee,
among other things, to make good any breakage or damage caused by the applicant
in the use of the City Hall, that the premises shall be left reasonably clean,
and that all ordinances of the city and statutes of the state will be strictly
complied with.
   (f)   The permit shall inform the permittee that the city makes no guarantee
that other organizations or individuals will not use the City Hall at the same
time, provided different space is applied for.
   (g)   All requests must be made seven days prior to the date desired for use
of the City Hall.
   (h)   It shall be the policy of the city to grant all permits in the order
of the filing thereof.
   (i)   All permits may be rejected if any disorderly conduct takes place in
connection with the use of the building or if any state laws or city ordinances
are violated.
   (j)   All applications shall be made to the custodian of the City Hall and,
in the event any question or controversy arises with reference to the use,
nature of the organization or other matter, the question or controversy shall
be referred to the Public Property, Public Utilities and Transportation
Committee of Council, and its decision shall be final.
   (k)   All permits shall be issued over the signature of the custodian.
   (l)   No cancellation shall be accepted on bookings of City Hall unless made
48 hours prior to the time of the event, in which case the applicant shall be
entitled to a refund of any deposit made, less any expense incurred by the
city. Otherwise, the deposit shall remain with the city as liquidated damages.
   (m)   No permit shall be issued without the rental being paid in advance.
   (n)   The Public Property, Public Utilities and Transportation Committee or
the Mayor may refuse any permit which, in its or his or her opinion, should not
be issued in the best interests of the city.
(Ord. 1940-34, passed 10-21-1940)
§ 1070.02 CHARGE AND DEPOSIT FOR USE OF CITY HALL AND SOLON HISTORICAL SOCIETY
PROPERTY.
   The following charges shall be made for use of the City Hall and the Solon
Historical Society property.
   (a)   For nonresidents, including educational, nonprofit and civic
organizations, the use charge shall be $50.
   (b)   A deposit of $50 shall be required of all residents and/or groups to
ensure that the facility is cleaned after its use and to pay for any damage
caused by the applicant. The deposit shall be refundable upon meeting or
exceeding set specifications received by the applicant prior to the receipt of
said deposit.
§ 1070.03 LIMITATION ON USE OF BASEMENT OF HISTORICAL SOCIETY PROPERTY.
   The basement of the Solon Historical Society property shall be used only by
civic organizations and shall not be used by private individuals or groups for
social functions and activities. The Mayor, or the Mayor’s designee, may, at
his or her discretion, require that any group or organization using the
basement of the Solon Historical Society provide a security deposit not to
exceed $50 and/or a security person present when the building is in use.
(Ord. 1995-241, passed 12-18-1995)
§ 1070.04 DISPLAYS FOR CITY-SPONSORED EVENTS ON CITY-OWNED PROPERTY.
   No individual or private commercial enterprise other than the city may place
displays, vehicles, merchandise, signs or any other type of advertisement
acknowledging sponsors, donators or supporters for city events on city-owned
property more than 30 days prior to the starting day of the event.
(Ord. 2003-173, passed 8-4-2003)
CHAPTER 1072: SNOW REMOVAL SERVICES
Section
   
1072.01   Qualifications for service
   
1072.02   Private contractors
   
1072.03   Applications
   
1072.04   Falsification of information
   
1072.05   Annual review of chapter
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Removal of snow and ice, see §
660.14
   Snow emergencies, see §§
452.12,
452.13
   Snow plowing vehicles, see §
438.31
   Snow removal, see R.C. §§ 727.01, 4513.18, 5501.41
   Snowmobiles, see §
432.39,
Ch. 476
§ 1072.01 QUALIFICATIONS FOR SERVICE.
   (a)   The Mayor and the Director of City Services are hereby authorized to
provide snow removal services for those residents who are 65 years of age or
over and who have an annual household income of not more than two hundred
percent (200%) of the federal poverty level including Social Security, pensions
and interest, with proof of gross income satisfactory to the Senior Services
Director and for adult residents who are classified as physically, medically or
mentally handicapped under the guidelines of the Social Security Administration
and who have an annual household income of not more than two hundred percent
(200%) of the federal poverty level including Social Security, pensions and
interest, with proof of gross income satisfactory to the Senior Services
Director, provided that, under any of the aforementioned circumstances, no
able-bodied person is residing with the resident at the same street address.
Each applicant and/or qualified resident must reside in the home for eighty
percent (80%) of the snow plowing service period from November through March.
   (b)   No snow plowing will be furnished to qualified residents, except when
the accumulation of snow reaches approximately three inches or, as determined
by the Director of City Services. Driveways shall be cleared not more than once
in a 24-hour period.
   (c)   Snow removal vehicles will clear not more than a single driveway width
except for residents who meet the basic program qualifications and provide
proof of clinically significant conditions or physical limitations satisfactory
to the Senior Services Director which indicates a need for greater width to be
cleared. The snow removal contractor shall indicate the location of the
designated area that will be plowed through the use of driveway markers which
shall be visible from the cab of a snow plow vehicle. Applicants shall not have
side or overhead driveway obstructions which may interfere with snow removal
operations.
   (d)   For the purposes of division (a) of this section, the Mayor or his or
her designee is hereby authorized to use his or her discretion in determining
whether or not an able-bodied person is residing at the residence or whether a
hardship case exists such that an applicant for services that otherwise do not
qualify under division (a) of this section may receive the services listed
under division (a) of this section as long as the applicant’s annual household
income does not exceed five hundred percent (500%) of the federal poverty
level.
(Ord. 1999-160, passed 9-21-1999; Ord. 2001-148, passed 7-2-2001; Ord. 2024-
113, passed 6-17-2024)
§ 1072.02 PRIVATE CONTRACTORS.
   (a)   The Director of City Services shall employ private snow removal
contractors to perform the services set forth in §
1072.01.
   (b)   The Director of City Services shall obtain such private snow removal
contractors after ascertaining, by means of an informal bid, the cost of
removal to be charged by individual contractors, and shall make arrangements
and contracts with such contractors in advance of each winter season, to be
assured of their availability on an on-call basis during the ensuing winter
months, upon such terms and specifications as he or she shall prepare. The
Director of City Services is hereby authorized to prepare such rules and
regulations consistent with this chapter to govern the activities of the
private snow removal contractors.
   (c)   Payment for such private contracting services shall be made by the
Director of Finance from funds appropriated for such purpose, which
appropriation is hereby authorized.
   (d)   Upon entering into a contract with the city, a contractor shall
provide a bond in an amount to be determined by the Director of Law and shall
furnish the city with a certificate of insurance naming the city as an
additional insured.
(Ord. 1986-180, passed 1-19-1987; Ord. 2001-148, passed 7-2-2001)
§ 1072.03 APPLICATIONS.
   (a)   A city resident who qualifies for city snow plowing and who desires
plowing services must complete an application and submit it to the Department
of Senior Services.
   (b)   The application will be reviewed and, if approved, will be included on
the eligible list for this service.
(Ord. 1986-180, passed 1-19-1987; Ord. 2001-148, passed 7-2-2001)
§ 1072.04 FALSIFICATION OF INFORMATION.
   The falsification of any information contained in the application or medical
letter of a city resident shall result in immediate and permanent ineligibility
for snow plowing services, and the applicant shall reimburse the city for costs
incurred.
(Ord. 1986-180, passed 1-19-1987; Ord. 2001-148, passed 7-2-2001)
§ 1072.05 ANNUAL REVIEW OF CHAPTER.
   The Public Works Committee of Council is hereby authorized to review the
operation of this chapter on an annual basis after the winter season and to
recommend changes, if any, to Council prior to the ensuing winter season.
(Ord.1986-180, passed 1-19-1987; Ord. 2001-148, passed 7-2-2001)
CHAPTER 1074: EMERGENCY ALARMS
Section
   
1074.01   Authority to install alarm
   
1074.02   Automatic dialing devices
   
1074.03   Alarms connected directly to police station (Repealed)
   
1074.04   Local alarms
   
1074.05   False alarms
   
1074.06   Maintenance of devices; responsibilities of suppliers; authority of
Police Chief; false alarms
   
1074.07   Nonliability of city
   
1074.08   Rules and regulations
   
1074.09   Permits and fees; address markings; separate alarms
   
1074.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Automatic sprinkler systems, see
Ch. 1442
   False alarms, see §§
648.07,
648.08
   Police Department, see
Ch. 240
   Theft alarms, see §
438.20
§ 1074.01 AUTHORITY TO INSTALL ALARM.
   (a)   Any premises located within the city may be equipped with an emergency
alarm, upon compliance with this chapter, for the purpose of detecting and
signaling the presence of a holdup or unauthorized intrusion. Existing
installations, whether residential or otherwise, shall be subject to the
requirements of this chapter, including those requirements pertaining to
permits.
   (b)   No person shall install any alarm referred to in this chapter without
first obtaining a permit therefor from the city, and no owner and/or tenant of
a place shall suffer or allow such installation unless a permit has been
obtained as provided herein. Prior to issuance of such a permit, the Chief of
Police shall investigate the reliability of the applicant and the applicant’s
equipment, and shall require, on forms to be provided by the Chief, relevant
information as may be deemed necessary by the Chief to protect the integrity
and confidentiality of alarm systems. The Chief shall issue a permit to a
qualified applicant, provided that he or she shall refuse to issue a permit to
any applicant whose equipment is incompatible with city equipment, whose
officers and/or agents are unable to reasonably demonstrate that they will
protect the confidentiality and integrity of the system, or who has failed to
pay permit fees as required by this chapter.
(Ord. 1985-169, passed 1-6-1986)
§ 1074.02 AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICES.
   (a)   The city may subscribe to one or more telephone lines for burglar
alarms or for holdup alarm purposes or for similar purposes, and when any line
is designated as provided for the above, persons may, upon proper application
and compliance with applicable laws, be granted a permit to install a device or
devices which automatically select the designated telephone line for the
purpose of playing a recorded message or to otherwise report an intrusion or
other emergency.
   (b)   No person shall use or cause to be used any telephone device or
telephone attachment that automatically selects a telephone line allocated by
the telephone company to the city or any of its departments or divisions,
except a telephone line which may be specifically designated by the Police
Department for such purpose. Such designated telephone line or lines shall
terminate at the police station communications center.
   (c)   For alarms of the type described, the message shall comply with the
following:
      (1)   Length of message: 15 seconds maximum;
      (2)   Message shall not be repeated more than three times for each
dialing; and
      (3)   Contents: message shall first state: “This is a recording.” The
balance of the message shall be appropriate to the purpose for which the alarm
is installed and shall be subject to the approval of the Chief of Police. The
entire message shall be intelligible.
   (d)   For alarms of the type described, each such device shall be programmed
to first dial the police station, using an unlisted number assigned for that
purpose.
   (e)   The cost of providing the service described above, including any fee
or payment charged by the telephone company, shall be paid by the applicant.
   (f)   The fee to be charged by the city shall be determined on an annual
basis by dividing the cost of phone service to the city by the number of
holders of permits for alarms, as described, adding 15% for administration and
rounding off to the next highest dollar, except that the minimum charge shall
be $5 per month per subscriber. All fees shall be payable on a calendar month
basis in advance. Delinquency in excess of ten days shall result in
cancellation of the permit or permits.
(Ord. 1985-169, passed 1-6-1986)
§ 1074.03 ALARMS CONNECTED DIRECTLY TO POLICE STATION (REPEALED).
Editor’s note:
   Section 1074.03 was repealed by Ordinance 1998-119, passed July 6, 1998.
§ 1074.04 LOCAL ALARMS.
   A permit for the installation of a local alarm which, when activated, sounds
a horn, bell, buzzer or other type of audible alarm, shall be required if the
sound created by the alarm is audible beyond the premises being served. The
Chief of Police or his or her authorized representatives shall issue a permit
for such an alarm, provided the intensity of sound does not exceed 65 decibels
at any location outside the premises being served and provided the alarm is
equipped with an automatic reset device which resets the alarm within 15
minutes or the permit holder provides the names, addresses and phone numbers of
three persons who will respond when called and reset the alarm within 30
minutes. Lists of names of persons who will respond to reset the alarm shall be
kept current and correct by the permittee.
(Ord. 1998-119, passed 7-6-1998)
§ 1074.05 FALSE ALARMS.
   (a)   As used in this section, FALSE ALARM means an emergency alarm,
activated by inadvertence, negligence or unintentional acts, including, but not
limited to, malfunction of the alarm system, to which the City Police and/or
Fire Department responds. The definition excludes false alarms caused by:
malfunction, testing or repairing of telephone equipment or lines; malfunction,
testing or repairing of the normal power supply source for alarms installed on
residential subdivisions; acts of God, such as earthquake, flood, windstorm,
thunder or lightning; an attempted illegal entry of which there is visible
evidence; or the user acting under a sincere belief that a need exists to call
the Police and/or Fire Department. If a doubt exists as to the cause of a false
alarm, the Chief of Police and/or Fire shall resolve it in favor of the alarm
user. Multiple alarms received by the Bureau of Emergency Communications before
the system can be deactivated within a reasonable period of time shall be
considered a single alarm.
   (b)   A charge in accordance with the following schedule shall be imposed
for false alarms:
 
Business, commercial, industrial                 
   First three false alarms in a calendar yeaNo charge
   Four or more false alarms in a calendar ye$50 per false alarm
Residential
   First three false alarms in a calendar yeaNo charge
   Four or more false alarms in a calendar ye$25 per false alarm
 
   (c)   Notwithstanding the fee to be assessed, as set forth above, no charge
shall be made for the first three false alarms in a calendar year, nor shall
there be any charge for a false alarm to which there is no response by the
Police and/or Fire Department, nor when the cause has been proven to be an act
of God.
   (d)   A grace period of 30 days from the date of installation shall be
granted to new permittees. During this period, no false alarms shall be counted
towards the three allowable false alarms before charges are assessed.
   (e)   Any charge for a false alarm, as provided for in division (b) hereof,
which remains unpaid 30 days after date of invoice, shall result in a certified
letter being mailed to the owner, and tenant if applicable, stating that they
will have ten days from the date of receiving the certified letter to pay the
amount due or it will be added to their property tax bill with a penalty of
10%. If the amount due is not paid by then, the Director of Finance shall
certify the amount due to the County Auditor for collection on the owner’s
property tax bill.
(Ord. 1998-119, passed 7-6-1998; Ord. 2007-77, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 1074.06 MAINTENANCE OF DEVICES; RESPONSIBILITIES OF SUPPLIERS; AUTHORITY OF
POLICE CHIEF; FALSE ALARMS.
   (a)   All components comprising such a device shall be maintained by the
owner in good repair to assure reliability of operation.
   (b)   Each alarm equipment supplier that sells or leases to a person an
automatic protection device, which is installed on such person’s premises in
the city, shall furnish that person with instructions as to the way the device
operates, along with maintenance instructions.
   (c)   Each alarm equipment supplier that sells or leases to a person an
automatic protection device, which is installed on such person’s premises in
the city, for which a permit is required, shall provide for receiving calls for
service, directly or through an agent, on a 24 hour basis, seven days a week,
and shall respond to such calls within eight hours of the time they are
received.
   (d)   Each alarm equipment supplier described in divisions (b) and (c)
hereof shall be required to register with the Police Department and to provide
such information concerning his or her business and operation as is deemed
necessary by the Police Department.
   (e)   At the time of installation, each alarm equipment supplier shall
furnish to the person for whom an automatic protection device has been
installed, written information as to how services can be obtained at any time,
including the telephone number to call for service, and such person shall be
responsible for having the device repaired as quickly as possible after he or
she learns, either from his or her own sources or from notification by the
city, that the device is not working properly.
   (f)   The Chief of Police or any officer designated by him or her shall have
the authority, at reasonable times and upon oral notice, to enter upon any
premises within the city to inspect the installation and operation of an
automatic protection device or signaling device, the purpose of which is to
report an emergency to the Police Department.
   (g)   All equipment, the use or installation of which is subject to this
chapter, shall be maintained in good operating condition. The Chief of Police
or his or her representative may require that repairs be made whenever he or
she has determined that such are necessary to assure proper operation.
   (h)   All alarms installed on business premises in the city must be provided
with an auxiliary power source to preclude false alarms due to power failures
in the normal power supply source for the premises.
   (i)   Permits may be revoked for noncompliance with any provision of this
chapter. Upon permit revocation, the Chief of Police shall notify the permit
holder, in writing, by certified mail, of the effective date of such revocation
and that the Police Department will no longer respond to any alarms transmitted
from that installation.
   (j)   Revoked permits may be reinstated by the Chief of Police as a new
installation permit only under the following conditions:
      (1)   Payment of the entire balance; and
      (2)   Full compliance with this chapter.
   (k)   Permits may be cancelled by the Chief of Police with the approval of
the Director of Public Safety for violation of any provision of this chapter or
for failure to property maintain an installation.
(Ord. 1998-119, passed 7-6-1998)
§ 1074.07 NONLIABILITY OF CITY.
   The issuance of any permit or permits in conjunction with this chapter shall
not constitute acceptance by the city of any liability to maintain any
equipment, to answer alarms or for anything in connection therewith.
(Ord. 1985-169, passed 1-6-1986)
§ 1074.08 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Mayor or his or her authorized representative shall make and enforce
such rules and regulations as he or she may deem necessary for the enforcement
of the provisions hereof and for the proper determination and collection of the
fees and charges herein provided for.
(Ord. 1985-169, passed 1-6-1986)
§ 1074.09 PERMITS AND FEES; ADDRESS MARKINGS; SEPARATE ALARMS.
   (a)   A fee of $10 shall be paid to the city for each permit issued as
provided herein to cover administrative and inspection costs. A separate permit
and permit fee shall be required for a holdup and an intrusion alarm emanating
from the same premises. No permit issued pursuant to any provision of this
chapter shall be transferable to any person, firm or corporation.
   (b)   All premises where an alarm permit has been issued shall have a
conspicuous address marking, a minimum of six inches high, located on the side
of the building facing the street, in clear view from the street.
   (c)   Where there is more than one alarm system in a building, or separate
alarms for a particular part or section, this constitutes another alarm. All
separate alarms shall be so coded on the outside of the building so as to
designate areas for that particular alarm only.
(Ord. 1985-169, passed 1-6-1986)
§ 1074.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever willfully violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the third degree for a first offense and shall be fined not
more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both. For any subsequent
offense, such person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree and shall
be fined not more than $750 or imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.
(Ord. 1985-169, passed 1-6-1986)
PART TWELVE - PLANNING AND ZONING CODE
         TITLE TWO - Planning Generally
            Chap.
1202.   City Planning Commission
         TITLE FOUR - Street Planning
            Chap.
1220.   Definitions and Penalty
            Chap.
1222.   Major Street Plan
            Chap.
1224.   Neighborhood Street Plan
            Chap.
1226.   Mapped Street Plats
         TITLE SIX - Subdivision Regulations
            Chap.
1240.   General Provisions, Administration and Penalty
            Chap.
1242.   Procedure
            Chap.
1244.   Preliminary Plats
            Chap.
1246.   Final Plats
            Chap.
1248.   Design Standards
            Chap.
1250.   Improvements
            Chap.
1252.   Modifications and Exceptions
            Chap.
1254.   Erosion and Sediment Control
            Chap.
1256.   Environmental Impact Statements
            Chap.
1257.   Comprehensive Stormwater Management
         TITLE EIGHT - Zoning (Reserved)
TITLE TWO - PLANNING GENERALLY
            Chap.
1202.   City Planning Commission
CHAPTER 1202: CITY PLANNING COMMISSION
Section
   
1202.01   Compensation
   
1202.02   Regular meetings
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Authority re site plans for undeveloped land, see §
1488.05
   Authority re Subdivision Regulations, see §§
1242.02
   Establishment, see
Charter Art. VI, § 1
   Generally, see
Charter Art. VI, § 5
   Notices and communications to, see
Charter Art. IV, § 8
   State law provisions, see R.C. Ch. 713
§ 1202.01 COMPENSATION.
   Each member of the City Planning Commission, except the Mayor and Council
members, shall be paid $175 for each official meeting attended by him or her,
payable quarterly. Commencing January 1, 2003, each member of the City Planning
Commission, except the Mayor and Council members, shall be paid $200 for each
official meeting attended by him or her, payable quarterly.
(Ord. 2000-26, passed 2-7-2000)
§ 1202.02 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   The Planning Commission shall establish its own rules of procedure, except
that meetings must be held at least once a month.
(Ord. 1999-251, passed 12-20-1999; Ord. 2006-7, passed 1-17-2006)
TITLE FOUR - STREET PLANNING
            Chap.
1220.   Definitions and Penalty
            Chap.
1222.   Major Street Plan
            Chap.
1224.   Neighborhood Street Plan
            Chap.
1226.   Mapped Street Plats
CHAPTER 1220: DEFINITIONS AND PENALTY
Section
   
1220.01   Definitions generally
   
1220.02   Streets generally
   
1220.03   Street types
   
1220.04   Access-controlled streets
   
1220.05   Street elements
   
1220.06   Highway systems
   
1220.07   Street plans
   
1220.08   Mapped plats and lines
   
1220.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   City Planning Commission, see
Ch. 1202
   Planning and Development Director, see
Charter Art. VI, § 9
   Street lighting, see §
1250.19
   Street signs and traffic-control devices, see §
1250.07
   Streets in subdivisions, see §§
1248.02 through
1248.04,
1250.02,
1250.09,
1250.11,
1250.12
   Subdivision Regulations, see
Ch. 1240 through
Ch. 1257
§ 1220.01 DEFINITIONS GENERALLY.
   The following terms shall have, throughout these Street Planning
Regulations, the meanings given herein.
(Ord. 1962-16, passed 2-19-1962)
§ 1220.02 STREETS GENERALLY.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   STREET. A highway, road, avenue, lane, boulevard, thoroughfare, freeway,
interchange, parkway and other ways proposed for vehicular traffic and any
existing way, or part thereof, of a municipal, township, county, state or
federal system shown upon a plat and duly approved, filed and recorded and
including the area within the right-of-way lines.
(Ord. 1962-16, passed 2-19-1962)
§ 1220.03 STREET TYPES.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   CUL-DE-SAC. A local street with only one permanent outlet and with
provisions for turning around.
   (b)   LOCAL STREET. A street primarily for access to residential or other
abutting property and to serve local needs.
   (c)   MAJOR STREET. A street primarily for moving large volumes of through
traffic usually on a continuous route between large or intensively developed
districts.
   (d)   PARKWAY. A major street for noncommercial traffic, with full or
partial control of access, and usually located within a park or a ribbon of
park-like development.
   (e)   SECONDARY STREET. A street connecting a local street system to a major
street or to a district center and on which the through movement of traffic is
given preference over cross traffic.
(Ord. 1962-16, passed 2-19-1962)
§ 1220.04 ACCESS-CONTROLLED STREETS.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY. A street to which owners or occupants of
abutting lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the
same, except at such points and in such manner as may be determined by the
public authority having jurisdiction over such street or highway.
   (b)   EXPRESSWAY. A divided arterial highway for through traffic with full
or partial control of access with more than 50% of all crossroads separated in
grade.
   (c)   FREEWAY. A multi-lane highway for continuous traffic flow with all
crossroads separated in grade and with full control of access.
   (d)   MARGINAL ACCESS STREET. A roadway, usually one way, separated from and
parallel to one or both sides of the express lanes of a highway and providing
direct access to the abutting properties.
(Ord. 1962-16, passed 2-19-1962)
§ 1220.05 STREET ELEMENTS.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land measured between property lines,
dedicated for use by the public for street or other purposes.
   (b)   ROADWAY. The portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used
for vehicular traffic, except the berm or shoulder.
(Ord. 1962-16, passed 2-19-1962)
§ 1220.06 HIGHWAY SYSTEMS.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   PRIMARY COUNTY ROAD SYSTEM. Shall be comprised of those major roads
which connect centers of population or give access to points within a county,
as designated by the Board of County Commissioners.
   (b)   STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM. Those major thoroughfares which are the most
important rural and urban traffic arteries of the state and those auxiliary
highways which are the principal rural and urban inter-county routes of
statewide importance, as designated by the Ohio Director of Transportation.
(Ord. 1962-16, passed 2-19-1962)
§ 1220.07 STREET PLANS.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   MAJOR STREET PLAN. A map showing a system of vehicular circulation
comprised of present and proposed major and secondary streets of the county or
a municipality and adopted pursuant to law.
   (b)   MAPPED STREET. Any future or planned street other than an existing
street shown upon a street plan.
   (c)   NEIGHBORHOOD STREET PLAN. A map showing a system of vehicular and
pedestrian circulation comprised of present and proposed local and secondary
streets and other ways, easements or public lands of a neighborhood, and
adopted pursuant to law. (A NEIGHBORHOOD shall be considered an area bounded by
major streets, railroads, water or other physical features.)
(Ord. 1962-16, passed 2-19-1962)
§ 1220.08 MAPPED PLATS AND LINES.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   MAPPED STREET LINE. The boundary of an area within which a future
street or street extension, relocation, widening or narrowing is planned to be
located.
   (b)   MAPPED STREET PLAT. A drawing of sufficient size, scale and detail to
show with appropriate dimensions the exact location of the mapped street line
or lines in reference to boundaries of property traversed by the mapped street.
(Ord. 1962-16, passed 2-19-1962)
§ 1220.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this Street Planning Code (Title
Four of Part Twelve of these Codified Ordinances) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(Ord. 1962-16, passed 2-19-1962)
CHAPTER 1222: MAJOR STREET PLAN
Section
   
1222.01   Purpose and intent
   
1222.02   Adoption of Plan
   
1222.03   Scope and contents
   
1222.04   Effect of adoption
   CROSS REFERENCES
   City Planning Commission, see
Ch. 1202
   Planning and Development Director, see
Charter Art. VI, § 9
   Street lighting, see §
1250.19
   Street signs and traffic-control devices, see §
1250.07
   Streets in subdivisions, see §§ §§
1248.02 through
1248.04,
1250.02,
1250.09,
1250.11,
1250.12
   Subdivision Regulations, see
Chs. 1240 through
1257
§ 1222.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (a)   The Major Street Plan is a map showing a system of vehicular
circulation, comprised of the present and proposed major streets of the city
and adopted pursuant to law.
   (b)   The general purpose and intent of this chapter shall be to guide the
preparation of major street plans in order to promote safety, convenience,
comfort, prosperity and general welfare and, specifically:
      (1)   To provide a convenient street system to effectively serve the
traffic generated by the residential, business, industrial and other
developments and to facilitate the flow of traffic through and around the city;
      (2)   To coordinate the planning of the municipal streets with adjoining
municipalities and with the county and state highway systems;
      (3)   To establish a system of major streets so as to reduce the use of
local streets for through traffic, thus improving the safety and comfort of the
residents along the local streets;
      (4)   To guide the planning and regulation of land use along the major
streets in order to minimize the marginal interference with the free flow of
traffic, and to protect the developments along such streets from the adverse
effects of concentration of traffic;
      (5)   To establish the location and width of major streets to obtain the
dedication of adequate rights-of-way when the land is subdivided and to guide
the planning of local streets in residential, business and industrial
subdivisions;
      (6)   To provide a framework for the study and preparation of more
detailed neighborhood street plans and mapped street plats and establish a
program for reserving and acquiring rights-of-way; and
      (7)   To provide a basis for making street improvements in accordance
with a capital improvement program.
(Ord. 1962-16, passed 2-19-1962)
§ 1222.02 ADOPTION OF PLAN.
   (a)   Whenever the Planning Commission adopts a master plan or progresses in
its master planning to where it has determined a land use plan for residential,
business, industrial, public and other land uses, the density of population,
the intensity of developments and estimated the volume, origin and destination
of traffic to be generated by the future development, it is empowered to
prepare and adopt a Major Street Plan in accordance with the regulations and
procedures established herein. The Major Street Plan may be an element of the
master or comprehensive plan or a separate plan. The Major Street Plan shall be
adopted by the Planning Commission as a whole by a resolution; thereafter the
Plan may be amended by successive resolutions by the Commission, covering
successive parts of the Plan.
   (b)   Before the adoption of the Plan, or any amendment thereto, the
Commission shall hold at least one public hearing on the proposal and shall
give at least 30 days’ notice of the time, place and purpose thereof in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city. A copy of the plan shall be on
display in the meeting room of the Commission during such period.
(Ord. 1962-16, passed 2-19-1962)
§ 1222.03 SCOPE AND CONTENTS.
   (a)   The Major Street Plan shall encompass the system of vehicular
circulation for the entire city and all the surrounding territory as may be
affected.
   (b)   The Major Street Plan shall be prepared at a scale of 1,000 feet to
one inch or a more detailed scale, and show, but not be limited to, the
following:
      (1)   The presently dedicated streets of all classifications;
      (2)   The general location and rights-of-way of all planned streets and
facilities, such as:
         A.   Freeways, expressways and other types of controlled-access
highways;
         B.   Major and secondary streets; parkways;
         C.   Street extensions, widenings, narrowings, vacations;
         D.   Right-of-way width proposed; route numbers;
         E.   Grade separations at railroads and intersections of streets; and
         F.   Improvements at intersections of streets.
      (3)   Certificates of approval, scale, legend, north point.
(Ord. 1962-16, passed 2-19-1962)
§ 1222.04 EFFECT OF ADOPTION.
   (a)   Public improvements and public land.
      (1)   Whenever the Planning Commission has adopted a Major Street Plan,
no street, bridge or other public way and no public utility, whether publicly
or privately owned, shall be constructed or be authorized to be constructed in
the city or planned portion thereof, and no real property shall be acquired for
street purposes by the city until and unless the location and extent thereof
shall have been submitted to and approved by the Commission.
      (2)   The widening, narrowing, relocation, vacation or change in the use
of any street or other public way or ground or the sale of any public real
property which has been acquired for street purposes or located within the
mapped street lines shall be subject to the same submission and approval.
      (3)   In case of disapproval, the Commission shall communicate its
reasons therefor to Council and to the head of the department which has control
of the construction of the proposed improvement. Council, by a vote of not less
than two-thirds of its members and of such department head, together may
overrule such disapproval. Upon such overruling, Council shall have power to
proceed. The failure of the Commission to act within 30 days after the date of
official submission to it shall be deemed approval, unless a longer period be
granted by Council or other submitting public agency.
   (b)   Subdivision of land. Whenever the Planning Commission has adopted a
Major Street Plan and Council has adopted Subdivision Regulations, then no plat
of a subdivision of land within the city shall be recorded until it has been
approved by the Commission. The Commission may require the dedication of the
rights-of-way for any street within the subdivision and the widening of present
streets at the width shown on the Major Street Plan.
   (c)   Preparation of neighborhood street plans and mapped street plats.
Whenever the Planning Commission has adopted a Major Street Plan, the
Commission shall have the power to make studies and prepare neighborhood street
plans and mapped street plats.
   (d)   Control of access. If the county, city or state has established
regulations controlling the location, use, number, width, grade, relation to
other intersections, or any other design features of private driveway
connections to major or secondary streets in order to minimize the marginal
interference with the free flow of traffic and to protect the developments
along such streets, approval shall be required for driveways connecting to the
streets, as may be designated on the Major Street Plan.
(Ord. 1962-16, passed 2-19-1962)
CHAPTER 1224: NEIGHBORHOOD STREET PLAN
Section
   
1224.01   Purpose and intent
   
1224.02   Adoption of Plan
   
1224.03   Scope and contents
   
1224.04   Effect of adoption
   CROSS REFERENCES
   City Planning Commission, see
Ch. 1202
   Planning and Development Director, see
Charter Art. VI, § 9
   Street lighting, see §
1250.19
   Street signs and traffic-control devices, see §
1250.07
   Streets in subdivisions, see §§ §§
1248.02 through
1248.04,
1250.02,
1250.09,
1250.11,
1250.12
   Subdivision Regulations, see
Chs. 1240 through
1257
§ 1224.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of neighborhood street planning, as defined in §
1220.07(c), is to provide an integrated street system for a neighborhood, to
coordinate isolated subdivisions, to develop a street pattern for parcels or
parts of parcels which are too small to subdivide unless assembled, to reserve
openings for local streets along strip roadside development and to promote the
economical development of the land.
(Ord. 1962-67, passed 6-4-1962)
§ 1224.02 ADOPTION OF PLAN.
   (a)   Whenever a Major Street Plan has been adopted and street plans of a
neighborhood have been studied and prepared, the Commission shall hold at least
one public hearing on the recommended Plan, or any amendment thereto, and shall
give public notice of the time, place and purpose thereof in the manner
prescribed by R.C. § 713.12 or any other similarly designed or intended
statutory enactment. A copy of the Plan shall be on display in the Municipal
Building during such period. After such hearing, the Commission may adopt or
reject the Plan or may modify it.
   (b)   After approval by resolution, the Commission shall recommend the Plan
to Council. No such Plan which violates, differs from or departs from the Plan
submitted by the Commission shall be adopted before Council shall advertise and
hold a public hearing thereon, after public notice given in the manner
prescribed in the preceding division. The Plan shall not take effect unless the
adopting ordinance is passed by not less than three-fourths of the membership
of Council. Thereafter, the Plan may be amended by successive resolutions and/
or ordinances covering parts of the Plan.
(Ord. 1962-67, passed 6-4-1962)
§ 1224.03 SCOPE AND CONTENTS.
   (a)   The Neighborhood Street Plan shall encompass a system of vehicular and
pedestrian circulation of a neighborhood, and may include drainage and public
lands.
   (b)   The Plan shall be prepared at a scale of 400 feet to the inch or a
more detailed scale, and show, but be not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Presently dedicated streets, topographic and physical data:
         A.   The major boundary streets and any secondary streets;
         B.   Local streets within the boundaries;
         C.   Topographic data and contours at two-foot intervals; streams,
bodies of water and other natural features; and
         D.   Subdivisions, dedicated and approved, and all lot lines.
      (2)   The location and extent of all planned streets and facilities:
         A.   Major and secondary streets; the mapped extension, relocation,
widening, narrowing, vacation, right-of-way and pavement widths;
         B.   Planned local street pattern; those streets or parts thereof
which are recommended as forming the most desirable street pattern for the
future subdividing of the land, although only one of several possible
variations;
         C.   Mapped local streets; those streets or parts thereof which are a
necessary element of the neighborhood street pattern in a specific location;
         D.   Land planned and reserved for public use; and
         E.   Drainage and other easements.
      (3)   Titles and certificates:
         A.   Title, north point, legend, scale; and
         B.   Certificates of recommendation by the Commission and adoption by
Council.
(Ord. 1962-67, passed 6-4-1962)
§ 1224.04 EFFECT OF ADOPTION.
   (a)   Whenever a Neighborhood Street Plan has been duly adopted, the
location of any street and the layout of any subdivision of land proposed
within the boundaries of the Plan shall substantially conform to the local
street pattern shown thereon as well as complying with the provisions of the
Subdivision Regulations of the city. Although the street pattern of any
proposed subdivision may vary from the approved pattern, the underlying system
of vehicular and pedestrian circulation, including the general direction and
extent of the streets and their relationship to the topography, shall be
reflected on the subdivision plan.
   (b)   It shall be construed that a purpose of the Neighborhood Street Plan
is to encourage the developer to prepare alternative subdivision plans for
consideration by the city. Any drainage system and any land designated for
public use upon a Neighborhood Street Plan shall be reserved and be in general
accord with the Plan.
   (c)   Furthermore, whenever a Neighborhood Street Plan has been duly
adopted, the Commission may prepare a mapped street plat of those streets or
parts thereof which are designated as planned local streets, and the city may
adopt the plat in accordance with the procedures established hereinafter in
Chapter 1226.
(Ord. 1962-67, passed 6-4-1962)
CHAPTER 1226: MAPPED STREET PLATS
Section
   
1226.01   Purpose and intent
   
1226.02   Adoption of plat
   
1226.03   Scope and content
   
1226.04   Effect of adoption
   CROSS REFERENCES
   City Planning Commission, see
Ch. 1202
   Planning and Development Director, see
Charter Art. VI, § 9
   Street lighting, see §
1250.19
   Street signs and traffic-control devices, see §
1250.07
   Streets in subdivisions, see §§ §§
1248.02 through
1248.04,
1250.02,
1250.09,
1250.11,
1250.12
   Subdivision Regulations, see
Chs. 1240 through
1257
§ 1226.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of a mapped street plat, as defined in §
1220.08(b), is to designate and describe the exact right-of-way lines of mapped
streets, the land vital for future street purposes. It is intended that land so
designated can be reserved and acquired before the surrounding area is
developed, thus assuring land in the proper locations for future streets to
fully serve the area and community.
(Ord. 1962-67, passed 6-4-1962)
§ 1226.02 ADOPTION OF PLAT.
   (a)   Whenever a Major Street Plan or a Neighborhood Street Plan has been
duly adopted, the Commission may prepare mapped street plats at such times and
in such sequence as it deems proper to reserve land for future use for streets.
Whenever the Commission has made and certified to Council a mapped street plat,
or amendment thereof, showing any mapped street line, Council shall hold a
public hearing thereon, notice of the time and place of which shall be given in
the manner prescribed by R.C. § 713.12 or any other similarly designed or
intended statutory enactment.
   (b)   After such hearing, Council may adopt or reject the mapped street plat
or may modify it. If the Commission disagrees with a modification proposed by
Council, the modified plat may be adopted only by at least a three-fourths vote
of the membership of Council. After the adoption of the mapped street plat, the
Clerk of Council shall transmit one attested copy of the adopted plat to the
County Recorder who shall place it on the public records.
   (c)   The resolution of adoption of the plat shall set forth the purpose of
the action, the necessity for the future street and the effective period of the
plat. The effective period shall not exceed ten years, but the plat may be
readopted or revised at any time by the same procedures as for the original.
The making or the certifying of a plat by the Commission, or the adoption of a
plat by the Commission, shall not constitute the opening or establishment of
any street or the taking or acceptance of any land for street purposes.
(Ord. 1962-67, passed 6-4-1962)
§ 1226.03 SCOPE AND CONTENT.
   (a)   A plat shall be prepared for each street, or part thereof, which is to
be reserved for future use for streets, drainageways or other public land. The
plat shall be drawn at a scale of sufficient detail to show with appropriate
dimensions the exact location of the mapped street lines and the land needed
for slopes and drainage, or other public use.
   (b)   The plat shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following
information, which shall be deemed a satisfactory description:
      (1)   The present property and streets:
         A.   The lot lines and recorded dimensions of the parcel, or relevant
part thereof, which is traversed by the mapped street; the permanent parcel
number;
         B.   The lines of the abutting street to which the mapped street is
connected; and
         C.   The location of any nearby building that may be affected.
      (2)   The mapped street and other public land:
         A.   The location and extent of the mapped street, or other public
land, or that part thereof which is recommended to be reserved and acquired;
         B.   Dimensions in relation to a lot line of a parcel of record,
dimension and angle to a dedicated street and other reference points as may be
necessary to locate the property in relation to prevailing records; and
         C.   The extent of remnants of the parcel or parcels, not included
within the mapped lines.
      (3)   Titles and certificates:
         A.   Title, north point, scale; and
         B.   Certificates of recommendation by the Commission, of adoption by
Council and provisions for recording.
(Ord. 1962-67, passed 6-4-1962)
§ 1226.04 EFFECT OF ADOPTION.
   (a)   Whenever any person interested, either because of ownership or
occupation, in any land located between the mapped lines of any street as shown
on a recorded mapped street plat adopted by Council, applies for a permit for
the erecting of a building or for altering or moving a building located on land
within the mapped street lines, the Planning Director shall certify to Council
within ten days after application for a certificate of zoning compliance is
received that the proposed building, or part thereof, is within the lines
established on a mapped street plat and in conflict with the Major Street or
Neighborhood Street Plan.
   (b)   Whenever any person so interested applies for the approval of a
subdivision and such application proposes to subdivide land within any mapped
street lines, the Planning Commission shall review the plan of the proposed
subdivision, considering also the Subdivision Regulations of the city and, if
the proposed subdivision cannot be approved as conforming to the mapped street
plat, the Commission shall, within 30 days after such application is received,
certify to Council that the proposed subdivision, or part thereof, is within
the lines established on a mapped street plat and in conflict with the Major
Street or Neighborhood Street Plan.
   (c)   Council shall, within 90 days after receipt of such certification from
the Planning Director, or from the Planning Commission relative to the approval
of a subdivision, or such further time as agreed between Council and the
applicant, acquire the property or any part thereof, including remnant areas of
the same property outside the boundaries of the mapped street line through
dedication or purchase, or, upon failing to conclude a settlement, initiate
proceedings to appropriate the property within the mapped street lines on which
the building is proposed to be erected, altered or moved or on which the
subdivision is proposed to be developed, or transmit to the Planning Director
or the Planning Commission a notification that such acquisition at the time of
consideration is not, in its judgment, in the public interest.
   (d)   Upon being notified that Council has determined that such acquisition
is not in the public interest, the Planning Director shall thereupon issue the
certificate of zoning compliance or the Planning Commission shall thereupon
proceed with the review and approval of the proposed subdivision plan in
accordance with the subdivision rules and regulations.
(Ord. 1962-67, passed 6-4-1962; Ord. 2002-15, passed 3-4-2002)
TITLE SIX - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
            Chap.
1240.   General Provisions, Administration and Penalty
            Chap.
1242.   Procedure
            Chap.
1244.   Preliminary Plats
            Chap.
1246.   Final Plats
            Chap.
1248.   Design Standards
            Chap.
1250.   Improvements
            Chap.
1252.   Modifications and Exceptions
            Chap.
1254.   Erosion and Sediment Control
            Chap.
1256.   Environmental Impact Statements
            Chap.
1257.   Comprehensive Stormwater Management
CHAPTER 1240: GENERAL PROVISIONS, ADMINISTRATION AND PENALTY
Section
   
1240.01   Short title; application
   
1240.02   Definitions
   
1240.03   Fees and deposits
   
1240.04   Separability
   
1240.99   Penalty; equitable remedies
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Authority to adopt subdivision regulations, see R.C. § 711.101
   Original plats, see R.C. §§ 711.01 et seq.
   Plat and subdivision defined, see R.C. § 711.001
   Revision of plats, see R.C. §§ 711.28 et seq.
   Subdivisions in flood hazard areas, see §§
1424.10,
1462.04(c)
   Vacating plats, see R.C. §§ 711.17 et seq.
   Violation of regulations, see R.C. § 711.102
§ 1240.01 SHORT TITLE; APPLICATION.
   This Title Six shall be known as the Subdivision Regulations of the City of
Solon or just the Subdivision Regulations. The rules and regulations governing
plats and subdivisions of land contained herein shall apply within the
corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. 1953-110, passed 12-30-1953)
§ 1240.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets.
   (b)   CITY. The City of Solon, Ohio.
   (c)   COUNCIL. The Council of the city.
   (d)   COMMISSION. The City Planning Commission of the city.
   (e)   MAJOR STREET PLAN. The plan of existing and proposed streets adopted
by Council.
   (f)   MAJOR SUBDIVISION. Any subdivision of land that involves the opening,
widening or extension of any street or road, or that involves more than five
lots.
   (g)   MINOR SUBDIVISION. Any subdivision of land that does not involve the
opening, widening or extension of any street or road and the entire parcel does
not involve more than five lots.
   (h)   SECRETARY. The Secretary of the Commission.
   (i)   SERVICE DRIVE. A passage or way affording generally a secondary means
of vehicular access to abutting properties and not intended for general traffic
circulation.
   (j)   STREET.
      (1)   A right-of-way, publicly or privately owned, which provides public
vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties.
      (2)   All STREETS are divided into the following classifications.
         A.   MAIN THOROUGHFARES. All state highways.
         B.   PRINCIPAL STREETS. All county roads.
         C.   SECONDARY STREETS. All others 40 feet or more in width.
   (k)   SUBDIVISION.
      (1)   The division of any parcel of land shown as a unit or as contiguous
units on the last preceding tax roll, into two or more parcels, sites or lots,
for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership; or
      (2)   The improvement of one or more parcels of land for residential,
commercial or industrial structures or groups of structures involving the
division or allocation of land for the opening, widening or extension of any
street or streets, except private streets serving industrial structures; the
division or allocation of land as open spaces for common use by owners,
occupants or lease holders or as easements for the extension and maintenance of
public sewer, water, storm drainage or other public facilities.
(Ord. 2000-122, passed 7-17-2000)
§ 1240.03 FEES AND DEPOSITS.
   (a)   (1)   At the time of filing the application for approval of any plat,
lot split or site plan review, and at the time when plans and specifications
for any improvements are submitted to the Planning Commission for approval,
there shall be paid to the Director of Finance a filing fee, and a deposit of
money as determined by the City Engineer shall be made with the Director of
Finance to insure the payment by the applicant of all expenses incurred by the
municipality in the processing of the application and all pertinent papers
connected therewith.
      (2)   The cost and expense of any investigation which the City Engineer,
the Director of Law and other city officials may find necessary to determine
whether such proposed subdivision is in accordance with law, and whether its
improvements, if any, have been made or are being made in accordance with the
requirements of the city, and the cost of any and all notices required, and all
other necessary expenses, shall be paid from the fees and deposit.
      (3)   In the event that the actual expenditures shall exceed such deposit
the excess shall be paid by the applicant upon demand of the Director of
Finance. If such expenditures are less than the required deposit, the balance
shall be refunded to the applicant upon the completion of all administrative
proceedings involved in connection with the plat. No filing fee shall be
refunded or returned.
   (b)   The filing fees shall be as follows:
 
Final subdivision None
Lot split
   Residential None
   Other       $200
Major subdivision $500, plus $25 per lot
Minor subdivision $200
 
   (c)   The filing fees for site plan reviews shall be as follows:
 
Up to 20,000 square feet $300
Over 20,000 square feet  $400
 
(Ord. 1995-156, passed 9-5-1995)
§ 1240.04 SEPARABILITY.
   (a)   If any sentence, clause, section, word or part of these Subdivision
Regulations is for any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid,
that unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair
any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections, words and parts
of these Regulations.
   (b)   It is hereby declared to be the intent of Council that these
Regulations would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or
invalid sentence, clause, section, word or part not been included herein.
(Ord. 1953-110, passed 12-30-1953)
§ 1240.99 PENALTY; EQUITABLE REMEDIES.
   (a)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of these Subdivision
Regulations shall be fined not more than $150 for each lot in violation of
these Regulations. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
   (b)   In case any person violates or threatens to violate any of the
provisions of these Regulations, as aforesaid, the Director of Law, in addition
to the foregoing penalty, and in addition to the remedies otherwise provided by
law, is authorized to institute an appropriate action or proceeding at law or
in equity to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such violation.
(Ord. 1969-163, passed 11-17-1969)
CHAPTER 1242: PROCEDURE
Section
   
1242.01   Preliminary plat required for subdivisions
   
1242.02   Planning and developing a subdivision; procedure
   
1242.03   Restrictions on Commission’s approvals
   
1242.04   Responsibility of Planning Commission
   
1242.05   Approval of name change of subdivisions and streets
   
1242.06   Restriction on approval of residential subdivisions
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Authority to adopt subdivision regulations, see R.C. § 711.101
   Original plats, see R.C. §§ 711.01 et seq.
   Plat and subdivision defined, see R.C. § 711.001
   Revision of plats, see R.C. §§ 711.28 et seq.
   Subdivisions in flood hazard areas, see §§
1424.10,
1462.04(c)
   Vacating plats, see R.C. §§ 711.17 et seq.
   Violation of regulations, see R.C. § 711.102
§ 1242.01 PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIRED FOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (a)   No person proposing to make, or who makes or has made, a subdivision
within the city, shall offer for sale, enter into any contract for the sale of,
sell, transfer or otherwise dispose of such subdivision, or any part thereof,
or proceed with any grading or any construction work of the proposed
subdivision, until he or she has obtained from the Commission approval of the
preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision and such approval has been
confirmed by resolution of Council. The affirmative vote of not fewer than five
members of Council shall be necessary to modify, alter or amend the preliminary
plat as approved by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 1979-112, passed 9-17-1979)
   (b)   Such person may thereupon offer to sell or enter into a contract to
sell such subdivision, or any part thereof, provided that the offer to sell, or
the contract to sell, is conditioned upon the promise and agreement of such
person, inserted therein, to complete the improvements and perform the other
work set forth upon the preliminary plat.
(Ord. 1953-110, passed 12-30-1953)
   (c)   A certificate for zoning compliance for the improvement of a lot in a
subdivision shall not be issued by the Planning Director unless and until the
subdivider has completed all of the required improvements serving such lot in
accordance with the standards and specifications set forth in
Chapter 1250 pertaining to such improvements and to the satisfaction of the
City Engineer, or unless the subdivider files the improvement bond and
maintenance bond provided for in §
1242.02(f).
(Ord. 1966-63, passed 6-20-1966; Ord. 2002-15, passed 3-4-2002)
§ 1242.02 PLANNING AND DEVELOPING A SUBDIVISION; PROCEDURE.
   In planning and developing a subdivision, the subdivider or his or her agent
shall in every case pursue the following procedure.
   (a)   Preparation and filing of preliminary plat. The subdivider shall
prepare a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision which shall conform with
the requirements set forth in
Chapter 1244, and shall file with the Secretary an application in writing for
the approval of the preliminary plat, accompanied by 20 blueprints, and one
sepia, at least two weeks prior to the meeting of the Commission at which
action is desired.
(Ord. 1985-48, passed 4-1-1985)
   (b)   Plat to be checked by Commission; copy to Engineer. The preliminary
plat shall be checked by the Commission as to its conformity with any Major
Street Plan in effect at the time of submission of the plat, and with the
principles, standards and requirements hereinafter set forth, and the Secretary
shall transmit a copy of the preliminary plat to the City Engineer for
recommendations concerning matters within his or her jurisdiction.
(Ord. 1976-56, passed 5-17-1976)
   (c)   Notice to adjoining property owners of filing of subdivision plat.
Upon receipt of the preliminary plat of a proposed major subdivision which has
been presented to the Commission for approval, the Commission shall send
notice, by first-class mail, of the filing thereof to property owners within
400 feet of the property boundary of the proposed major subdivision. Upon
receipt of the preliminary plat of a proposed minor subdivision which has been
presented to the Commission for approval, the Commission shall send notice, by
first-class mail, of the filing thereof to adjoining property owners. A
reasonable time, as set forth in the notice, shall be allowed for a reply from
the property owners before action is taken on the preliminary plat by the
Commission. If the applicant is the only adjoining property owner to whom the
notice is to be sent, the requirements of this division (c) may be waived.
(Ord. 2000-123, passed 7-17-2000)
   (d)   Approval or disapproval of plat.
      (1)   The Commission shall approve or disapprove the preliminary plat, or
approve it with modifications, within 180 days of the filing thereof, noting
any changes thereon that are required.
      (2)   The Commission approval shall be confirmed by resolution of
Council, pursuant to §
1242.01(a). One copy shall be returned to the subdivider with the date of the
approval or disapproval endorsed thereon. A similar copy shall also be
transmitted to the City Engineer.
   (e)   Conformity to plans and specifications; performance and maintenance
bond requirements. Upon approval by Council of the preliminary plat, the
subdivider may then secure all necessary permits to proceed with the
improvements required under
Chapter 1250, upon payment of the fees required under §
1240.03. All improvements shall be constructed or installed in strict
accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the City Engineer. No
changes or modifications in the plans or specifications shall be allowed except
upon written authorization of the Engineer. The subdivider shall file with the
city two complete sets of plans and specifications for all improvements,
including any authorized changes or modifications, to be retained by the city
upon completion of the improvements. Prior to the commencing of the required
improvements, the subdivider shall execute and file with the Director of
Finance an agreement and performance bond or equivalent financial guarantee in
the amount determined by Council, in form satisfactory to the Director of Law,
equal to the approximate total cost of such improvements, which shall insure
the city that the improvements shall be completed as planned. The subdivider
shall be further required to file with the Director of Finance a policy of
liability insurance or bond, in an amount determined by the City Engineer,
which shall provide that for a period of five years from commencement of
construction of the subdivision all adjacent and downstream property owners
will be insured for any damage which may be occasioned by increased stormwater
runoff and drainage from the subdivision. If the subdivider elects to commence
construction of dwellings or other structures, making it necessary that a means
of ingress and egress be provided over streets in the subdivision, then the
subdivider shall improve the street prior to the approval of the final plat to
the extent necessary, in the opinion of the Engineer, to provide satisfactory
access to dwellings and structures on the street until such time as the street
is fully improved in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and
with the terms of the performance bond or equivalent financial guarantee. To
ensure that all streets are properly maintained to provide access, the
subdivider shall deposit a cash bond in addition to the performance bond, with
the Director of Finance, in an amount deemed necessary by the Engineer, from
which all current maintenance costs shall be paid until the street is fully
improved, dedication is offered and accepted, and the two-year maintenance bond
required by division (f) hereof is filed. The subdivider may use the cash bond
or any portion of it from time to time to pay for all maintenance expenses, but
if he or she should fail to maintain the street properly, then upon request of
the Engineer, the city may use such bond to perform necessary maintenance upon
giving the subdivider 48 hours written notice by certified mail of its
intention to do so. Any reduction in the amount of the cash bond for the above
listed purposes shall be promptly made up by the developer so as to return the
cash bond to its original amount.
(Ord. 1985-44, passed 5-20-1985)
   (f)   Final plat; certificate of title. Within 90 days after the completion
of all required improvements in accordance with the standards and
specifications of the city pertaining to such improvements and to the written
satisfaction of the City Engineer, the subdivider shall file with the Secretary
an original drawing of ink on polyester drafting film, together with 18 prints,
of the final plat, together with a copy of the surveyor’s calculations for the
subdivision lots and lands and any other data the City Engineer may require to
process the drawing and all meeting the requirements stipulated in
Chapter 1246, and such improvements shall be offered to the city for approval
and acceptance as hereinafter set forth. The approval and acceptance by the
city shall not take place until the subdivider has posted a two-year
maintenance bond in an amount satisfactory to the City Engineer and in a form
approved by the Director of Law, to ensure the city that the improvements shall
be properly maintained for a period of two years after the date of approval and
acceptance by Council. The final plat shall be accompanied by a certificate of
title showing that the ownership of all lands to be dedicated to public use is
free and unencumbered. The final plat shall be filed with the Secretary at
least two weeks prior to the meeting of the Commission at which the action is
desired.
   (g)   Engineer’s report and duties. The City Engineer shall check the final
plat as to computations, certifications, lot areas and numbers, monuments and
the like. If found satisfactory, he or she shall transmit the required copies
of the final plat to the Commission, together with the certificate of title and
a threefold letter stating:
      (1)   That the technical details of the plat itself have been checked and
found satisfactory;
      (2)   That all improvements have been completed in accordance with the
standards and specifications of the city and to his or her satisfaction; and
      (3)   A.   That the subdivider has posted the required maintenance bond
which shall extend for two years from the date of approval and acceptance by
Council.
         B.   Ninety days prior to the expiration of any bond referred to in
this chapter, the Engineer shall so advise the Mayor, Council and the Planning
Commission and provide them with a written report as to the status of the
subdivision and particularly that portion effected by the bond about to expire.
A copy of this report shall be sent to the developer or owner.
   (h)   Approval of final plat. After the final plat, together with such
certificates, has been received, and provided that the final plat is found to
conform with the preliminary plat as approved and with the requirements set
forth in these Regulations, the Commission shall give the final plat its final
approval and endorse the same thereon. Ten prints shall be transmitted by the
Commission to Council for necessary action on any proposed acceptance and
dedication. The original drawing shall then be endorsed and shall be
immediately returned to the subdivider. The final plat of the subdivision so
approved shall then be filed for record by the developer in the office of the
Recorder of Cuyahoga County, Ohio, no later than 60 days after approval by the
city.
   (i)   Approval of final plat for record purposes only. Upon written request
of the subdivider, the Commission may approve a final plat for record purposes
only, before all of the required improvements are installed or secured by the
required performance bond or equivalent financial guarantee, provided that an
appropriate legend is shown on the face of the plat to the effect that such
approval shall not constitute the acceptance of the dedication of any streets,
easements or public grounds shown thereon, and further, that no dwelling,
building or other structure may be erected on any lot until all of the
improvements required under this Planning and Zoning Code have been installed
and approved or a satisfactory performance bond or equivalent financial
guarantee has been filed to ensure such installation.
(Ord. 1982-52, passed 11-15-1982)
§ 1242.03 RESTRICTIONS ON COMMISSION’S APPROVALS.
   (a)   It is suggested that the subdivider or his or her engineer consult
with the City Engineer while the plat is in sketch form and before the
preliminary plat is prepared, to ascertain the location and extent of proposed
city streets, parks and other public grounds and of other planned projects and
developments related to the proposed subdivision.
   (b)   The approval of the preliminary plat by the Commission is tentative
and may be revoked within 90 days of the filing thereof, and does not
constitute acceptance of the subdivision. It shall be considered only as an
approval of the layout, with the understanding that the City Engineer will
examine the grades of streets, the types of improvements and the design of the
drainage, sewerage and water systems as proposed, and may modify any
engineering or construction details submitted by the subdivider whenever
required for the protection of the public interest.
   (c)   Approval of the preliminary plat will be effective for one year unless
extended by the Commission.
   (d)   The final plat of any portion of a larger subdivision, the preliminary
plat of which has been approved by the Commission, may be submitted for final
approval.
   (e)   The approval of the final plat by the Commission shall not be deemed
to constitute or effect an acceptance by the public of the dedication of any
street or other proposed public way or space shown on the plat.
   (f)   Approval of the final plat by the Commission shall be null and void if
the plat is not offered for record within 30 days of such approval and accepted
for record within 60 days after the date of approval.
(Ord. 1953-110, passed 12-30-1953)
§ 1242.04 RESPONSIBILITY OF PLANNING COMMISSION.
   In granting approval to any subdivision plat or plats, the Planning
Commission shall give full consideration to the following matters in order to
secure and provide for the coordination of the streets within the subdivision
with existing streets and roads or with the plan or plats of the city; for the
proper amount of open spaces for traffic, circulation and utilities; for the
avoidance of future congestion of population detrimental to the public health
or safety; and for the protection of the community in all aspects, including
drainage, sewers, water and other such aspects of community development; and
shall not approve a plat or a subdivision unless it is satisfied that
reasonable provisions have been made for all of these matters and that the plat
or subdivision complies in every way with these Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. 1976-67, passed 8-2-1976)
§ 1242.05 APPROVAL OF NAME CHANGE OF SUBDIVISIONS AND STREETS.
   No person, having received approval of a preliminary plat pursuant to §
1242.01(a), may change the name of a subdivision, or the name of any street or
roadway therein, without first obtaining approval from the Planning Commission
for such name change, which approval shall be confirmed by resolution of
Council.
(Ord. 1987-29, passed 2-2-1987)
§ 1242.06 RESTRICTION ON APPROVAL OF RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   Any provision of this Planning and Zoning Code notwithstanding, the Planning
Commission shall approve no subdivision of a residential lot wherein the size
of any one of the resulting lots is less than 80% of the average lot size in
the recorded subdivision.
(Ord. 1990-156, passed 8-6-1990)
CHAPTER 1244: PRELIMINARY PLATS
Section
   
1244.01   Number of blueprints of plat
   
1244.02   Vicinity sketch
   
1244.03   Scale
   
1244.04   General requirements
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Authority to adopt subdivision regulations, see R.C. § 711.101
   Original plats, see R.C. §§ 711.01 et seq.
   Plat and subdivision defined, see R.C. § 711.001
   Revision of plats, see R.C. §§ 711.28 et seq.
   Subdivisions in flood hazard areas, see §§
1424.10,
1462.04(c)
   Vacating plats, see R.C. §§ 711.17 et seq.
   Violation of regulations, see R.C. § 711.102
§ 1244.01 NUMBER OF BLUEPRINTS OF PLAT.
   Twenty blueprints prepared by a registered professional engineer or surveyor
shall accompany an application in writing to the Commission for the approval of
the preliminary plat of the subdivision.
§ 1244.02 VICINITY SKETCH.
   A vicinity sketch at the scale of 400 feet or more to the inch shall be
shown on or shall accompany the preliminary plat. The vicinity sketch shall
show all existing subdivisions and the street and tract lines of all acreage
parcels of land, together with the names of record owners of such parcels,
immediately adjoining the proposed subdivision and between it and the nearest
existing streets. It shall also show how the streets and service drives in the
proposed subdivision may connect with existing and proposed streets and service
drives in neighborhood subdivisions or unplatted property to produce the most
advantageous development of the entire neighborhood.
(Ord. 1953-110, passed 12-30-1953)
§ 1244.03 SCALE.
   The horizontal scale of the preliminary plat shall be 100 feet or less to
the inch, and the vertical scale of street and sewer profiles 20 feet or less
to the inch.
(Ord. 1953-110, passed 12-30-1953)
§ 1244.04 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The preliminary plat shall clearly show the following features and
information:
   (a)   The proposed name of the subdivision. This name shall not duplicate or
closely approximate the name of any other subdivision in Cuyahoga County;
   (b)   The tract designation according to the real estate records of the
Auditor and Recorder of Cuyahoga County;
   (c)   The names and addresses of the owner of record, the subdivider and the
engineer or surveyor;
   (d)   The names of adjacent subdivisions and the names of record owners of
adjacent parcels of unplatted land;
   (e)   The boundary lines, accurate in scale, of the tract to be subdivided;
   (f)   The location, widths and names of all existing or plotted streets or
other public ways within or adjacent to the tract, and other important features
such as existing permanent buildings, railroad lines, corporation lines,
township lines, sections, lines and the like;
   (g)   Existing sewers, water mains, culverts and other underground
structures within the tract and immediately adjacent thereto, with pipe sizes
and grades indicated;
   (h)   Contours with intervals of five feet or less; references to sea level
datum;
   (i)   The layout, proposed names and widths of proposed streets, service
drives and easements; the layout, numbers and approximate dimensions of
proposed lots. The proposed street names shall not duplicate the names of
existing streets in Cuyahoga County or closely approximate any existing street
names in the city except coterminous streets;
   (j)   The profile of each street, with tentative grades indicated;
   (k)   The cross-section of each proposed street and service drive, showing
the width of pavements, the location and width of sidewalks, if any, and the
location and size of utility mains;
   (l)   The plans and profiles of proposed sewers, with grades and sizes
indicated, or the method of sewage disposal in lieu of sewers;
   (m)   The plan of any proposed water distribution system, showing pipe sizes
and the location of valves and fire hydrants;
   (n)   Zoning boundary lines, if any; proposed uses of property and proposed
front yard depths;
   (o)   All parcels of land, including streets, intended to be dedicated or
temporarily reserved for public use, or to be reserved in the deeds for the
common use of property owners in the subdivision, with the purpose, conditions
or limitations of such reservation indicated;
   (p)   The location and plans of all structures appurtenant to the
subdivision and intended for the common use of property owners, such as gates,
recreation buildings, shelters and the like;
   (q)   North point, scale and date; and
   (r)   Copies of any private restrictions to be included in the deeds should
be attached to the preliminary unit.
(Ord. 1953-110, passed 12-30-1953)
CHAPTER 1246: FINAL PLATS
Section
   
1246.01   Submission of plat to Council
   
1246.02   General requirements
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Authority to adopt subdivision regulations, see R.C. § 711.101
   Original plats, see R.C. §§ 711.01 et seq.
   Plat and subdivision defined, see R.C. § 711.001
   Revision of plats, see R.C. §§ 711.28 et seq.
   Subdivisions in flood hazard areas, see §§
1424.10,
1462.04(c)
   Vacating plats, see R.C. §§ 711.17 et seq.
   Violation of regulations, see R.C. § 711.102
§ 1246.01 SUBMISSION OF PLAT TO COUNCIL.
   The final or record plat of the subdivision shall be submitted to Council in
the form of an original drawing in black India ink on tracing cloth, together
with 18 blueprints of same.
§ 1246.02 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The final plat shall be drawn at the scale of 100 feet to the inch, and
shall clearly show the following features and information:
   (a)   Plat boundary lines with length of courses to hundredths of a foot and
bearings to half minutes, and the exact location and width of all existing or
recorded streets intersecting or adjoining the boundaries of the tract. The
plat boundaries shall be determined by an accurate survey in the field, which
shall be balanced and closed. The error of closure shall not exceed one to
10,000;
   (b)   True bearings and distances to nearest established street lines, or
official monuments, which shall be accurately located and described on the
plat; municipal, township, county or section lines accurately tied to the lines
of the subdivision by distances and bearings;
   (c)   The exact layout including:
      (1)   The right-of-way lines of streets and service drives, their names,
bearings, angles of intersection and widths (including widths along the line of
any obliquely intersecting street);
      (2)   The length of all arcs, radii, internal angles, points of curvature
and tangent bearings;
      (3)   All easements or rights-of-way provided for or owned by public
services (the limitation of the easement rights shall be definitely stated on
the plat); and
      (4)   Lot numbers and all lot lines with accurate dimensions in feet and
hundredths, and with bearings and angles to minutes (if other than right angles
to the street lines).
   (d)   The accurate location, material and approximate size of all monuments;
   (e)   The accurate boundaries of all property which is offered for
dedication, or which is temporarily reserved for public use, and of all
property that may be reserved by deed covenant for the common use of the
property owners in the subdivision, with the purpose of each such dedication or
reservation indicated;
   (f)   The name of the subdivision and the name or number of the largest
subdivision or tract of which the tract now subdivided forms a part;
   (g)   An accurate description of the subdivision in reference to the real
estate records of Cuyahoga County;
   (h)   Names and addresses of the owner of record, the subdivider and of the
engineer or surveyor;
   (i)   North point, scale and date; and
   (j)   Certification by a registered professional civil engineer or surveyor
to the effect that the plat represents a survey made by him or her, and that
all monuments indicated thereon actually exist, and that their location, size
and material are correctly shown.
(Ord. 1953-110, passed 12-30-1953)
CHAPTER 1248: DESIGN STANDARDS
Section
   
1248.01   General requirements for layout of subdivisions
   
1248.02   Street and block layout
   
1248.03   Width and length of blocks
   
1248.04   Right-of-way widths of streets, service drives and utility easements
   
1248.05   Widths of pavements
   
1248.06   Grades, curves and sight distances
   
1248.07   Intersections
   
1248.08   Lots
   
1248.09   Plats
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Authority to adopt subdivision regulations, see R.C. § 711.101
   Original plats, see R.C. §§ 711.01 et seq.
   Plat and subdivision defined, see R.C. § 711.001
   Revision of plats, see R.C. §§ 711.28 et seq.
   Subdivisions in flood hazard areas, see §§
1424.10,
1462.04(c)
   Vacating plats, see R.C. §§ 711.17 et seq.
   Violation of regulations, see R.C. § 711.102
§ 1248.01 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR LAYOUT OF SUBDIVISIONS.
   ln the laying out of a subdivision the subdivider shall comply with the
following principles and requirements.
   (a)   The subdivision layout shall conform to any Major Street Plan in
effect at the time of submission of the plat.
   (b)   Whenever a tract to be subdivided embraces any part of a principal or
secondary street, such part of such street shall be platted by the subdivider
in its existing location and at the width indicated in §
1248.04.
   (c)   Where a proposed park or other recreational area, school site or other
public ground shown on any Major Street Plan, in effect at the time of
submission of the plat, is located in whole or in part within the proposed
subdivision, such proposed public ground or park shall be dedicated to the city
or reserved for acquisition by the city within a period of three years by
purchase or other compensatory means according to law.
(Ord. 1953-110, passed 12-30-1953)
§ 1248.02 STREET AND BLOCK LAYOUT.
   (a)   The street layout of the subdivision shall be in general conformity
with a plan for the most advantageous development of adjoining areas and the
entire neighborhood.
   (b)   As far as practicable, all proposed streets shall be continuous and in
alignment with existing, planned or platted streets with which they are to
connect. As far as practicable, all proposed streets shall provide two or more
entrances to the subdivision.
   (c)   Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract
to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions,
or unless, in the opinion of the Commission, such extension is not necessary or
desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision with the
existing layout, or the most advantageous future development, of adjacent
tracts.
   (d)   Proposed streets shall follow the contour of the land wherever
practicable.
   (e)   Proposed streets shall intersect one another as nearly at right angles
as topography and other limiting factors of good design permit.
   (f)   Whenever there exists adjacent to the tract to be subdivided a
dedicated or platted and recorded half-width street or service drive, the other
half-width of such street or service drive shall be platted.
   (g)   In the rear of lots fronting on principal streets, where practicable,
provision shall be made for service drives when required by the Commission.
(Ord. 1987-205, passed 11-2-1987)
§ 1248.03 WIDTH AND LENGTH OF BLOCKS.
   (a)   Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots of
appropriate depth.
   (b)   The lengths of blocks shall be such as, in the opinion of the
Commission, are appropriate for the locality and the type of development
contemplated, but shall not exceed 1,800 feet where the average size of lots
does not exceed two acres in area.
   (c)   In any block over 900 feet in length, the Commission may require that
a crosswalk or pedestrian way, not less than ten feet wide, be dedicated to
public use near the center and entirely across such block.
   (d)   The number of intersecting streets along principal streets shall be
held to a minimum. Wherever practicable, blocks along such traffic ways shall
be not less than 1,200 feet in length.
(Ord. 1953-110, passed 12-30-1953)
§ 1248.04 RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTHS OF STREETS, SERVICE DRIVES AND UTILITY EASEMENTS.
   The right-of-way widths of streets, service drives and utility easements
shall be as follows.
   (a)   Main thoroughfares: 80 feet.
   (b)   Minor streets, including cul-de-sac streets: 60 feet. All cul-de-sac
streets shall terminate in a circular turn-around having a minimum right-of-way
diameter of 154 feet.
   (c)   Service drives: 20 feet.
   (d)   Easements for utilities shall be provided along rear and side lot
lines wherever practicable. Such easements shall be at least ten feet wide.
(Ord. 1995-188, passed 9-5-1995)
§ 1248.05 WIDTHS OF PAVEMENTS.
   Widths of pavements shall be as follows.
   (a)   Major thoroughfares: as required by the state.
   (b)   Principal streets: as required by the county.
   (c)   Minor streets, including cul-de-sac streets: 26 feet. The pavement of
a turning circle at the end of a cul-de-sac street shall have a minimum outside
diameter of 126 feet and shall be at least 30 feet wide.
   (d)   Service drives: 18 feet.
   (e)   In the case of a minor street or service drive along which the average
size of lots is two acres or more and the average street frontage of such lots
200 feet or more, the Commission may authorize a pavement width of 16 feet,
provided that, owing to the location and character of the street and
subdivision development contemplated, such pavement width, in the judgment of
the Commission, will adequately meet the anticipated requirements of traffic.
(Ord. 1987-248, passed 12-7-1987)
§ 1248.06 GRADES, CURVES AND SIGHT DISTANCES.
   (a)   The grades of streets shall not exceed the following.
      (1)   Principal streets: 7%.
      (2)   Secondary streets, minor streets and service drives: 12%.
      (3)   Pedestrian ways or crosswalks: 12%.
   (b)   The grade of side ditches shall not be less than 0.25%.
   (c)   All changes in street grades shall be connected by vertical curves of
a minimum length equal to 15 times the algebraic difference in the rate of
grade, for principal streets, and one-half of this minimum for all other
streets.
   (d)   The radii of curvature on the centerline shall not be less than the
following.
      (1)   Principal streets: 300 feet.
      (2)   Secondary streets and minor streets: 100 feet.
   (e)   A tangent at least 100 feet in length shall be provided between
reversed curves.
(Ord. 1953-110, passed 12-30-1953)
§ 1248.07 INTERSECTIONS.
   (a)   At street intersections property line corners shall be rounded by an
arc, the minimum radius of which shall be ten feet.
   (b)   Street curb or street pavement intersections shall be rounded by radii
of at least 35 feet.
   (c)   The above minimum radii shall be increased when the smallest angle of
intersection is less than 60 degrees, or in any case where the Commission
considers an increase necessary.
(Ord. 1953-110, passed 12-30-1953)
§ 1248.08 LOTS.
   (a)   The size and shape of lots shall be appropriate for the location of
the proposed subdivision and for the type of development contemplated. Lots
shall also be of adequate size to comply with the requirements of the Zoning
Code.
   (b)   Construction shall not occur on any lot unless full city improvements
are installed across the entire frontage of the property. The term FULL CITY
IMPROVEMENTS shall include the following:
      (1)   Storm sewers;
      (2)   Sanitary sewers;
      (3)   Water lines;
      (4)   Electric lines;
      (5)   Public street constructed to city specifications;
      (6)   Public sidewalks constructed to city specifications (this
requirement may be waived at the discretion of the city when sidewalks neither
exist in the vicinity, nor are planned); and
      (7)   All other public or private utilities mandated by the Codified
Ordinances of the city.
(Ord. 1953-110, passed 12-30-1953; Ord. 2012-48, passed 4-2-2012)
   (c)   Lots for residence purposes in R-1-A, R-1-B, R-1-C, R-1-D, R-1-E, R-1-
F Districts or R-2 Districts shall not be platted with a greater depth than
five times the average width of the lot.
(Ord. 1965-112, passed 9-7-1965)
   (d)   Double-frontage lots and reversed-frontage lots shall be avoided.
   (e)   Side lot lines shall be approximately at right angles or radial to the
right-of-way line of the street on which the lot faces.
(Ord. 1953-110, passed 12-30-1953)
§ 1248.09 PLATS.
   (a)   All preliminary and final plats and detailed improvement plans shall
be submitted on 20-inch by 34-inch size sheets.
   (b)   The area of all parcels and sublots shown on preliminary and final
plats shall be indicated in acres.
(Ord. 1961-37, passed 6-16-1961)
CHAPTER 1250: IMPROVEMENTS
Section
   
1250.01   Conformity to regulations
   
1250.02   Street improvements
   
1250.03   Water system
   
1250.04   Sewer system
   
1250.05   Trees
   
1250.06   Monuments and iron pins
   
1250.07   Street signs and traffic-control devices
   
1250.08   Supervision by Engineer
   
1250.09   Street construction
   
1250.10   Street frontages under 100 feet (Repealed)
   
1250.11   Street abutting residential lots
   
1250.12   Streets abutting industrial lots
   
1250.13   Increase of right-of-way
   
1250.14   Sidewalks
   
1250.15   Sewer construction
   
1250.16   Construction materials
   
1250.17   Utility construction
   
1250.18   City specifications
   
1250.19   Underground utilities and street lighting
   
1250.20   Drainage and sediment pollution control
   
1250.21   Roadway restrictions
   
1250.22   Subdivision signage
   
1250.23   Construction of access roads
   
1250.24   Fencing of retention and sediment basins
   
1250.25   Removal of temporary construction barriers
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Authority to adopt subdivision regulations, see R.C. § 711.101
   Original plats, see R.C. §§ 711.01 et seq.
   Plat and subdivision defined, see R.C. § 711.001
   Revision of plats, see R.C. §§ 711.28 et seq.
   Subdivisions in flood hazard areas, see §§
1424.10,
1462.04(c)
   Vacating plats, see R.C. §§ 711.17 et seq.
   Violation of regulations, see R.C. § 711.102
§ 1250.01 CONFORMITY TO REGULATIONS.
   Improvements shall be installed in accordance with the regulations contained
in this chapter.
(Ord. 1953-110, passed 12-30-1953)
§ 1250.02 STREET IMPROVEMENTS.
   (a)   Streets, including stub-streets, abutting residential lots shall be
improved in accordance with the specifications, shall contain all of the
appurtenances and shall be in conformity with §
1250.11.
   (b)   Streets, including stub-streets, abutting industrial lots shall be
improved in accordance with the specifications, shall contain all of the
appurtenances and shall be in conformity with §
1250.12.
(Ord. 1991-19, passed 4-1-1991)
   (c)   All streets and roads, principal or secondary, in new subdivisions,
constructed in asphaltic cement, in addition to being constructed in conformity
with the standards set forth in §
1250.11, shall be sealed by the owner or developer with an asphalt rejuvenation
agent that meets the standards and specifications of the City Engineer’s
office. These streets and roads shall be sealed with the asphalt rejuvenation
agent within one year of the acceptance of the streets by the city or as
otherwise directed by the City Engineer. The developer’s maintenance period
shall not be deemed to have been successfully completed unless the streets are
sealed with the asphalt rejuvenation agent to the acceptance of the City
Engineer’s office.
(Ord. 1995-123, passed 6-5-1995)
§ 1250.03 WATER SYSTEM.
   The entire water system, including fire hydrants spaced in accordance with
the standards and specifications of the City of Cleveland Division of Water,
shall meet the approval of the Commission.
(Ord. 1991-19, passed 4-1-1991)
§ 1250.04 SEWER SYSTEM.
   Where the subdivision is located in an established sanitary sewer district
with public sewage treatment facilities, the subdivision will be provided with
a complete sanitary sewer system even though a public main may not then be
immediately accessible to the subdivision. If a public sewer main is reasonably
accessible, in the opinion of the Commission, the sanitary sewer system shall
be connected to such sewer main. Where the subdivision is not located in an
established sanitary sewer district with public sewage treatment facilities, a
note to that effect shall be made on the plat informing future purchasers that
provision must later be made for the disposal of sanitary wastes by the
installation on each lot of an individual sewage disposal system meeting fully
the requirements of the County Health Code. No storm flow or seepage water may
be discharged into any sanitary system.
(Ord. 1968-193, passed 12-2-1968)
§ 1250.05 TREES.
   Trees shall be planted on both sides of every street containing city
sidewalks. Such trees shall be planted within the right-of-way area at
intervals of no more than 50 feet, and each separate lot shall contain at least
one tree. Any lot that abuts more than one street with city sidewalks shall
have at least one tree located in each separate street right-of-way, and such
trees shall be spaced at intervals of not more than 50 feet. The owner or
builder shall deposit with the Director of Finance the sum of $230 for each
tree required to be planted in accordance with this section. The funds so
deposited shall be used by the city for the purchasing and planting of the
trees so that the size, species and location will be in accordance with the
city’s Tree Planting Program.
(Ord. 1987-111, passed 6-15-1987; Ord. 2002-57, passed 11-4-2002)
§ 1250.06 MONUMENTS AND IRON PINS.
   (a)   Permanent monuments of a type and design as required by the standards
and specifications of the city shall be accurately set and established at the
intersection of all outside boundary lines of the plat, at intersections of
these boundary lines with all street lines, at two diagonally opposite corners,
at least, of each street intersection, at the beginning and end of all curves,
at points on curves where the radius or direction changes, and at such other
points as are necessary to establish definitely all lines of the plat. In
general, permanent monuments shall be placed at all critical points necessary
to enable any skilled surveyor correctly to lay out any lot in the subdivision.
   (b)   In addition, iron pins shall be set at each rear corner of each
sublot. Iron pins shall also be set at the front corners of each sublot on the
right-of-way line and encased in four-inch drain-tile filled with concrete.
Such iron pins shall be set prior to the issuance of a building permit unless
the Chief Building Official, for good cause, allows additional time for the
setting of the pins. The Chief Building Official may retain from deposits
previously made by the owner, builder or developer a sufficient amount of money
to insure full compliance with the requirements of this section. Any iron pins
damaged, disturbed or destroyed during construction shall be replaced by the
owner, builder or developer prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit by the
Chief Building Official. At the time of setting the front corner iron pin, the
surveyor shall also permanently mark the lot lines on the curb. Any person
knowingly removing or destroying such iron pins shall be subject to the
penalties prescribed in §
1240.99.
(Ord. 1993-216, passed 12-6-1993)
§ 1250.07 STREET SIGNS AND TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   The subdivider shall furnish and erect street signs for all streets in the
subdivision at intersections and such other places as directed by the City
Engineer. The signs shall be installed immediately upon the completion of
pavement of each street. The style and design of street signs shall be in
accordance with the standard specifications of the city. The subdivider shall
further furnish (or reimburse the city for the cost of) and erect traffic-
control devices for all streets in the subdivision. The traffic-control devices
shall be in accordance with the standards and requirements as set forth by the
Police Chief and Fire Chief. The traffic-control devices shall be installed
immediately upon completion of pavement of each street.
(Ord. 1985-70, passed 6-3-1985)
§ 1250.08 SUPERVISION BY ENGINEER.
   All improvements shall be constructed under the supervision of the City
Engineer.
(Ord. 1961-50, passed 7-5-1961)
§ 1250.09 STREET CONSTRUCTION.
   All streets and roads, principal or secondary, shall be constructed in
accordance with the requirements contained in §§
1250.11 to
1250.13, inclusive, and the current issue of the State of Ohio Department of
Transportation Construction and Materials Specifications.
(Ord. 1991-19, passed 4-1-1991)
§ 1250.10 STREET FRONTAGES UNDER 100 FEET (REPEALED).
Editor’s note:
   Section 1250.10 was repealed by Ordinance 1991-19, passed April 1, 1991.
§ 1250.11 STREET ABUTTING RESIDENTIAL LOTS.
   Where a street abuts on residential lots, the following requirements shall
apply.
   (a)   The minimum right-of-way shall be 60 feet in width.
   (b)   There shall be an additional easement 12 feet in width adjacent to
each side of the right-of-way to provide for the installation of underground
power lines, telephone lines, cable television lines and gas mains.
   (c)   The improved portion of the right-of-way shall consist of an asphalt
pavement with concrete combination curbs and gutters and shall have a minimum
width of 26 feet between the backs of curbs.
   (d)   Earthwork and subgrade preparations shall be in accordance with ODOT
Item 203 and 206.
   (e)   The subbase shall consist of a three-inch layer of ODOT Item 304
limestone, 26 feet in width.
   (f)   Square concrete curbs and gutters shall be in accordance with ODOT
Item 609, Type 2 (modified).
   (g)   The asphalt portion of the pavement shall consist of a five and one-
half inch base course of ODOT Item 301, a two-inch intermediate course of ODOT
Item 448 Type II and a one and one-half inch surface course of ODOT, 448 Type
I.
(Ord 1991-19, passed 4-1-1991)
§ 1250.12 STREETS ABUTTING INDUSTRIAL LOTS.
   Where a street abuts on industrial lots the following requirements shall
apply.
   (a)   The minimum right-of-way shall be 70 feet in width.
   (b)   There shall be an additional easement ten feet in width adjacent to
each side of the right-of-way to provide for the installation of underground
power lines, telephone lines, cable television lines and gas mains.
   (c)   The improved portion of the right-of-way shall consist of a concrete
pavement with square curbs and shall have a minimum width of 33 feet between
the backs of curbs.
   (d)   Earthwork and subgrade preparation shall be in accordance with ODOT
Item 203 and 206.
   (e)   The subbase shall consist of a three-inch layer of ODOT Item 304
limestone, 33 feet in width.
   (f)   Square concrete curbs shall be in accordance with ODOT Item 609, Type
2-A.
   (g)   The pavement shall consist of nine inches of fiber reinforced concrete
in accordance with ODOT Item 451.
(Ord. 1991-19, passed 4-1-1991)
§ 1250.13 INCREASE OF RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   The required minimum right-of-way and the minimum paved or improved portion
thereof of any street or road may be increased no more than 10% by the Planning
Commission if deemed necessary because of unusual conditions and the
anticipated volume of vehicular traffic.
(Ord. 1961-50, passed 7-5-1961)
§ 1250.14 SIDEWALKS.
   (a)   Concrete sidewalks shall be constructed in connection with street
improvements in a subdivision unless specifically waived by the Planning
Commission upon a showing by the developer that, because of unique conditions
in the subdivision, the elimination of sidewalks will not adversely affect the
health, safety and welfare of the present and future residents of the
subdivision and citizens of the city. Additionally, temporary sidewalks of
asphalt or macadam material may be installed in special circumstances under
such reasonable rules and regulations as are necessary in the circumstances
when approved by the City Engineer and the Planning Commission.
   (b)   In subdivisions in the process of development, any required concrete
sidewalks shall be completely installed on the side of any street for its
entire length when residences have been built and occupied on 60% or more of
the lots on such side of the street, notwithstanding the filing of an
improvement bond provided for in §
1242.02(f).
(Ord. 1984-77, passed 6-18-1984)
§ 1250.15 SEWER CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   Storm and sanitary sewers, where required, shall be constructed in
accordance with specifications equal to or in excess of those prescribed and
used by the city for such improvements when constructed by the city. The design
of manholes, catch basins and inlets shall be in accordance with the
specifications prescribed by the Cuyahoga County Sanitary Engineer.
   (b)   All sewer pipe and joints shall meet the specifications set forth in
the Uniform Rules, Regulations and Standards for Design and Construction of
Sewerage Improvements, as formulated by the Committee on Uniform Standards,
dated May 11, 1978, and adopted by this section, with the exception of the
following deletions and changes:
      (1)   Section 2.204-B-4: Pages 3 through 21;
      (2)   Section 5.120-B: Pages 5 through 2; and
      (3)   Polyvinyl chloride pipe and fittings, A.S.T.M. D-3034, may be used
up to 15 inches in diameter.
(Ord. 1991-19, passed 4-1-1991)
§ 1250.16 CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS.
   Materials used in connection with the construction of any improvement
required in connection with the development of a new subdivision or within any
established street or road shall be tested in accordance with the standards
used by the city for general improvements undertaken by it. Any costs incurred
for laboratory, shop and field tests shall be borne by the developer or the
person undertaking the construction of the improvements.
(Ord. 1961-50, passed 7-5-1961)
§ 1250.17 UTILITY CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   In connection with the construction of utilities within any dedicated
street or in any street to be dedicated as a part of a subdivision, the owner
and contractor shall plan the work so as to present a minimum of inconvenience
to the normal flow of traffic. The contractor shall submit a written plan of
operation to the City Engineer and obtain written approval of the plan before
beginning construction.
   (b)   Failure to obtain such approval shall be sufficient reason for the
City Engineer to stop the work. Where any trenches cross the traveled portion
of a street that is kept open to traffic, the contractor shall furnish and
install, at no cost to the city, a steel plate satisfactory to the City
Engineer to ensure the smooth passage of normal traffic flow.
(Ord. 1961-50, passed 7-5-1961)
§ 1250.18 CITY SPECIFICATIONS.
   In connection with all street improvements, any detail of construction which
is not governed specifically by an ordinance of the city shall be in accordance
with the specifications usually used by the city in connection with its own
improvements.
(Ord. 1961-50, passed 7-5-1961)
§ 1250.19 UNDERGROUND UTILITIES AND STREET LIGHTING.
   In all residential and industrial subdivisions consisting of more than ten
lots which involve the improvement of streets to be dedicated to the city, the
developer shall be required to install an underground electric power and
telephone distribution system and to install street lighting equipment fixtures
and facilities. The plan for street lighting shall be submitted to the City
Engineer for approval prior to the installation thereof, and shall conform with
the then existing standards for roadway lighting of the Illuminating
Engineering Society or with standards recommended by the Cleveland Electric
Illuminating Company. The Engineer, however, shall have no authority to vary
such standards. In a specific case, having due regard for the requirements of
the subdivision for adequate street lighting, and upon application and payment
of fees pursuant to Chapter 1295 and subject to review of Council pursuant to
Chapter 1291, the Planning Commission may vary such standards.
(Ord. 1979-171, passed 9-17-1979)
§ 1250.20 DRAINAGE AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION CONTROL.
   (a)   After approval of the preliminary plat and prior to the approval of
the final plat and/or construction drawings, the developer shall submit to the
City Engineer a general grading plan for the entire subdivision or development.
The Engineer shall review the plan in accordance with the standards set forth
in
Chapter 1254 to ensure the control of soil sediment pollution caused by
accelerated erosion during development and by accelerated stormwater runoff
after development. If, in the judgment of the City Engineer, the topography is
such that the drainage of the sublots or parcels shall require the installation
of storm drains or storm sewers from rear yards, open space and phased
development, such storm drains or storm sewers shall be installed by the
developer at the time that the sewer and water improvements are installed in
the subdivision or development.
   (b)   If any lot or parcel collects and discharges surface water other than
directly to an on-site stream, river or into a storm sewer system, the Engineer
shall require regrading of the land or the installation of such inlet basins,
catch basins, drainage inlets and/or stormwater control devices as may be
necessary to transfer water to an approved point of discharge.
   (c)   At the time of application for a building permit for the construction
of any structure as per
Chapter 1424 of the Building and Housing Code, the owner or builder shall
submit plans of sufficient detail and scale to show topographic information and
notes and other data detailing how stormwater will be collected and conveyed to
the approved point of discharge. The City Engineer shall approve, approve with
modifications or disapprove the submitted plan within ten days after the date
of submission and the applicant shall be notified in writing of the basis for
any such disapproval. The Engineer shall offer assistance to the applicant in
the preparation of a plan acceptable to the city.
   (d)   The drainage system approved by the Engineer for any sublot or lands
shall be maintained by the owner thereof. The city shall have the right to
enter onto such sublot or lands to maintain any drainage system approved by the
Engineer in the event the owner thereof shall fail to correct a problem after
notification by the Engineer. Any costs incurred shall be chargeable to the
property owner, or made a lien on such premises, in accordance with R.C. §
715.47.
   (e)   In any of the foregoing circumstances, the construction of open
drainage ditches as a substitute for such storm drains or storm sewers shall
not be permitted.
(Ord. 1984-51, passed 8-6-1984)
§ 1250.21 ROADWAY RESTRICTIONS.
   No person shall use or permit to be used on a regular basis, any part or
portion of a residentially zoned lot or parcel of land (including land in the
R-1-A, R-1-B, R-1-C, R-1-D, R-1-E, R-1-F, R-2 and R-3 Districts) for the
purposes of a roadway or other means of ingress to or egress from the same or
another lot or parcel of land by any industrial or commercial vehicle.
(Ord. 1979-13, passed 4-2-1979)
§ 1250.22 SUBDIVISION SIGNAGE.
   In all residential subdivisions consisting of ten or more lots, the
developer shall be required to set aside an area and shall install a permanent
subdivision identification sign, as approved by the Director of Planning and
Community Development and/or his or her designee.
(Ord. 1996-126, passed 7-17-1996; Ord. 2008-66, passed 5-5-2008)
§ 1250.23 CONSTRUCTION OF ACCESS ROADS.
   Where deemed feasible by the City Engineer, the developer shall construct
one or more access roads for use by construction vehicles so as to minimize the
safety hazards and inconvenience of subdivision development to nearby property
owners, which roads shall be used as long as deemed reasonable by the City
Engineer.
(Ord. 1986-139, passed 10-6-1986)
§ 1250.24 FENCING OF RETENTION AND SEDIMENT BASINS.
   In any subdivision where, in the judgment of the City Engineer, the
developer is required to install a permanent retention or sediment control
basin, the City Engineer shall also require fencing of the basin with a six-
foot high chain-link fence, wherever practical.
(Res. 1987-230, passed 11-16-1987)
§ 1250.25 REMOVAL OF TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION BARRIERS.
   In subdivisions in the process of development, any temporary construction
barrier which may have been installed in a street shall be removed when
residences have been built and occupied on 60% or more of the lots on any such
street.
(Ord. 1988-72, passed 8-1-1988)
CHAPTER 1252: MODIFICATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
Section
   
1252.01   Variances and hardship exceptions
   
1252.02   Waiver of filing plats
   
1252.03   Notification of adjustments to lot boundaries
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Authority to adopt subdivision regulations, see R.C. § 711.101
   Original plats, see R.C. §§ 711.01 et seq.
   Plat and subdivision defined, see R.C. § 711.001
   Revision of plats, see R.C. §§ 711.28 et seq.
   Subdivisions in flood hazard areas, see §§
1424.10,
1462.04(c)
   Vacating plats, see R.C. §§ 711.17 et seq.
   Violation of regulations, see R.C. § 711.102
§ 1252.01 VARIANCES AND HARDSHIP EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   The general principles of design and the minimum requirements for the
laying out of subdivisions, stipulated in
Chapter 1248, may be varied by the Commission in the case of a subdivision
large enough to constitute a more or less self-contained neighborhood to be
developed in accordance with a comprehensive plan safeguarded by appropriate
restrictions, which, in the judgment of the Commission, make adequate provision
for all essential community requirements; provided, however, that no
modifications shall be granted by the Commission which would conflict with the
proposal of any Major Street Plan in effect at the time of the submission of
the plat, or with the intent and purposes of such general principles of design
and minimum requirements.
   (b)   In any particular case where the subdivider can show that by reason of
exceptional topographic or other physical conditions, strict compliance with
any requirement of these Regulations would cause practical difficulty or
exceptional and undue hardship, the Commission may relax such requirements to
the extent deemed just and proper, so as to relieve such difficulty or
hardship, provided that such relief may be granted without detriment to the
public good and without impairing the intent and purposes of these Regulations,
or the desirable general development of the neighborhood and the community in
accordance with any Major Street Plan in effect at the time of the submission
of the plat, and the Zoning Code. Any modification thus granted shall be
entered in the minutes of the Commission setting forth the reasons which, in
the opinion of the Commission, justified the modification.
   (c)   Any such variance or hardship exception shall be considered only after
proper application has been made pursuant to Chapter 1293 and fees paid
pursuant to Chapter 1295.
   (d)   In cases where a variance is granted, the Secretary of the Planning
Commission shall immediately notify the Planning Director and Council of any
variance granted by the Planning Commission under this section. Council may, at
either of its next two ensuing regular meetings, by motion, take action to
either reverse, affirm or modify the decision of the Planning Commission in any
case where a variance is granted. If no action is taken by Council at its next
two ensuing regular meetings, the decision of the Planning Commission shall be
final. If the variance, as granted by the Planning Commission and reviewed by
Council, contains conditions which are later modified by action of the Planning
Commission, such modification shall be forwarded to Council, and Council may,
at either of its next two ensuing regular meetings, by motion, take action to
either reverse, affirm or modify the decision of the Planning Commission in any
case where a modification of a condition is granted. If no action is taken by
Council at its next two ensuing regular meetings, the decision of the Planning
Commission shall be final.
   (e)   Any person adversely affected by any final decision of the Planning
Commission concerning a variance in the application of ordinances, resolutions,
regulations, measures and orders governing zoning in the municipality, may,
within 14 days after the date of the Clerk’s notification to the applicant,
appeal said decision to Council. Notice of the Commission’s decision shall be
sent by the Clerk by certified mail to the applicant. To the extent that it is
reasonable and practical, within 30 days after receipt of the appeal, the
Council shall hear and decide said appeal in accordance with standards and
procedures established by Council. If no action is taken by Council within the
30-day period for Council’s review, the decision of the Planning Commission
shall be final.
(Ord. 1994-186, passed 1-3-1995; Ord. 2002-15, passed 3-4-2002)
§ 1252.02 WAIVER OF FILING PLATS.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of these Regulations the requirements for
filing plats may be waived under the following conditions:
   (a)   The proposed subdivision of land abuts upon an existing public street
and does not involve the opening, widening or extension of any street or road,
and the entire parcel does not involve more than five lots;
   (b)   There is a proposed sale or exchange of parcels between adjoining
owners, where the sale or exchange does not create additional building sites;
   (c)   There is submitted to the City Planning Commission a linen tracing to
scale showing the proposed subdivision and such other information as is
pertinent to its determination and action thereon under these Regulations;
(Ord. 1955-16, passed 2-17-1955)
   (d)   If the Planning Commission is satisfied that such proposed subdivision
is not contrary to other applicable subdivision or zoning regulations, it may,
after notice and hearing, at a regular meeting, approve such subdivision, shall
stamp the same “Approved by City Planning Commission of the City of Solon: No
Plat Required,” and shall have it signed by the Secretary of the Commission. If
the applicant is the only adjoining property owner to whom the notice is to be
sent, the notice and hearing requirements of this subdivision may be waived;
and
(Ord. 2000-124, passed 7-17-2000)
   (e)   The Secretary of the Planning Commission shall immediately notify
Council of the action taken by the Planning Commission set forth in division
(d) hereof. Council may, at its next ensuing regular meeting, reverse or modify
the action of the Planning Commission by the affirmative vote of not fewer than
five members of Council. If no action is taken by Council at its next ensuing
regular meeting, the approval of the Planning Commission shall be final.
(Ord. 1978-37, passed 5-22-1978)
§ 1252.03 NOTIFICATION OF ADJUSTMENTS TO LOT BOUNDARIES.
   Whenever the City Engineer receives a request by a property owner for an
adjustment to the lot boundary, which adjustment is not of the type which would
require the review and approval by the Planning Commission, the City Engineer
shall, prior to approving the adjustment to the lot boundary, immediately
notify Council and the Planning Commission of his or her intent to approve the
adjustment to the lot boundary and, if no action is taken by either Council or
the Planning Commission at their next ensuing regular meetings, the Engineer’s
approval of the adjustment to the lot boundary shall be final.
(Ord. 1984-42, passed 5-21-1984)
CHAPTER 1254: EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
Section
   
1254.01   Purpose and scope
   
1254.02   Definitions
   
1254.03   Disclaimer of liability
   
1254.04   Conflicts, severability, nuisances and responsibility
   
1254.05   Development of Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plans
   
1254.06   Application procedures
   
1254.07   Compliance with state and federal regulations
   
1254.08   Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWP3)
   
1254.09   Performance standards
   
1254.10   Abbreviated Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan
   
1254.11   Fees
   
1254.12   Bond
   
1254.13   Enforcement
   
1254.14   Violations
   
1254.15   Appeals
   
1254.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Authority to adopt subdivision regulations, see R.C. § 711.101
   Original plats, see R.C. §§ 711.01 et seq.
   Plat and subdivision defined, see R.C. § 711.001
   Revision of plats, see R.C. §§ 711.28 et seq.
   Subdivisions in flood hazard areas, see §§
1424.10,
1462.04(c)
   Vacating plats, see R.C. §§ 711.17 et seq.
   Violation of regulations, see R.C. § 711.102
§ 1254.01 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (a)   The purpose of this regulation is to establish technically feasible
and economically reasonable standards to achieve a level of erosion and
sediment control that will minimize damage to property and degradation of water
resources, and will promote and maintain the health and safety of the citizens
of the city.
   (b)   This regulation will:
      (1)   Allow development while minimizing increases in erosion and
sedimentation.
      (2)   Reduce water quality impacts to receiving water resources that may
be caused by new development or redevelopment activities.
   (c)   This regulation applies to all parcels used or being developed, either
wholly or partially, for new or relocated projects involving highways,
underground cables, or pipelines; subdivisions or larger common plans of
development; industrial, commercial, institutional, or residential projects;
building activities on farms; redevelopment activities; general clearing; and
all other uses that are not specifically exempted in division (d) hereof.
   (d)   This regulation does not apply to activities regulated by, and in
compliance with, the Ohio Agricultural Sediment Pollution Abatement Rules.
(Ord. 2016-153, passed 9-19-2016)
§ 1254.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For purpose of this regulation, the following terms shall have the meaning
herein indicated:
   (a)   ABBREVIATED STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (ABBREVIATED SWP3).
The written document that sets forth the plans and practices to be used to meet
the requirements of this regulation during and after land development.
   (b)   ACRE. A measurement of area equaling 43,560 square feet.
   (c)   ADMINISTRATOR. The person or entity having the responsibility and duty
of administering and ensuring compliance with this regulation.
   (d)   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS), also STORMWATER CONTROL MEASURE
(SCM). Schedule of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance
procedures, and other management practices (both structural and non-structural)
to prevent or reduce the pollution of water resources and wetlands. BMPs also
include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control
facility and/or construction site runoff, spillage, or leaks; sludge or waste
disposal; or drainage from raw material storage.
   (e)   CERTIFIED PROFESSIONAL IN EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL (CPESC). A
specialist in erosion and sediment control best management practices for soil
disturbing activities in good standing with EnviroCert International, Inc.
   (f)   COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION. The initial disturbance of soils
associated with clearing, grubbing, grading, placement of fill, or excavating
activities or other construction activities.
   (g)   COMMUNITY. Throughout this regulation, this shall refer to the city,
its designated representatives, boards, or commissions.
   (h)   CONCENTRATED STORMWATER RUNOFF. Any stormwater runoff that flows
through a drainage pipe, ditch, diversion, or other discrete conveyance
channel.
   (i)   CONCRETE WASHOUT. The washing of concrete material from its delivery
or installation device in such a manner as to allow such material to enter the
city’s municipal separate storm sewer system or water resources.
   (j)   CONSTRUCTION ENTRANCE. The permitted points of ingress and egress to
development
areas regulated under this regulation.
   (k)   CONVEYANCE CHANNEL. A water resource that carries water or a ditch
excavated for the
flow of water.
   (l)   DEVELOPMENT AREA. A parcel or contiguous parcels owned by one person
or persons, or operated as one development unit, and used or being developed
for commercial, industrial, residential, institutional, or other construction
or alteration that changes the runoff characteristics of a parcel or parcels of
land.
   (m)   DEWATERING VOLUME. See latest version of Ohio Rainwater and Land
Development Manual.
   (n)   DISCHARGE. The addition of any pollutant to surface waters of the
state from a point source.
   (o)   DISTURBANCE. Any clearing, grading, excavating, filling, or other
alteration of land surface where natural or man-made cover is destroyed in a
manner that exposes the underlying soils.
   (p)   DISTURBED AREA. An area of land subject to erosion due to the removal
of vegetative cover and/or soil disturbing activities such as grading,
excavating, or filling.
   (q)   DRAINAGE WATERSHED. For the purpose of this regulation the total
contributing drainage area to a BMP, i.e., the "watershed" directed to the
practice. This includes offsite contributing drainage.
   (r)   DRAINAGE WAY. A natural or manmade channel, ditch, or waterway that
conveys surface water in a concentrated manner by gravity.
   (s)   EROSION. The process by which the land surface is worn away by the
action of wind, water, ice, gravity, or any combination of those forces.
   (t)   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL. The control of earthly materials, both
mineral and organic, to minimize the removal of said materials from the land
surface and to prevent its transport from a disturbed area by means of wind,
water, ice, gravity, or any combination of those forces.
   (u)   FINAL STABILIZATION. All soil disturbing activities at the site have
been completed and a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of at
least 80% coverage for the area has been established or equivalent
stabilization measures, such as the use of mulches or geotextiles, have been
employed. In addition, all temporary erosion and sediment control practices are
removed and disposed of and all trapped sediment is permanently stabilized to
prevent further erosion. Final stabilization also requires the installation of
permanent (post-construction) stormwater control measures (SCMs).
   (v)   GRADING. The excavating, filling, or stockpiling of earth material, or
any combination thereof, including the land in its excavated or filled
condition.
   (w)   GRUBBING. Removing or grinding of roots, stumps and other unwanted
material below existing grade.
   (x)   IMPERVIOUS. That which does not allow infiltration.
   (y)   LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT. A professional landscape architect registered in
the state.
   (z)   LARGER COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT OR SALE. A contiguous area where
multiple separate and distinct construction activities may be taking place at
different times on different schedules under one plan.
   (aa)   MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE (MEP). The technology-based discharge
standard for municipal separate storm sewer systems (MS4) to reduce pollutants
in storm water discharges that was established by the Clean Water Act § 402(p).
A discussion of MEP as it applies to small MS4s is found in 40 CFR 122.34.
   (bb)   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). A conveyance or system
of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) that are:
      (1)   Owned or operated by the federal government, state, municipality,
township, county, district, or other public body (created by or pursuant to
state or federal law) including a special district under state law such as a
sewer district, flood control district or drainage districts, or similar
entity, or a designated and approved management agency under Section 208 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act that discharges into surface waters of the
state;
      (2)   Designed or used for collecting or conveying solely stormwater;
      (3)   Which is not a combined sewer; and
      (4)   Which is not a part of a publicly owned treatment works.
   (cc)   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES). The national
program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, termination, monitoring
and enforcing permits and enforcing pretreatment requirements, under sections
307, 402, 318, 405 under the Clean Water Act.
   (dd)   OPERATOR. Any party associated with a construction project that meets
either of the following two criteria:
      (1)   The party has operational control over construction plans and
specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and
specifications; or
      (2)   The party has day-to-day operational control of those activities at
a project which are necessary to ensure compliance with a stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWP3) for the site or other permit conditions (e.g. they are
authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the
SWP3 or comply with other permit conditions.
   (ee)   OWNER OR OPERATOR. The owner or operator of any "facility or
activity" subject to regulation under the NPDES program.
   (ff)   SUBDIVISIONS, MAJOR AND MINOR. See OAC 711.001 for definition.
   (gg)   PARCEL. A tract of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a use,
building or group of buildings and their accessory uses and buildings as a
unit, together with such open spaces and driveways as are provided and
required. A parcel may contain more than one contiguous lot individually
identified by a permanent parcel number assigned by the Cuyahoga County
Auditor's Office.
   (hh)   PERCENT IMPERVIOUSNESS. The impervious area created divided by the
total area of the project site.
   (ii)   PERMANENT STABILIZATION. Establishment of permanent vegetation,
decorative landscape mulching, matting, sod, rip rap, and landscaping
techniques to provide permanent erosion control on areas where construction
operations are complete or where no further disturbance is expected for at
least one year.
   (jj)   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, firm, trust, commission, board,
public or private partnership, joint venture, agency, unincorporated
association, municipal corporation, county or state agency, the federal
government, other legal entity, or an agent thereof.
   (kk)   PHASING. Clearing a parcel of land in distinct sections, with the
stabilization of each section before the clearing of the next.
   (ll)   POINT SOURCE. Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance,
including but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well,
discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding
operation, landfill leachate collection system, vessel or the floating craft
from which pollutants are or may be discharged. This term does not include
return flows from irrigated agriculture or agricultural stormwater runoff.
   (mm)   PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. A professional engineer registered in the
state.
   (nn)   QUALIFIED INSPECTION PERSONNEL. A person knowledgeable in the
principles and practice of erosion and sediment controls, who possess the
skills to assess all conditions at the construction site that could impact
storm water quality and to assess the effectiveness of any sediment and erosion
control measure selected to control the quality of storm water discharges from
the construction activity.
   (oo)   RAINWATER AND LAND DEVELOPMENT. Ohio's standards for stormwater
management, land development, and stream protection. The most current edition
of these standards shall be used with this regulation.
   (pp)   RIPARIAN AREA. The transition area between flowing water and
terrestrial (land) ecosystems composed of trees, shrubs and surrounding
vegetation which serve to stabilize erodible soil, improve both surface and
ground water quality, increase stream shading and enhance wildlife habitat.
   (qq)   RUNOFF. The portion of rainfall, melted snow, or irrigation water
that flows across the ground surface and is eventually conveyed to water
resources or wetlands.
   (rr)   RUNOFF COEFFICIENT. The fraction of rainfall that will appear at the
conveyance as runoff.
   (ss)   SEDIMENT. The soils or other surface materials that are transported
or deposited by the action of wind, water, ice, gravity, or any combination of
those forces, as a product of erosion.
   (tt)   SEDIMENTATION. The deposition or settling of sediment.
   (uu)   SEDIMENT SETTLING POND. A sediment trap, sediment basin or permanent
basin that has been temporarily modified for sediment control, as described in
the latest edition of Rainwater and Land Development.
   (vv)   SEDIMENT STORAGE VOLUME. See current edition of Rainwater and Land
Development.
   (ww)   SETBACK. A designated transition area around water resources that is
left in a natural, usually vegetated, state so as to protect the water
resources from runoff pollution. Soil disturbing activities in this area are
restricted by this regulation.
   (xx)   SOIL DISTURBING ACTIVITY. Clearing, grading, excavating, filling,
grubbing or stump removal that occurs during clearing or timber activities, or
other alteration of the earth's surface where natural or human made ground
cover is destroyed and that may result in, or contribute to, erosion and
sediment pollution.
   (yy)   SOIL & WATER CONSERVATION DISTRICT. An entity organized under Ohio
R.C. Chapter 1515 referring to either the Soil and Water Conservation District
Board or its designated employee(s). Hereafter referred to the Cuyahoga SWCD.
   (zz)   STABILIZATION. The use of BMPs, such as seeding and mulching, that
reduce or prevent soil erosion by water, wind, ice, gravity, or a combination
of those forces.
   (aaa)   STEEP SLOPES. Slopes that are 12% or greater in grade. NOTE: If
otherwise defined in community zoning, use community definition.
   (bbb)   STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWP3). The written document
that sets forth the plans and practices to be used to meet the requirements of
this regulation during and after land development.
   (ccc)   STORMWATER. Stormwater runoff, snow melt and surface runoff and
drainage.
   (ddd)   SURFACE OUTLET. A dewatering device that only draws water from the
surface of the water.
   (eee)   SURFACE WATER OF THE STATE also WATER RESOURCE OR WATER BODY. Any
stream, lake, reservoir, pond, marsh, wetland, or other waterway situated
wholly or partly within the boundaries of the state except those private waters
which do not combine or affect a junction with surface water. Waters defined as
sewerage systems, treatment works or disposal systems in Ohio R.C. 6111.01 are
not included.
   (fff)   SURVEYOR. A professional surveyor registered in the state.
   (ggg)   TEMPORARY STABILIZATION. The establishment of temporary vegetation,
mulching, geotextiles, sod, preservation of existing vegetation, and other
techniques capable of quickly establishing cover over disturbed areas to
provide erosion control between construction operations.
   (hhh)   TOPSOIL. The upper layer of the soil that is usually darker in color
and richer in organic matter and nutrients than subsoil.
   (iii)   TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD (TMDL). The sum of the existing and/or
projected point source, nonpoint source, and background loads for a pollutant
to a specified watershed, water resource or wetland, or water resource or
wetland segment. A TMDL sets and allocates the maximum amount of a pollutant
that may be introduced into the water and still ensure attainment and
maintenance of water quality standard.
   (jjj)   UNSTABLE SOILS. A portion of land that is identified by the City
Engineer as prone to slipping, sloughing, or landslides, or is identified by
the U.S. Department of Agriculture Natural Resource Conservation Service
methodology as having a low soil strength.
   (kkk)   WATER QUALITY VOLUME (WQv). The volume of stormwater runoff which
must be captured and treated prior to discharge from the developed site after
construction is complete. WQv is based on the expected runoff generated by the
mean storm precipitation volume from post-construction site conditions at which
rapidly diminishing returns in the number of runoff events captured begins to
occur.
   (lll)   WATER RESOURCE also SURFACE WATER OF THE STATE. Any stream, lake,
reservoir, pond, marsh, wetland, or waterway situated wholly or partly within
the boundaries of the state, except those private waters which do not combine
or affect a junction with surface water. Waters defined as sewerage systems,
treatment works or disposal systems in Ohio R.C. 6111.01 are not included.
   (mmm)   WATERSHED. The total drainage area contributing runoff to a single
point.
   (nnn)   WETLAND. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under
normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted
for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs, and
similar areas (40 C.F.R. 232, as amended).
(Ord. 2016-153, passed 9-19-2016)
§ 1254.03 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   Compliance with the provisions of this regulation shall not relieve any
person from responsibility for damage to any person otherwise imposed by law.
The provisions of this regulation are promulgated to promote the health,
safety, and welfare of the public and are not designed for the benefit of any
individual or for the benefit of any particular parcel of property.
(Ord. 2011-154, passed 8-15-2011; Ord. 2016-153, passed 9-16-2016)
§ 1254.04 CONFLICTS, SEVERABILITY, NUISANCES AND RESPONSIBILITY.
   (a)   Where this regulation is in conflict with other provisions of law or
ordinance, the most restrictive provisions shall prevail.
   (b)   If any clause, section, or provision of this regulation is declared
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the validity
of the remainder shall not be affected thereby.
   (c)   This regulation shall not be construed as authorizing any person to
maintain a private or public nuisance on their property, and compliance with
the provisions of this regulation shall not be a defense in any action to abate
such a nuisance.
   (d)   Failure of the city to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly
conditions or to recommend corrective measures shall not relieve the site owner
from the responsibility for the condition or damage resulting therefrom, and
shall not result in the city, its officers, employees, or agents being
responsible for any condition or damage resulting therefrom.
(Ord. 2016-153, passed 9-16-2016)
§ 1254.05 DEVELOPMENT OF STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLANS.
   (a)   This regulation requires that a stormwater pollution prevention plan
be developed and implemented for all soil disturbing activities disturbing one
or more acres of total land, or less than one acre if part of a larger common
plan of development or sale disturbing one or more acres of total land. A
stormwater pollution prevention plan must be developed and implemented for all
commercial and industrial site development. The City Engineer may require a
comprehensive stormwater management plan on sites disturbing less than one
acre.
   (b)   The following activities shall submit an abbreviated SWP3:
      (1)   New single family, two family or multi-family residential
construction. If such activities disturb one acre or more, or are part of a
larger common plan of development or sale disturbing one acre or more, a full
SWP3 and compliance with Ohio EPA Construction General Permit are required.
      (2)   Additions or accessory buildings for single family, two family or
multi-family residential construction. If such activities disturb one acre or
more, or are part of a larger common plan of development or sale disturbing one
acre or more, an Ohio EPA Construction Site General Permit and a full SWP3 are
required.
      (3)   All non-residential construction on parcels of less than one acre.
      (4)   General clearing activities not related to construction. If such
activities disturb one acre or more, or are part of a larger common plan of
development or sale disturbing one acre or more, compliance with the Ohio EPA
Construction Site General Permit and a full SWP3 are required. All tree
clearing activities must also comply with
Chapter 1488 of this Code of Ordinances.
   (c)   Activities disturbing one-tenth or less of an acre are not required to
submit a SWP3 or an abbreviated SWP3, unless required by the City Engineer.
These activities must comply with all other provisions of this regulation.
   (d)   Soil disturbing activities undertaken by the city, associated with
public highway, transportation improvements, drainage improvements, or the
maintenance thereof, and disturbing less than one acre of land are not required
to submit a stormwater pollution prevention plan or an abbreviated stormwater
pollution prevention plan, unless required by the City Engineer. These
activities must comply with all other provisions of this regulation.
(Ord. 2016-153, passed 9-19-2016)
§ 1254.06 APPLICATION PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Soil disturbing activities submitting a stormwater pollution
prevention plan. The applicant shall submit three sets of the SWP3 and the
applicable fees for site plan review to the city as follows:
      (1)   For new subdivisions: After the approval of the preliminary plans
and with submittal of the improvement plans.
      (2)   For other construction projects: Before issuance of a permit by the
Chief Building Official.
      (3)   For general clearing projects: Prior to issuance of a permit by the
Chief Building Official.
   (b)   Soil disturbing activities submitting an abbreviated stormwater
pollution prevention plan. The applicant shall submit three sets of the
abbreviated SWP3 and the applicable fees for site plan review to the city as
follows:
      (1)   For new single family, two family or multi-family residential
construction: Before issuance of a permit by the Chief Building Official.
      (2)   For other construction projects: Before issuance of a permit by the
Chief Building Official.
      (3)   For general clearing projects: Prior to issuance of a permit by the
Chief Building Official.
   (c)   The city, and/or the Cuyahoga Soil Water Conservation District, if
authorized by the city, shall review the plans submitted under division (a) or
(b) hereof for conformance with this regulation and approve, or return for
revisions with comments and recommendations for revisions. A plan rejected
because of deficiencies shall receive a narrative report stating specific
problems and the procedures for filing a revised plan.
   (d)   Soil disturbing activities shall not begin and building permits shall
not be issued without:
      (1)   An approved SWP3 or abbreviated SWP3;
      (2)   Installation of erosion and sediment controls; and
      (3)   Physical marking in the field of protected areas or critical areas,
including wetlands and riparian areas.
   (e)   SWP3 for individual sublots in a subdivision will not be approved
unless the larger common plan of development or sale containing the sublot is
in compliance with this regulation.
   (f)   The developer, engineer and contractor, and other principal parties,
shall meet with the City Engineer for a pre-construction meeting no less than
seven days prior to soil-disturbing activity at the site to ensure that erosion
and sediment control devices are properly installed, limits of disturbance and
buffer areas are properly delineated and construction personnel are aware of
such devices and areas. Pre-construction meetings for abbreviated SWP3s may be
waived at the discretion of the City Engineer.
   (g)   Approvals issued in accordance with this regulation shall remain valid
for one year from the date of approval.
(Ord. 2016-153, passed 9-19-2016)
§ 1254.07 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND FEDERAL REGULATIONS.
   Approvals issued in accordance with this regulation do not relieve the
applicant of responsibility for obtaining all other necessary permits and/or
approvals from the Ohio EPA, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and other
federal, state, and/or county agencies. If requirements vary, the most
restrictive requirement shall prevail. These permits may include, but are not
limited to, those listed below. All submittals required to show proof of
compliance with these state and federal regulations shall be submitted with
stormwater pollution prevention plans or abbreviated stormwater pollution
prevention plans.
   (a)   Ohio EPA NPDES Permits authorizing stormwater discharges associated
with construction activity or the most current version thereof. Proof of
compliance with these requirements shall be the applicant's notice of intent
(NOI) number from Ohio EPA, a copy of the Ohio EPA Director's Authorization
Letter for the NPDES Permit, or a letter from the site owner certifying and
explaining why the NPDES Permit is not applicable.
   (b)   Section 401 of the Clean Water Act. Proof of compliance shall be a
copy of the Ohio EPA Water Quality Certification application tracking number,
public notice, project approval, or a letter from the site owner certifying
that a wetland scientist/specialist has surveyed the site and determined that
Section 401 of the Clean Water Act is not applicable. Wetlands, and other
waters of the United States, shall be delineated by protocols accepted by the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers at the time an application is made under this
regulation.
   (c)   Ohio EPA Isolated Wetland Permit. Proof of compliance shall be a copy
of Ohio EPA's Isolated Wetland Permit application tracking number, public
notice, project approval, or a letter from the site owner certifying that a
wetland scientist/specialist has surveyed the site and determined that Ohio
EPA's Isolated Wetlands Permit is not applicable. Isolated wetlands shall be
delineated by protocols accepted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers at the
time an application is made under this regulation.
   (d)   Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. Proof of compliance shall be a
copy of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Individual Permit, if an individual
permit is required for the project, showing project approval and any
restrictions that apply to site activities. If an individual permit is not
required, the site owner shall submit proof of compliance with the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineer's Nationwide Permit Program. This shall include one of the
following:
      (1)   A letter from the site owner certifying that a wetland scientist/
specialist has evaluated the site and found no waters of the United States.
      (2)   A letter from the site owner certifying and demonstrating
compliance with the applicable nationwide permit, and any applicable state
conditions, through a post construction notification.
      (3)   A letter from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers certifying that the
proposed work is authorized by a nationwide permit and a site plan showing that
any proposed fill of waters of the United States conforms with the general and
specific conditions specified in the applicable nationwide permit. Wetlands,
and other waters of the United States, shall be delineated by protocols
accepted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers at the time an application is made
under this regulation.
   (e)   Ohio Dam Safety Law. Proof of compliance shall be a copy of the ODNR
Division of Water permit application tracking number, a copy of the project
approval letter from the ODNR Division of Water, or a letter from the site
owner certifying and explaining why the Ohio Dam Safety Law is not applicable.
(Ord. 2016-153, passed 9-19-2016)
§ 1254.08 STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWP3).
   (a)   In order to control sediment pollution of water resources, the
applicant shall submit a SWP3 in accordance with the requirements of this
regulation.
   (b)   The SWP3 shall include best management practices (BMPs) and stormwater
control measures (SCMs) adequate to prevent pollution of public waters by soil
sediment from accelerated storm water runoff from development areas.
   (c)   The SWP3 shall be certified by a professional engineer, registered
surveyor, certified professional in erosion and sediment control, or a
registered landscape architect and shall be assembled in a manner that the
respective plan sheet(s) could be removed from the detailed construction plans
and still function as intended.
   (d)   The SWP3 shall be amended whenever there is a change in design,
construction, operation or maintenance, which has a significant effect on the
potential for the discharge of pollutants to surface waters of the state or if
the SWP3 proves to be ineffective in achieving the general objectives of
controlling pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with construction
activity.
   (e)   The SWP3 shall incorporate measures as recommended by the most current
edition of Rainwater and Land Development as published by the Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency and, at a minimum, shall include the following
information:
      (1)   A cover page or title identifying the name and location of the
site, the name and contact information of all construction site operators, the
name and contact information for the person responsible for authorizing and
amending the SWP3, preparation date, and the estimated start and completion
dates for construction.
      (2)   A copy of the permit requirements (attaching a copy of the current
Ohio EPA NPDES Construction General Permit is acceptable).
      (3)   Site description. The SWP3 shall provide:
         A.   A description of the nature and type of the construction activity
(e.g. residential, shopping mall, highway, etc.).
         B.   Total area of the site and the area of the site that is expected
to be disturbed (i.e., grubbing, clearing, excavation, filling or grading,
including off-site borrow areas).
         C.   An estimate of the impervious area and percent of imperviousness
created by the land disturbance.
         D.   A calculation of the run-off coefficients for both the pre-
construction and post-construction site conditions.
         E.   Existing data describing the soil and, if available, the quality
of any known pollutant discharge from the site such as that which may result
from previous contamination caused by prior land uses.
         F.   A description of prior land uses at the site.
         G.   An implementation schedule which describes the sequence of major
soil-disturbing operations (i.e., grubbing, excavating, grading, utilities and
infrastructure installation) and the implementation of erosion and sediment
controls to be employed during each operation of the sequence.
         H.   The location and name of the immediate receiving stream or
surface water(s) and the first subsequent receiving water(s) and the aerial
extent and description of wetlands or other special aquatic sites at or near
the site which will be disturbed or which will receive discharges from
disturbed areas of the project. For discharges to a municipal separate storm
sewer system (MS4), the point of discharge to the MS4 and the location where
the MS4 ultimately discharges to a water resource shall be indicated.
         I.   List TMDLs applicable for the site and demonstrate that
appropriate BMPs or stormwater control measures (SCMs) have been selected to
address these TMDLs. [A TMDL identifier table for Northeast Ohio communities is
available at http://www.neohiostormwater.com/]
         J.   For subdivided developments a detail drawing of a typical
individual lot showing standard individual lot erosion and sediment control
practices. This does not remove the responsibility to designate specific
erosion and sediment control practices in the SWP3 for areas such as steep
slopes, stream banks, drainage ways, and riparian zones.
         K.   Location and description of any stormwater discharges associated
with dedicated asphalt and dedicated concrete plants associated with the
development area and the best management practices to address pollutants in
these stormwater discharges.
         L.   A log documenting grading and stabilization activities as well as
amendments to the SWP3, which occur after construction activities commence.
         M.   Site map showing:
            1.   Limits of soil-disturbing activity of the site, including off
site spoil and borrow areas.
            2.   Soils types should be depicted for all areas of the site,
including locations of unstable or highly erodible soils.
            3.   Existing and proposed one-foot contours. This must include a
delineation of drainage watersheds expected during and after major grading
activities as well as the size of each drainage watershed in acres. This plan
must be to a scale so that the contours are legible.
            4.   Surface water locations including springs, wetlands, streams,
lakes, water wells, etc., on or within 200 feet of the site, including the
boundaries of wetlands or stream channels and first subsequent named receiving
water(s) the applicant intends to fill or relocate for which the applicant is
seeking approval from the Army Corps of Engineers and/or Ohio EPA.
            5.   Existing and planned locations of buildings, roads, parking
facilities, and utilities.
            6.   The location of all erosion and sediment control practices,
including the location of areas likely to require temporary stabilization
during the course of site development.
            7.   Sediment and stormwater management basins including their
sediment settling volume and the maximum expected disturbed area that will be
directed to the sediment pond during construction. The plan should include a
summary of the following:
               a.   The required sediment storage and dewatering volumes;
               b.   The provided sediment storage and dewatering volumes;
               c.   The weir length or skimmer size, as applicable;
               d.   The weir length or skimmer size provided.
            8.   Data sheets for all sediment traps, sediment basins, and SCMs
that identify contributing drainage area, disturbed area, water quality volume,
sedimentation volume, dewatering volume, practice surface area, facility
discharge and dewatering time, outlet type and dimensions, and any other
relevant parameters for each practice.
            9.   A separate plan and profile view of each individual sediment
settling pond and its outlet structure. Detail drawings of the outlet structure
shall indicate the following elevations:
               a.   Pond bottom;
               b.   Elevation required to store the required sediment storage
volume;
               c.   For sediment basins, the elevation at which the skimmer is
attached;
               d.   For sediment traps, the top and bottom of the stone outlet
section;
               e.   Elevation required to store the dewatering volume,
exclusive of the sediment storage volume;
               f.   Elevation of the top of embankment;
               g.   Crest of the emergency spillway.
            10.   Where used as a sediment-settling pond during construction,
the plan shall include a detail drawing of the temporary outlet configuration
of the permanent storm water basin with the following information specified:
               a.   Storage volume provided below the elevation at which the
skimmer or other surface dewatering device is attached;
               b.   Elevation at which the skimmer or other surface dewatering
device is attached;
               c.   Elevation at which the full dewatering zone is stored above
the skimmer invert;
               d.   Any temporary modification to permanent outlet orifices or
weirs required to ensure no discharge below the skimmer invert and only the
skimmer controls the discharge up to the top of the dewatering volume;
               e.   Calculations of the sediment storage volume, dewatering
volume and skimmer drawdown time shall also be provided.
            11.   The location of permanent SCMs to be used to control
pollutants in stormwater after construction operations have been completed.
            12.   Areas designated for the storage or disposal of solid,
sanitary and toxic wastes, including dumpster areas, areas designated for
cement truck washout, and vehicle fueling.
            13.   Methods to minimize the exposure of building materials,
building products, construction wastes, trash, landscape materials,
fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, detergents, and sanitary waste to
precipitation, stormwater runoff, and snow melt.
            14.   Measures to prevent and respond to chemical spills and leaks.
Applicants may also reference the existence of other plans (i.e., spill
prevention control and countermeasure (SPCC) plans, spill control programs,
safety response plans, etc.) provided that such plan addresses this requirement
and a copy of such plan is maintained on site.
            15.   Methods to minimize the discharge of pollutants from
equipment and vehicle washing, wheel wash water, and other wash waters. No
detergents may be used to wash vehicles. Wash waters shall be treated in a
sediment basin or alternative control that provides equivalent treatment prior
to discharge.
            16.   The location of designated stoned construction entrances
where the vehicles will ingress and egress the construction site.
            17.   The location of any in-stream activities including stream
crossings.
      (4)   Soils engineering report. The City Engineer may require the SWP3 to
include a soils engineering report based on his or her determination that the
conditions of the soils are unknown or unclear to the extent that additional
information is required to protect against erosion or other hazards.
Recommendations included in the report and approved by the City Engineer shall
be incorporated in the grading plans and/or other specifications for site
development. This report shall be based on adequate and necessary test borings,
and shall contain the following information:
         A.   Data regarding the nature, distribution, strength, and
erodibility of existing soils.
         B.   If applicable, data regarding the nature, distribution, strength,
and erodibility of the soil to be placed on the site.
         C.   Conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures.
         D.   Conclusions and recommended designs for interim soil
stabilization devices and measures, and for permanent soil stabilization after
construction is completed.
         E.   Design criteria for corrective measures when necessary.
         F.   Opinions and recommendations covering the stability of the site.
(Ord. 2015-153, passed 9-19-2016)
§ 1254.09 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (a)   The SWP3 must contain a description of the controls appropriate for
each construction operation and the applicant must implement such controls. The
SWP3 must clearly describe for each major construction activity the appropriate
control measures; the general sequence during the construction process under
which the measures will be implemented; and the contractor responsible for
implementation (e.g., contractor A will clear land and install perimeter
controls and contractor B will maintain perimeter controls until final
stabilization).
   (b)   The approved SWP3, and the sediment and erosion controls, and non-
sediment pollution controls contained therein, shall be implemented upon the
commencement of construction. Perimeter controls must be installed two working
days prior to commencement of construction. The approved plan must be
implemented until the site reaches final stabilization. All properties adjacent
to the site of soil-disturbing activity shall be protected from soil erosion
and sediment run-off and damage, including, but not limited to, private
properties, natural and artificial waterways, wetlands, storm sewers and public
lands.
   (c)   It is the owner's responsibility to maintain current records of
contractor(s) responsible for implementation of the SWP3 and providing that
information to the city. The SWP3 shall identify all subcontractors engaged in
activities that could impact storm water runoff. The SWP3 shall contain
signatures from all of the identified subcontractors indicating that they have
been informed and understand their roles and responsibilities in complying with
the SWP3. The applicant shall review the SWP3 with the primary contractor prior
to commencement of construction activities and keep a SWP3 training log to
demonstrate that this review had occurred.
   (d)   Erosion and sediment controls shall be designed, installed and
maintained effectively to minimize the discharge of pollutants during the
course of earth disturbing activities. The controls shall include the following
minimum components:
      (1)   Non-structural preservation measures. The SWP3 must make use of
practices that preserve the existing natural condition to the maximum extent
practicable. Such practices may include preserving riparian areas, preserving
existing vegetation and vegetative buffer strips, phasing of construction
operations in order to minimize the amount of disturbed land at any one time,
minimizing disturbance of steep slopes, designation of tree preservation areas
or other protective clearing or grubbing practices. Soil compaction shall be
minimized and, unless infeasible, topsoil shall be preserved. Provide and
maintain a 50-foot buffer of undisturbed natural vegetation around surface
waters of the state, or riparian or wetland setbacks, if applicable, whichever
is greater, unless maintaining this buffer is infeasible (e.g., stream
crossings for roads or utilities, or for channel and floodplain rehabilitation
and restoration). Direct stormwater to vegetated areas to increase sediment
removal and maximize stormwater infiltration.
      (2)   Erosion control practices. The SWP3 must make use of erosion
controls that are capable of providing cover over disturbed soils. The amount
of soil exposed during construction activity shall be minimized. A description
of control practices designed to restabilize disturbed areas after grading or
construction shall be included in the SWP3. The SWP3 must provide
specifications for stabilization of all disturbed areas of the site and provide
guidance as to which method of stabilization will be employed for any time of
the year. Such practices may include: temporary seeding, permanent seeding,
mulching, matting, sod stabilization, vegetative buffer strips, phasing of
construction operations, the use of construction entrances, and the use of
alternative ground cover. Erosion control practices must meet the following
requirements:
         A.   Stabilization. Disturbed areas must be stabilized as specified in
Tables 1 and 2 below.
 
Table 1: Permanent Stabilization
Area Requiring Permanent Stabilization Timeframe to Apply Erosion Controls
Any area that will lie dormant for one Within seven days of the most recent
year or more                           disturbance
Any area within 50 feet of surface     Within two days of reaching final grade
water of the state and at final grade
Any other areas at final grade         Within seven days of reaching final
                                       grade within that area
 
 
Table 2: Temporary Stabilization
Area Requiring Temporary Stabilization Timeframe to Apply Erosion Controls
Any disturbed area within 50 feet of a Within two days of the most recent
surface water of the state and not at  disturbance if that area will remain
final grade                            idle for more than 14 days
For all construction activities, any   Within seven days of the most recent
disturbed area, including soil         disturbance within the area
stockpiles that will be dormant for    For residential subdivisions, disturbed
more than 14 days but less than one    areas must be stabilized at least 7 days
year, and not within 50 feet of a      prior to transfer of ownership or
surface water of the state             operational responsibility
Disturbed areas that will be idle over Prior to November 1 or the onset of
winter                                 winter weather, whichever occurs first
Note:   Where vegetative stabilization techniques may cause structural
instability or are otherwise unobtainable, as determined by the City Engineer,
alternative stabilization techniques may be employed. This includes areas that
will be idle over the winter and stabilization prior to November 1 is not
possible.
 
         B.   Permanent stabilization of conveyance channels. Applicants shall
undertake special measures to stabilize channels and outfalls and prevent
erosive flows. Measures may include seeding, dormant seeding, mulching, erosion
control matting, sodding, riprap, natural channel design with bioengineering
techniques, step pools, or rock check dams, all as defined in the most recent
edition of Rainwater and Land Development or the Field Office Technical Guide
available at www.nrcs.usda.gov/technical/efotg/.
      (3)   Runoff control practices. The SWP3 shall incorporate measures that
control the volume and velocity of stormwater runoff within the site to prevent
erosion. Peak flow rates and total stormwater volume shall be controlled to
minimize erosion and outlets, downstream channel and streambank erosion. Such
practices may include rock check dams, pipe slope drains, diversions to direct
flow away from exposed soils and protective grading practices. These practices
shall divert runoff away from disturbed areas and steep slopes where
practicable and shall at the same time not divert runoff to an adjacent
property per Section
1250.20. Velocity dissipation devices shall be placed at discharge locations
and along the length of any outfall channel to provide non-erosive flow
velocity from the structure to a water course so that the natural physical and
biological characteristics and functions are maintained and protected.
      (4)   Sediment control practices. The SWP3 shall include a description
of, and detailed drawings for, all structural practices that shall store
runoff, allowing sediments to settle and/or divert flows away from exposed
soils or otherwise limit runoff from exposed areas to minimize sediment
discharges from the site. Structural practices shall be used to control erosion
and trap sediment from a site remaining disturbed for more than 14 days. Such
practices may include, among others: sediment settling ponds, silt fences,
storm drain inlet protection, and earth diversion dikes or channels which
direct runoff to a sediment settling pond. The design, installation and
maintenance of erosion and sediment controls shall address factors such as the
amount, frequency, intensity and duration of precipitation, the nature of
resulting stormwater runoff, and soil characteristics, including the range of
soil particle sizes expected to be present on the site.
      (5)   All sediment control practices must be capable of ponding runoff in
order to be considered functional. Earth diversion dikes or channels alone are
not considered a sediment control practice unless used in conjunction with a
sediment settling pond. Sediment control practices must meet the following
requirements:
         A.   Timing. Sediment control structures shall be functional
throughout the course of earth disturbing activity. Sediment basins and
perimeter sediment barriers shall be implemented prior to grading and within
seven days from the start of grubbing. They shall continue to function until
the up slope development area is restabilized. As construction progresses and
the topography is altered, appropriate controls must be constructed or existing
controls altered to address the changing drainage patterns.
         B.   Sediment settling ponds.
            1.   A sediment settling pond, or equivalent best management
practice upon approval from the City Engineer is required for any one of the
following conditions:
               a.   Concentrated storm water runoff;
               b.   Runoff from drainage areas that exceeds the design capacity
of silt fence (see Table 3) or inlet protection, or other sediment barriers;
               c.   Runoff from common drainage locations with ten or more
acres of disturbed land.
            2.   Sediment settling ponds shall be provided in the form of a
sediment trap or sediment basin as defined in the latest edition of Rainwater
and Land Development. The maximum allowable contributing drainage area to a
sediment trap shall be limited to less than five acres. Contributing drainage
areas of five acres or more shall be treated with a sediment basin. An
equivalent best management practice may be utilized upon approval from the
city.
            3.   The sediment-settling pond shall provide both a sediment
storage zone and a dewatering zone. The volume of the dewatering zone shall be
at least 1,800 cubic feet of storage per acre of total contributing drainage
area. The dewatering structure of sediment basins shall be designed to have a
minimum 48-hour drain time, and, unless infeasible, be designed to always
withdraw runoff from the surface of the pond throughout the storm cycle. As
such, a skimmer discharge device consistent with Rainwater and Land Development
shall be provided to dewater sediment basins. Sediment traps shall also provide
both a sediment storage zone and dewatering zone, but the outlet structure
shall be constructed consistent with the specifications contained in the latest
edition of Rainwater and Land Development.
            4.   When post-construction detention/water quality ponds are to be
used as temporary sediment trapping BMPs, a skimmer discharge device consistent
with Rainwater and Land Development shall be utilized during construction phase
and until the site is deemed permanently stabilized by the city.
            5.   The skimmer shall be designed per the equivalent requirements
of sediment basins and the operator must ensure that the outlet structure of
the pond provides an equivalent or better sediment storage zone and dewatering
zone. As such, temporarily while the site is under construction, there shall be
no discharge of runoff below the elevation required for the sediment storage
zone and the discharge of stormwater within the dewatering zone shall only
occur through the skimmer.
            6.   The volume of the sediment storage zone shall be calculated by
one of the following methods:
               Method 1: The volume of the sediment storage zone shall be 1,000
ft3 per disturbed acre within the watershed of the basin.
               Method 2: The volume of the sediment storage zone shall be the
volume necessary to store the sediment as calculated with the Revised Universal
Soil Loss Equation (RUSLE) or other generally accepted erosion protection
model.
            7.   When determining the total contributing drainage area, off-
site areas and areas which remain undisturbed by construction activity must be
included unless runoff from these areas is diverted away from the sediment
settling pond and is not co-mingled with sediment-laden runoff. The depth of
the dewatering zone must be less than or equal to five feet. The configuration
between the inlets and the outlet of the sediment-settling pond must provide at
least two units of length for each one unit of width ≥ 2:1 length-to-width
ratio; however a length to width ratio of ≥ 4:1 is recommended. Sediment must
be removed from the sediment-settling pond when the design capacity of the
sediment storage zone has been completely filled by sediment accumulations.
This limit is typically reached when sediment occupies one-half of the basin
depth. When designing sediment settling ponds, the applicant must consider
public safety, especially as it relates to children, as a design factor for the
sediment basin and alternative sediment controls must be used where site
limitations would preclude a safe design. The use of a combination of sediment
and erosion control measures in order to achieve maximum pollutant removal is
encouraged.
         C.   Silt fence and diversions. Sheet flow runoff from denuded areas
shall be intercepted by silt fence or diversions to protect adjacent
properties, and water resources from sediment transported via sheet flow. Where
intended to provide sediment control, silt fence shall be placed on a level
contour and shall be capable of temporarily ponding runoff. The relationship
between the maximum drainage area to silt fence for a particular slope range is
shown in Table 3 below. Placing silt fence in a parallel series does not extend
the size of the permissible drainage area.
 
Table 3: Maximum Drainage Area to Silt Fence Based on Slope
Maximum Drainage Area (Acres) to 100 Range of Slope for a Drainage Area (%)
Linear Feet of Silt Fence
0.50                                 <2%
0.25                                 ≥ 2% but < 20%
0.125                                ≥ 20% but < 50%
 
         D.   Alternative perimeter controls for sheet flow discharges may be
considered by the city, but their use shall not exceed the limitations
indicated in Table 3 above. Detail drawings and plan notes shall specify the
diameter of filter socks, compost berms and other such alternative perimeter
controls if used instead of silt fence.
         E.   Stormwater diversion practices shall be used to keep runoff away
from disturbed areas and steep slopes. Such devices, which include swales,
dikes or berms, may receive storm water runoff from areas up to ten acres.
         F.   Inlet protection. Erosion and sediment control practices, such as
boxed inlet protection, shall be installed to minimize sediment-laden water
entering active storm drain systems. All inlets receiving runoff from drainage
areas of one or more acres will require a sediment settling pond. Straw or hay
bales and filter socks around catch basins are not acceptable forms of inlet
protection, unless directed by the City Engineer or if conditions warrant it.
         G.   Off-site tracking of sediment and dust control.
            1.   Best management practices must be implemented to ensure
sediment is not tracked off-site and that dust is controlled. These best
management practices must include, but are not limited to, the following:
               a.   One construction entrance shall be built and shall serve as
the only permitted point of ingress and egress to the development area. This
entrance shall be built of a stabilized pad of aggregate stone or recycled
concrete or cement sized greater than two inches in diameter, placed over a
geotextile fabric, and constructed in conformance with specifications in the
most recent edition of the Rainwater and Land Development Manual.
               b.   Streets and catch basins adjacent to construction entrances
shall be kept free of sediment tracked off site. Streets directly adjacent to a
construction entrance and receiving traffic from the development area, shall be
cleaned daily to remove sediment tracked off-site. If applicable, the catch
basins on these streets nearest to the construction entrance shall also be
cleaned weekly and protected from sediment-laden runoff, if feasible without
posing a public safety hazard.
            2.   Based on site conditions, the City Engineer and/or the
Cuyahoga SWCD as directed by the City Engineer may require additional best
management practices to control off site tracking and dust. These additional
BMPs may include:
               a.   Fencing shall be installed around the perimeter of the
development area to ensure that all vehicle traffic adheres to designated
construction entrances.
               b.   Designated vehicle and wheel-washing areas. Wash water from
these areas must be directed to a designated sediment trap, the sediment-
settling pond, or to a sump pump for dewatering in conformance with division
(d)(7) of this section. No surfactants or detergents may be used to wash
vehicles.
               c.   Applicants shall take all necessary measures to comply with
applicable regulations regarding fugitive dust emissions, including obtaining
necessary permits for such emissions. The City Engineer may require dust
controls including the use of water trucks to wet disturbed areas, tarping
stockpiles, temporary stabilization of disturbed areas, and regulation of the
speed of vehicles on the site.
         H.   Surface waters of the state protection. Construction vehicles
shall avoid water resources. A 50 foot undisturbed natural buffer shall be
provided around surface waters of the state unless infeasible. If it is
infeasible to provide and maintain an undisturbed 50-foot natural buffer, the
SWP3 shall comply with the stabilization requirements in division (d)(2)A. of
this section for areas within 50 feet of a surface water and minimize soil
compaction and, unless infeasible, preserve topsoil. If the applicant is
permitted to disturb areas within 50 feet of a water resource, the following
conditions shall be addressed in the SWP3:
            1.   All BMPs and stream crossings shall be designed as specified
in the most recent edition of Rainwater and Land Development.
            2.   Structural practices shall be designated and implemented on
site to protect water resources from the impacts of sediment runoff.
            3.   No structural sediment controls (e.g., the installation of
silt fence or in-stream sediment settling pond) shall be used in water
resources or wetlands.
            4.   Where stream crossings for roads or utilities are necessary
and permitted, the project shall be designed such that the number of stream
crossings and the width of the disturbance are minimized.
            5.   Temporary stream crossings shall be constructed if water
resources or wetlands will be crossed by construction vehicles during
construction.
            6.   Construction of bridges, culverts, or sediment control
structures shall not place soil, debris, or other particulate material into or
close to the water resources or wetlands in such a manner that it may slough,
slip, or erode.
            7.   Concentrated stormwater runoff from BMPs to natural wetlands
shall be converted to diffuse flow through the use of level spreaders or other
such appropriate measure before the runoff enters the wetlands. The flow should
be released such that no erosion occurs downslope. Level spreaders may need to
be placed in series to ensure non-erosive velocities.
            8.   Protected areas or critical areas, including wetlands and
riparian areas shall be physically marked in the field prior to earth
disturbing activities.
         I.   Modifying controls. If periodic inspections or other information
indicates a control has been used inappropriately or incorrectly, the applicant
shall replace or modify the control for site conditions.
      (5)   Non-sediment pollutant controls. No solid or liquid waste,
including building materials, shall be discharged in stormwater runoff. The
applicant must implement site best management practices to prevent toxic
materials, hazardous materials, or other debris from entering water resources,
wetlands or the MS4. These practices shall include but are not limited to the
following:
         A.   Waste materials. A covered dumpster shall be made available for
the proper disposal of garbage, plaster, drywall, grout, gypsum, and other
waste materials.
         B.   Concrete truck washout. The washing of concrete material into a
street, catch basin, other public facility, natural resource or water of the
state is prohibited. A designated area for concrete washout shall be made
available.
         C.   Disposal of other wastewaters. The discharge of washout and
cleanout of stucco, paint, form release oils, curing compounds, and other
construction materials to a street, catch basin, other public facility, natural
resource or waters of the state is prohibited. The discharge of soaps or
solvents used in vehicle and equipment washing is also prohibited. If
generated, these wastewaters must be collected and disposed of properly.
         D.   Fuel/liquid tank storage. All fuel/liquid tanks and drums shall
be stored in a marked storage area. A dike shall be constructed around this
storage area with a minimum capacity equal to 110% of the volume of the largest
containers in the storage area and/or a spill kit shall be provided to clean up
spills. The SWP3 shall contain spill prevention and response procedures and
these procedures shall be discussed at the pre-construction meeting.
         E.   Toxic or hazardous waste disposal. Any toxic or hazardous waste
shall be disposed of properly. The discharge of fuels, oils, and other
pollutants used in vehicle and equipment operation and maintenance is
prohibited.
         F.   Contaminated soils disposal and runoff.
            1.   Discovery of previously unknown contaminated soils onsite
shall be self-reported to Ohio EPA and local authorities. Contaminated soils
from redevelopment sites shall be disposed of properly. Runoff from
contaminated soils shall not be discharged from the site. Proper permits shall
be obtained for development projects on solid waste landfill sites or
redevelopment sites. Where construction activities are to occur on sites with
contamination from previous activities, operators shall be aware that
concentrations of materials that meet other criteria (i.e. not considered a
hazardous waste, meeting voluntary action program (VAP) standards) may still
result in stormwater discharges in excess of Ohio Water Quality Standards. Such
discharges are not authorized by this code. Control measures which may be
utilized to meet this requirement include, but are not limited to:
               a.   Use berms, trenches, pits or tanks to collect contaminated
runoff and prevent discharge;
               b.   Pump runoff from contaminated soils to the sanitary sewer
with the prior approval of the sanitary sewer system operator, or pump into a
container for transport to an appropriate treatment or disposal facility; and
               c.   Cover areas of contamination with tarps, daily cover or
other such methods to prevent storm water from coming into contact with
contaminated materials.
            2.   The SWP3 must include methods to minimize the exposure of
building materials, building products, construction wastes, trash, landscape
materials, fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, detergents, and sanitary waste
to precipitation, stormwater runoff, and snow melt. The SWP3 shall include
measures to prevent and respond to chemical spills and leaks. Applicants may
also reference the existence of other plans (i.e., spill prevention control and
countermeasure (SPCC) plans, spill control programs, safety response plans,
etc.) provided that such plan addresses this requirement and a copy of such
plan is maintained on site.
      (6)   Compliance with other requirements. The SWP3 shall be consistent
with applicable state and/or local waste disposal, sanitary sewer, or septic
system regulations, including provisions prohibiting waste disposal by open
burning, and shall provide for the proper disposal of contaminated soils
located within the development area.
      (7)   Trench and ground water control. There shall be no sediment-laden
or turbid discharges to water resources or wetlands resulting from dewatering
activities. If trench or ground water contains sediment, it must pass through a
sediment-settling pond or other equally effective sediment control device,
prior to being discharged from the construction site. Alternatively, sediment
may be removed by settling in place or by dewatering into a sump pit, filter
bag or comparable practice. Ground water dewatering which does not contain
sediment or other pollutants is not required to be treated prior to discharge.
However, care must be taken when discharging ground water to ensure that it
does not become pollutant-laden by traversing over disturbed soils or other
pollutant sources.
      (8)   Internal inspections.  
         A.   All controls on the site shall be inspected at least once every
seven calendar days and within 24 hours after any storm event greater than one-
half inch of rain per 24 hour period. The inspection frequency may be reduced
to at least once every month if the entire site is temporarily stabilized or
runoff is unlikely due to weather conditions (e.g., site is covered with snow,
ice, or the ground is frozen). A waiver of inspection requirements is available
until one month before thawing conditions are expected to result in a discharge
if prior written approval has been attained from the City Engineer and/or
Cuyahoga County SWCD as directed by the City Engineer and all of the following
conditions are met:
            1.   The project is located in an area where frozen conditions are
anticipated to continue for extended periods of time (i.e. more than one
month).
            2.   Land disturbance activities have been suspended, and temporary
stabilization is achieved.
            3.   The beginning date and ending dates of the waiver period are
documented in the SWP3.
         B.   The applicant shall assign qualified inspection personnel to
conduct these inspections to ensure that the control practices are functional
and to evaluate whether the SWP3 is adequate, or whether additional control
measures are required. Qualified inspection personnel are individuals with
knowledge and experience in the installation and maintenance of sediment and
erosion controls. A copy of all reports shall be forwarded to the city
Engineering Department. All inspection reports shall be kept on file for a
period of three years following final stabilization of the site.
         C.   These inspections shall meet the following requirements:
            1.   Disturbed areas and areas used for storage of materials that
are exposed to precipitation shall be inspected for evidence of or the
potential for, pollutants entering the drainage system.
            2.   Erosion and sediment control measures identified in the SWP3
shall be observed to ensure that they are operating correctly. The applicant
shall utilize an inspection form provided by the city or an alternate form
acceptable to the City Engineer. The inspection form shall include:
               a.   The inspection date.
               b.   Names, titles and qualifications of personnel making the
inspection.
               c.   Weather information for the period since the last
inspection, including a best estimate of the beginning of each storm event,
duration of each storm event and approximate amount of rainfall for each storm
event in inches, and whether any discharges occurred.
               d.   Weather information and a description of any discharges
occurring at the time of inspection.
               e.   Locations of:
                  i.   Discharges of sediment or other pollutants from site.
                  ii.   BMPs that need to be maintained.
                  iii.   BMPs that failed to operate as designed or proved
inadequate for a particular location.
                  iv.   Where additional BMPs are needed that did not exist at
the time of inspection.
               f.   Corrective action required including any necessary changes
to the SWP3 and implementation dates.
            3.   Discharge locations shall be inspected to determine whether
erosion and sediment control measures are effective in preventing significant
impacts to the receiving water resource or wetlands.
            4.   Locations where vehicles enter or exit the site shall be
inspected for evidence of off-site vehicle tracking.
            5.   The applicant shall maintain for three years following final
stabilization the results of these inspections, the names and qualifications of
personnel making the inspections, the dates of inspections, major observations
relating to the implementation of the SWP3, a certification as to whether the
facility is in compliance with the SWP3, and information on any incidents of
non-compliance determined by these inspections.
      (9)   Maintenance.  
         A.   The SWP3 shall be designed to minimize maintenance requirements.
All BMPs shall be maintained and repaired as needed to ensure continued
performance of their intended function until final stabilization. All sediment
control practices must be maintained in a functional condition until all up
slope areas they control reach final stabilization. The applicant shall provide
a description of maintenance procedures needed to ensure the continued
performance of control practices and shall ensure a responsible party and
adequate funding to conduct this maintenance, all as determined by the City
Engineer.
         B.   When inspections reveal the need for repair, replacement, or
installation of erosion and sediment control BMPs, the following procedures
shall be followed:
            1.   When BMPs require repair or maintenance. If an internal
inspection reveals that a BMP is in need of repair or maintenance, with the
exception of a sediment-settling pond, it must be repaired or maintained within
three days of the inspection. Sediment settling ponds must be repaired or
maintained within ten days of the inspection.
            2.   When BMPs fail to provide their intended function. If an
internal inspection reveals that a BMP fails to perform its intended function
as detailed in the SWP3 and that another, more appropriate control practice is
required, the SWP3 must be amended and the new control practice must be
installed within ten days of the inspection as determined by the City Engineer
or duly authorized representative.
            3.   When BMPs depicted on the SWP3 are not installed. If an
internal inspection reveals that a BMP has not been implemented in accordance
with the schedule, the control practice must be implemented within ten days
from the date of the inspection. If the internal inspection reveals that the
planned control practice is not needed, the record must contain a statement of
explanation as to why the control practice is not needed.
      (10)   Final stabilization. Final stabilization shall be determined by
the City Engineer or their duly authorized representative. Once a definable
area has achieved final stabilization, the applicant may note this on the SWP3
and no further inspection requirement applies to that portion of the site.
Final stabilization also requires the installation of permanent (post-
construction) stormwater control measures (SCMs). Obligations under this
chapter shall not be completed until installation of post-construction BMPs is
verified.
(Ord. 2016-153, passed 9-19-2016)
§ 1254.10 ABBREVIATED STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN.
   (a)   In order to control sediment pollution of water resources, the
applicant shall submit an abbreviated SWP3 in accordance with the requirements
of this regulation.
   (b)   The abbreviated SWP3 shall be certified by a professional engineer,
certified professional erosion and sediment control specialist, or a registered
landscape architect.
   (c)   The abbreviated SWP3 shall include a minimum of the following BMPs.
The city may require other BMPs as site conditions warrant.
      (1)   Construction entrance. A construction entrance shall be built and
shall serve as the only permitted point of ingress and egress to the
development area. This entrance shall be built of a stabilized pad of aggregate
stone or recycled concrete or cement sized greater than two inches in diameter,
placed over a geotextile fabric, and constructed in conformance with
specifications in the most recent edition of Rainwater and Land Development.
      (2)   Concrete truck wash out. The washing of concrete material into a
street, catch basin, or other public facility or natural resource is
prohibited. A designated area for concrete washout shall be indicated on the
plan. Use for other waste and wastewater is prohibited.
      (3)   Street sweeping. Streets directly adjacent to construction
entrances and receiving traffic from the development area, shall be cleaned
daily to remove sediment tracked off-site. If applicable, the catch basins on
these streets nearest to the construction entrances shall be cleaned weekly.
      (4)   Stabilization. The development area shall be stabilized as detailed
in Table 4.
 
Table 4: Stabilization
Area Requiring Stabilization             Timeframe to Apply Erosion Controls
Any disturbed area within 50 feet of a   Within two days of the most recent
surface water of the state and not at    disturbance if that area will remain
final grade                              idle for more than 14 days
For all construction activities, any
disturbed area, including soil           Within seven days of the most recent
stockpiles, that will be dormant for     disturbance within the area
more than 14 days but less than one
year, and not within 50 feet of a stream
Disturbed areas that will be idle over   Prior to November 1
winter
Note:   Where vegetative stabilization techniques may cause structural
instability or are otherwise unusable as determined by the City Engineer,
alternative stabilization techniques must be employed. These techniques may
include mulching or erosion control matting. This includes areas that will be
idle over the winter and stabilization prior to November l is not possible.
 
      (5)   Inlet protection. Erosion and sediment control practices, such as
boxed inlet protection, shall be installed to minimize sediment-laden water
entering active storm drain systems, including rear yard inlets. Straw, hay
bales, and filter socks are not acceptable forms of inlet protection.
      (6)   Internal inspection and maintenance. All controls on the
development area shall be inspected at least once every seven calendar days and
within 24 hours after any storm event greater than one-half inch of rain per 24
hour period. Maintenance shall occur as detailed below. The applicant is
required to make an inspection and maintenance report for each inspection and
maintain a log of reports. A copy of all reports shall be forwarded to the City
Engineering Department.
         A.   When BMPs require repair or maintenance. If the internal
inspection reveals that a BMP is in need of repair or maintenance, with the
exception of a sediment-settling pond, it must be repaired or maintained within
three days of the inspection. Sediment settling ponds must be repaired or
maintained within ten days of the inspection.
         B.   When BMPs fail to provide their intended function. If the
internal inspection reveals that a BMP fails to perform its intended function
and that another, more appropriate control practice is required, the
abbreviated SWP3 must be amended and the new control practice must be installed
within ten days of the inspection.
         C.   When BMPs depicted on the abbreviated SWP3 are not installed. If
the internal inspection reveals that a BMP has not been implemented in
accordance with the schedule, the control practice must be implemented within
ten days from the date of the inspection. If the inspection reveals that the
planned control practice is not needed, the record must contain a statement of
explanation as to why the control practice is not needed.
      (7)   Final stabilization. Final stabilization shall be determined by the
City Engineer.
(Ord. 2016-153, passed 9-19-2016)
§ 1254.11 FEES.
   The city’s costs for review, filing, and inspections associated with SWP3 or
abbreviated SWP3 are part of a complete site plan review fee. This site plan
review fee is required to be submitted to the city before the review process
begins. Please refer to the City of Solon Codified Ordinance
Chapter 1424 for current fee schedule.
(Ord. 2016-153, passed 9-19-2016)
§ 1254.12 BOND.
   (a)   If a SWP3 is required by this regulation for a new subdivision, bond
requirements shall be in accordance with §
1242.02(e).
   (b)   If a SWP3 or abbreviated SWP3 is required by this regulation for any
other type of soil disturbing activity not referenced in division (a) hereof,
soil disturbing activities shall not be permitted until a cash bond has been
deposited with the City Finance Department. The amount shall be a $3,000
minimum, and an additional $3,000 paid for each subsequent acre or fraction
thereof. The bond will be used for the city to perform the obligations
otherwise to be performed by the owner of the development area as stated in
this regulation and to allow all work to be performed as needed in the event
that the applicant fails to comply with the provisions of this regulation. The
cash bond shall be returned after all work required by this regulation has been
completed and final stabilization has been reached, all as determined by the
City Engineer or their duly authorized representative.
      (1)   No project subject to this regulation shall commence without a SWP3
or abbreviated SWP3 approved by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 2016-153, passed 9-19-2016)
§ 1254.13 ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   If the city or its duly authorized representative determines that a
violation of the rules adopted under this code exist, the city or
representative may issue an immediate stop work order if the violator failed to
obtain any federal, state, or local permit necessary for sediment and erosion
control, earth movement, clearing, or cut and fill activity.
   (b)   All development areas may be subject to external inspections at any
time by the city and or Cuyahoga SWCD to ensure compliance with the approved
SWP3 or abbreviated SWP3.
   (c)   No applicant, contractor, builder, site manager, etc. shall limit
access to the site to any city, state, county or federal inspector.
   (d)   After each external inspection, the city and or Cuyahoga SWCD shall
prepare and distribute a status report to the applicant.
   (e)   If an external inspection determines that operations are being
conducted in violation of the approved SWP3 or abbreviated SWP3 or if the
practices in place do not provide their intended functions, the city may take
action as detailed in Sections
1254.15 and
1254.99.
(Ord. 2016-153, passed 9-19-2016)
§ 1254.14 VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   No person shall violate or cause or knowingly permit to be violated
any of the provisions of this regulation, or fail to comply with any of such
provisions or with any lawful requirements of any public authority made
pursuant to this regulation, or knowingly use or cause or permit the use of any
lands in violation of this regulation or in violation of any permit granted
under this regulation.
   (b)   Upon notice, the City Engineer may suspend any active soil disturbing
activity for a period not to exceed 90 days, and may require immediate erosion
and sediment control measures whenever he or she determines that such activity
is not meeting the intent of this regulation. Such notice shall be in writing,
shall be given to the applicant, and shall state the conditions under which
work may be resumed. In instances, however, where the City Engineer finds that
immediate action is necessary for public safety or the public interest, he or
she may require that work be stopped upon verbal order pending issuance of the
written notice.
(Ord. 2016-153, passed 9-19-2016)
§ 1254.15 APPEALS.
   Any person aggrieved by any order, requirement, determination, or any other
action or inaction by the city in relation to this regulation may appeal to the
court of common pleas. Such an appeal shall be made in conformity with Ohio
R.C. Chapter 2506.
(Ord. 2016-153, passed 9-19-2016)
§ 1254.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   Any person, firm, entity or corporation; including but not limited to,
the owner of the property, his agents and assigns, occupant, property manager,
and any contractor or subcontractor who violates or fails to comply with any
provision of this regulation is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and
shall be fined no more than $1,000 or imprisoned for no more than 180 days, or
both, for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day
during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
   (b)   The imposition of any other penalties provided herein shall not
preclude the city instituting an appropriate action or proceeding in a court of
proper jurisdiction to prevent an unlawful development, or to restrain,
correct, or abate a violation, or to require compliance with the provisions of
this regulation or other applicable laws, ordinances, rules, or regulations, or
the orders of the city.
(Ord. 2016-153, passed 9-19-2016)
CHAPTER 1256: ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS
Section
   
1256.01   Preserving environmental quality
   
1256.02   Evaluation required for residential subdivisions of more than five
lots
   
1256.03   Required information
   
1256.04   Review of evaluation
   
1256.05   Basis for approval
   
1256.06   City actions subject to scrutiny
   
1256.07   Cooperation
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Authority to adopt subdivision regulations, see R.C. § 711.101
   Original plats, see R.C. §§ 711.01 et seq.
   Plat and subdivision defined, see R.C. § 711.001
   Revision of plats, see R.C. §§ 711.28 et seq.
   Subdivisions in flood hazard areas, see §§
1424.10,
1462.04(c)
   Vacating plats, see R.C. §§ 711.17 et seq.
   Violation of regulations, see R.C. § 711.102
§ 1256.01 PRESERVING ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY.
   In concert with enhancing and preserving environmental quality, the policy
of the city government shall be to use all practicable means and measures to
create and maintain conditions under which man and nature can exist in
productive harmony and fulfill the social, economic and other requirements of
present and future generations. Every citizen has a responsibility to
contribute to the preservation and enhancement of the quality of the
environment. There is a need to understand the relationship between the
maintenance of high-quality ecological systems and the general welfare of the
people of the city, including their enjoyment of the natural resources of the
city. It is the intent of the city that the protection and enhancement of the
environment shall be given appropriate weight with social and economic
consideration in public policy. Social, economic and environmental factors
shall be considered together in reaching decisions on proposed activities. In
order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, it is the continuing
responsibility of the city to use all practicable means, consistent with other
essential considerations, to improve and coordinate plans, facilities, programs
and resources to the end that the city may:
   (a)   Fulfill the responsibilities of each generation as trustee of the
environment for succeeding generations;
   (b)   Assure for all citizens safe, healthful, productive and aesthetically
and culturally pleasing surroundings;
   (c)   Attain the widest range of beneficial uses of the environment without
degradation, risk to health or safety or other undesirable and unintended
consequences;
   (d)   Preserve important historic, cultural and natural aspects of our
heritage, and maintain, wherever possible, an environment which supports
diversity and variety of individual choice;
   (e)   Achieve a balance between growth and resource use which will permit
high standards of living and wide sharing of life’s amenities; and
   (f)   Enhance the quality of renewable resources and approach the optimum
attainable recycling of depletable resources.
(Ord. 1978-160, passed 8-7-1978)
§ 1256.02 EVALUATION REQUIRED FOR RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS OF MORE THAN FIVE
LOTS.
   An environmental impact evaluation shall be filed by every applicant for
approval of a residential subdivision of more than five lots and for other
proposed developments when deemed necessary by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 1978-160, passed 8-7-1978)
§ 1256.03 REQUIRED INFORMATION.
   (a)   Each environmental impact evaluation prepared in accordance with this
chapter shall include the following:
      (1)   A description of the proposed action;
      (2)   A description of the existing environmental setting;
      (3)   The favorable and adverse environmental impacts of the proposed
action;
      (4)   The means and estimated costs necessary to minimize the adverse
impacts;
      (5)   Identification of alternatives to the proposed action, including
their impact on the environment;
      (6)   Identification of any irreversible commitment of natural resources
as a result of the proposed action;
      (7)   The growth-inducing aspects of the proposed action as related to
natural resources; and
      (8)   Evidence furnished by the developer that he or she has reviewed a
copy of the NWI Map for the area where the development is planned. If the NWI
Map shows a wetland area, the developer shall apply for, and furnish evidence
that it has received, an ACOE permit prior to project approval.
   (b)   Application forms shall be obtained from the office of the Planning
Director.
(Ord. 1978-160, passed 8-7-1978; Ord. 1993-82, passed 6-7-1993; Ord. 2002-15,
passed 3-4-2002)
§ 1256.04 REVIEW OF EVALUATION.
   The environmental impact evaluation shall be presented to the Planning
Commission along with the proposed residential subdivision under consideration.
It may be referred by the Mayor to administrative department heads for comment.
Prior to any determination on the proposed residential subdivision, the
Planning Commission shall review and consider the environmental impact
evaluation together with any comments submitted by the Mayor or administrative
department heads.
(Ord. 1978-160, passed 8-7-1978)
§ 1256.05 BASIS FOR APPROVAL.
   The Planning Commission shall not grant preliminary approval of any
residential subdivision of more than five lots unless it finds that the
environmental impact of the project shall be in harmony with the city’s present
development.
(Ord. 1978-160, passed 8-7-1978)
§ 1256.06 CITY ACTIONS SUBJECT TO SCRUTINY.
   The city declares its intention to subject its own designated actions to
scrutiny on environmental considerations by providing a public environmental
impact evaluation for review by the Planning Commission, Council and citizens.
(Ord. 1978-160, passed 8-7-1978)
§ 1256.07 COOPERATION.
   The Mayor is hereby directed to contact any state or local governmental unit
proposing to engage in any activity having substantial environmental relevance
in or near the city and to request that unit to cooperate fully with the city
in carrying out the intent of this chapter.
(Ord. 1978-160, passed 8-7-1978)
CHAPTER 1257: COMPREHENSIVE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Section
   
1257.01   Purpose and scope
   
1257.02   Definitions
   
1257.03   Disclaimer of liability
   
1257.04   Conflicts, severability, nuisances and responsibility
   
1257.05   Development of Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plans
   
1257.06   Application procedures
   
1257.07   Compliance with state and federal regulations
   
1257.08   Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plans
   
1257.09   Performance standards
   
1257.10   Easements
   
1257.11   Maintenance and final inspection approval
   
1257.12   On-going inspections
   
1257.13   Fees
   
1257.14   Bond
   
1257.15   Installation of water quality stormwater control measures
   
1257.16   Violations
   
1257.17   Appeals
 
   
1257.99   Penalty
§ 1257.01 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (a)   The purpose of this regulation is to establish technically feasible
and economically reasonable stormwater management standards to achieve a level
of stormwater quality and quantity control that will minimize damage to
property and degradation of water resources and will promote and maintain the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city.
   (b)   This regulation requires owners who develop or redevelop their
property within the city to:
      (1)   Control stormwater runoff from their property and ensure that all
Stormwater Control Measures (SCMs) are properly designed, constructed and
maintained;
      (2)   Reduce water quality impacts to receiving water resources that may
be caused by new development or redevelopment activities;
      (3)   Control the volume, rate and quality of stormwater runoff
originating from their property so that surface water and ground water are
protected and flooding and erosion potential are not increased;
      (4)   Minimize the need to construct, repair and replace subsurface storm
drain systems;
      (5)   Preserve natural infiltration and ground water recharge, and
maintain subsurface flow that replenishes water resources, except in slippage-
prone soils;
      (6)   Incorporate stormwater quality and quantity controls into site
planning and design at the earliest possible stage in the development process;
      (7)   Reduce the expense of remedial projects needed to address problems
caused by inadequate stormwater management;
      (8)   Maximize use of SCMs that serve multiple purposes, including, but
not limited to, flood control, erosion control, fire protection, water quality
protection, recreation and habitat preservation;
      (9)   Design sites to minimize the number of stream crossings and the
width of associated disturbance in order to minimize the city's future expenses
related to the maintenance and repair of stream crossings; and
      (10)   Maintain, promote and re-establish conditions necessary for
naturally occurring stream processes that assimilate pollutants, attenuate
flood flows and provide a healthy water resource.
   (c)   This regulation shall apply to all parcels used or being developed,
either wholly or partially, for new or relocated projects involving highways
and roads; subdivisions or larger common plans of development; industrial,
commercial, institutional or residential buildings and/or additions greater
than 900 square feet; building activities on farms; redevelopment of buildings
and/or parking lots; grading for buildings and/or additions regulated herein;
and all other uses that are not specifically exempted in this section.
   (d)   Public entities, including the state, county and the city shall comply
with this regulation for roadway projects initiated after March 10, 2006 and,
to the maximum extent practicable, for projects initiated before that time.
   (e)   This regulation does not apply to activities regulated by, and in
compliance with, the Ohio Agricultural Sediment Pollution Abatement Rules.
   (f)   This regulation does not require a Comprehensive Stormwater Management
Plan for linear construction projects, such as pipeline or utility line
installation, that do not result in the installation of impervious surface as
determined by the City Engineer. Such projects must be designed to minimize the
number of stream crossings and the width of disturbance. Linear construction
projects must comply with the requirements of
Chapter 1254, Erosion and Sediment Control.
(Ord. 2008-29, passed 4-7-2008; Ord. 2012-255, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 2016-
208A, passed 12-19-2016)
§ 1257.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this regulation, the following terms shall have the
meaning herein indicated.
   (a)   ACRE. A measurement of area equaling 43,560 square feet.
   (b)   AS-BUILT SURVEY. A survey done after construction has been completed
and shown on a plan or drawing prepared by a registered Professional Engineer
or Surveyor, indicating the actual dimensions, elevations and locations of any
stormwater management practices, including but not limited to structures,
underground utilities, swales or detention facilities, all as necessary for
implementation of the Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan.
   (c)   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP) also STORMWATER CONTROL MEASURE
(SCMs). Schedule of activities, prohibitions of practices, operation and
maintenance procedures, treatment requirements and other management practices
(both structural and non-structural) to prevent or reduce the pollution of
water resources and to control stormwater volume and rate. This includes
practices to control runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or
drainage from raw material storage. For guidance, please see U.S. EPA's
National Menu of BMPs at http://water.epa.gov/polwaste/npdes/swbmp/index.cfm.
   (d)   CLEAN WATER ACT. Pub. L. No. 92-500, as amended Pub. L. No. 95-217,
Pub. L. No. 95-576, Pub. L. No. 96-483, Pub. L. No. 97-117 and Pub. L. No. 100-
4, 33 U.S.C. Sections 1251 et seq. Referred to as the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act or the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972.
   (e)   CITY. The City of Solon, its designated representatives, boards or
commissions.
   (f)   COMPREHENSIVE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN. The written document and
plans meeting the requirements of this regulation that sets forth the plans and
practices to minimize stormwater runoff from a development area, to safely
convey or temporarily store and release post-development runoff at an allowable
rate to minimize flooding and stream bank erosion, and to protect or improve
stormwater quality and stream channels.
   (g)   CRITICAL STORM. A storm that is determined by calculating the
percentage increase in volume of runoff by a proposed development area for the
1 year 24 hour event. The critical storm is used to calculate the maximum
allowable stormwater discharge rate from a developed site.
   (h)   DEVELOPMENT AREA. A parcel or contiguous parcels owned by one person
or persons, or operated as one development unit, and used or being developed
for commercial, industrial, residential, institutional or other construction or
alteration that changes runoff characteristics.
   (i)   DEVELOPMENT DRAINAGE AREA. A combination of each hydraulically unique
watershed with individual outlet points on the development area.
   (j)   DISTURBED AREA. An area of land subject to erosion due to the removal
of vegetative cover and/or soil-disturbing activities.
   (k)   DRAINAGE. The removal of excess surface water or ground water from
land by surface or subsurface drains.
   (l)   EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner for the use of a specified
portion of land for a specified purpose.
   (m)   EROSION. The process by which the land surface is worn away by the
action of wind, water, ice, gravity or any combination of those forces.
   (n)   EXTENDED DETENTION FACILITY. A stormwater control measure that
replaces and/or enhances traditional detention facilities by releasing the
runoff collected during the stormwater quality event over at least 24 to 48
hours, retarding flow and allowing pollutants to settle within the facility.
   (o)   FINAL STABILIZATION. All soil-disturbing activities at the site have
been completed and a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of at
least 80% coverage for the area has been established or equivalent
stabilization practices, such as the use of mulches or geotextiles, have been
employed.
   (p)   GRADING. The process in which the topography of the land is altered to
a new slope.
   (q)   GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE. Wet weather management approaches and
technologies that utilize, enhance or mimic the natural hydrologic cycle
processes of infiltration, evapotranspiration and reuse.
   (r)   HYDROLOGIC UNIT CODE. A cataloging system developed by the United
States Geological Survey and the Natural Resource Conservation Service to
identify watersheds in the United States.
   (s)   IMPERVIOUS COVER. Any surface that cannot effectively absorb or
infiltrate water. This may include roads, streets, parking lots, rooftops,
sidewalks and other areas not covered by vegetation.
   (t)   INFILTRATION CONTROL MEASURE. A stormwater control measure that does
not discharge to a water resource during the stormwater quality event,
requiring collected runoff to either infiltrate into the groundwater and/or be
consumed by evapotranspiration, thereby retaining stormwater pollutants in the
facility.
   (u)   LARGER COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT. A contiguous area where multiple
separate and distinct construction activities may be taking place at different
times on different schedules under one plan.
   (v)   LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT. Low-impact development (LID) is a site design
approach, which seeks to integrate hydrologically functional design with
pollution prevention measures to compensate for land development impacts on
hydrology and water quality. LID's goal is to mimic natural hydrology and
processes by using small-scale, decentralized practices that infiltrate,
evaporate, detain, and transpire stormwater. LID stormwater control measures
(SCMs) are uniformly and strategically located throughout the site.
   (w)   MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE. The level of pollutant reduction that
operators of small municipal separate storm sewer systems regulated under 40
C.F.R. Parts 9, 122, 123 and 124, referred to as NPDES Stormwater Phase II,
must meet.
   (x)   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) that are:
      (1)   Owned or operated by the federal government, state, municipality,
township, county, district, or other public body (created by or pursuant to
state or federal law) including a special district under state law such as a
sewer district, flood control district or drainage districts, or similar
entity, or a designated and approved management agency under section 208 of the
Clean Water Act that discharges into water resources; and
      (2)   Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater; and
      (3)   Which is not a combined sewer; and
      (4)   Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as
defined at 40 C.F.R. Part 122.2.
   (y)   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES). A regulatory
program in the Federal Clean Water Act that prohibits the discharge of
pollutants into surface waters of the United States without a permit.
   (z)   NONSTRUCTURAL STORMWATER CONTROL MEASURE (SCM). Any technique that
uses natural processes and features to prevent or reduce the discharge of
pollutants to water resources and control stormwater volume and rate.
   (aa)   OPEN DRAINAGE WAY. Use of the land to collect and transport
stormwater runoff in a swale, ditch, channel or stream.
   (bb)   POST-DEVELOPMENT. The conditions that exist following the completion
of soil-disturbing activity in terms of topography, vegetation, land use and
the rate, volume, quality or direction of stormwater runoff.
   (cc)   PRE-CONSTRUCTION MEETING. Meeting prior to construction between all
parties associated with the construction of the project including government
agencies, contractors and owners to review agency requirements and plans as
submitted and approved by the City of Solon.
   (dd)   PRE-DEVELOPMENT. The conditions that exist prior to the initiation of
soil-disturbing activity in terms of topography, vegetation, land use and the
rate, volume, quality or direction of stormwater runoff.
   (ee)   PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. A professional engineer registered in the
State of Ohio with specific education and experience in water resources
engineering, acting in conformance with the Code of Ethics of the Ohio State
Board of Registration for Engineers and Surveyors.
   (ff)   PROFESSIONAL SURVEYOR. A professional surveyor registered in the
State of Ohio with specific education and experience to adequately perform the
art of surveying, acting in conformance with the Code of Ethics of the Ohio
State Board of Registration for Engineers and Surveyors.
   (gg)   REDEVELOPMENT. A construction project on land that has been
previously developed and where the new land use will not increase the runoff
coefficient used to calculate the water quality volume. If the new land use
will increase the runoff coefficient, then the project is considered to be a
new development project rather than a redevelopment project.
   (hh)   RIPARIAN AREA. Land adjacent to any brook, creek, river or stream
having a defined bed and bank that, if appropriately sized, helps to stabilize
streambanks, limit erosion, reduce flood size flows and/or filter and settle
out runoff pollutants, or performs other functions consistent with the purposes
of this regulation.
   (ii)   RUNOFF. The portion of rainfall, melted snow or irrigation water that
flows across the ground surface and is eventually returned to water resources.
   (jj)   SEDIMENT. The soils or other surface materials that can be
transported or deposited by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity as a
product of erosion.
   (kk)   SEDIMENTATION. The deposition of sediment in water resources.
   (ll)   SHEET FLOW. An overland flow or downslope movement of water taking
the form of a continuous film over land surfaces and not concentrated into
channels.
   (mm)   SITE OWNER/OPERATOR. Any individual, corporation, firm, trust,
commission, board, public or private partnership, joint venture, agency,
unincorporated association, municipal corporation, county or state agency, the
federal government, other legal entity or an agent thereof that is responsible
for the overall construction site.
   (nn)   SOIL-DISTURBING ACTIVITY. Clearing, grading, excavating, filling or
other alteration of the earth's surface where natural or human-made ground
cover is destroyed and that may result in, or contribute to, increased
stormwater quantity and/or decreased stormwater quality.
   (oo)   STABILIZATION. The use of best management practices or Stormwater
Control Measures that reduce or prevent soil erosion by stormwater runoff,
trench dewatering, wind, ice, gravity or a combination thereof.
   (pp)   STORMWATER. Defined at 40 CFR 122.26(b)(13) and means stormwater
runoff, snow melt runoff and surface runoff and drainage.
   (qq)   STRUCTURE. For the purpose of this chapter, STRUCTURE shall refer to
any home, garage, basement, accessory building, commercial, retail or
industrial building or any other human-made permanent feature meant for human
habitation. Natural flowing rivers, creeks, ponds, lakes, yards, streets,
roadways and sidewalks are not considered STRUCTURES.
   (rr)   STORMWATER CONTROL MEASURE (SCM) also BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP).
Schedule of activities, prohibitions of practices, operation and maintenance
procedures, treatment requirements, and other management practices (both
structural and non-structural) to prevent or reduce the pollution of water
resources and to control stormwater volume and rate. This includes practices to
control runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from
raw material storage.
   (ss)   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICE. Any structural or nonstructural
stormwater management practice developed in accordance with a Comprehensive
Stormwater Management Plan developed and approved under this regulation.
   (tt)   STRUCTURAL STORMWATER CONTROL MEASURE (SCM). Any constructed
facility, structure or device that prevents or reduces the discharge of
pollutants to water resources and controls stormwater volume and rate.
   (uu)   SURFACE WATER OF THE STATE also WATER RESOURCE. Any stream, lake,
reservoir, marsh, wetland or other waterway situated wholly or partly within
the boundaries of the state, except those private waters who do not combine or
affect a junction with surface water. Waters defined as sewerage systems,
treatment works or disposal systems in R.C. § 6111.01 are not included.
   (vv)   TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD. The sum of the existing and/or projected
point source, nonpoint source, and background loads for a pollutant to a
specified watershed, water body, or water body segment. A TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY
LOAD sets and allocates the maximum amount of a pollutant that may be
introduced into the water and still ensures attainment and maintenance of water
quality standards.
   (ww)   WATER QUALITY VOLUME (WQv). The volume of stormwater runoff which
must be captured and treated prior to discharge from the developed site after
construction is complete. WQv is based on the expected runoff generated by the
mean storm precipitation volume from post-construction site conditions at which
rapidly diminishing returns in the number of runoff events captured begins to
occur.
   (xx)   WATER RESOURCE also SURFACE WATER OF THE STATE. Any stream, lake,
reservoir, pond, marsh, wetland, or waterway situated wholly or partly within
the boundaries of the state, except those private waters which do not combine
or affect a junction with surface water. Waters defined as sewerage systems,
treatment works or disposal systems in R.C. § 6111.01 are not included.
   (yy)   WATER RESOURCE CROSSING. Any bridge, box, arch, culvert, truss or
other type of structure intended to convey people, animals, vehicles or
materials from one side of a watercourse to another. This does not include
private, noncommercial footbridges or pole mounted aerial electric or
telecommunication lines, nor does it include below-grade utility lines.
   (zz)   WATERSHED. The total drainage area contributing stormwater runoff to
a single point.
   (aaa)   WETLAND. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under
normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted
for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs and
similar areas (40 C.F.R. Part 232, as amended).
(Ord. 2008-29, passed 4-7-2008; Ord. 2012-255, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 2016-
208A, passed 12-19-2016)
§ 1257.03 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (a)   Compliance with the provisions of this regulation shall not relieve
any person, company or other entity from responsibility for damage to any
person otherwise imposed by law. The provisions of this regulation are
promulgated to promote the health, safety and welfare of the public and are not
designed for the benefit of any individual or any particular parcel of
property.
   (b)   By approving a Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan under this
regulation, the city does not accept responsibility for the design,
installation and operation and maintenance of SCMs.
(Ord. 2008-29, passed 4-7-2008; Ord. 2012-255, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 2016-
208A, passed 12-19-2016)
§ 1257.04 CONFLICTS, SEVERABILITY, NUISANCES AND RESPONSIBILITY.
   (a)   Where this regulation is in conflict with other provisions of law or
ordinance, the most restrictive provisions, as determined by the Director of
Law, shall prevail.
   (b)   If any clause, section or provision of this regulation is declared
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the validity
of the remainder shall not be affected thereby.
   (c)   This regulation shall not be construed as authorizing any person to
maintain a nuisance on their property, and compliance with the provisions of
this regulation shall not be a defense in any action to abate such a nuisance.
   (d)   Failure of the city to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly
conditions or to recommend corrective measures shall not relieve the site owner
from the responsibility for the condition or damage resulting therefrom, and
shall not result in the city, its officers, employees or agents being
responsible for any condition or damage resulting therefrom.
(Ord. 2008-29, passed 4-7-2008; Ord. 2012-255, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 2016-
208A, passed 12-19-2016)
§ 1257.05 DEVELOPMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLANS.
   (a)   This regulation requires that a Comprehensive Stormwater Management
Plan be developed and implemented for all soil disturbing activities disturbing
one or more acres of total land, or less than one acre if part of a larger
common plan of development or sale disturbing one or more acres of total land,
and on which any regulated activity of §
1257.01(c) is proposed. A Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan must be
developed and implemented for all commercial and industrial site development.
The City Engineer may require a comprehensive stormwater management plan on
sites disturbing less than one acre.
   (b)   The specific requirements for stormwater quality control on
redevelopment projects, as defined by this regulation, are in §
1257.09(e). All other requirements of this regulation, including performance
standards for stormwater quantity control per §
1257.09, apply to redevelopment projects.
   (c)   The city shall administer this regulation, shall be responsible for
determination of compliance with this regulation and shall issue notices and
orders as may be necessary. The city may consult with the Cuyahoga Soil and
Water Conservation District, state agencies, private engineers, stormwater
districts or other technical experts in reviewing the Comprehensive Stormwater
Management Plan.
(Ord. 2008-29, passed 4-7-2008; Ord. 2012-255, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 2016-
208A, passed 12-19-2016)
§ 1257.06 APPLICATION PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Pre-application meeting. The applicant shall attend a pre-application
meeting with the city to discuss the proposed project, review the requirements
of this regulation, identify unique aspects of the project that must be
addressed during the review process, and establish a preliminary review and
approval schedule. Through the coordination of the City Engineering and
Planning Departments, this pre-application meeting will occur in conjunction
with the pre-planning meeting as noted by §§ 1290.01 and 1290.02.
   (b)   Preliminary Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan. The applicant
shall submit one set of a Preliminary Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan
(Preliminary Plan) and the applicable fees to the City Engineer as prescribed
by
Chapter 1424. The Preliminary Plan shall show the proposed property boundaries,
setbacks, dedicated open space, public roads, water resources, stormwater
management practices, and easements in sufficient detail and engineering
analysis to allow the City Engineer to determine if the site is laid out in a
manner that meets the intent of this regulation and if the proposed SCMs are
capable of controlling runoff from the site in compliance with this regulation.
The applicant shall submit one set of the Preliminary Plan and applicable fees
as follows:
      (1)   For subdivisions. In conjunction with the submission of the
preliminary subdivision plan;
      (2)   For residential construction projects that are not part of a
subdivision or larger common plan of development and have soil disturbing
activities disturbing one or more acres of total land. In conjunction with the
application for Planning Commission and Council approval;
      (3)   For any other construction projects. In conjunction with the
application for Planning Commission and Council approval; and
      (4)   For general clearing projects. In conjunction with the application
as required by
Chapter 1488.
   (c)   Final Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan. The applicant shall
submit three sets of a Final Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan (Final
Plan) and the applicable fees to the City Engineer in conjunction with the
submittal of the improvement plans or application for a building or zoning
permit for the site. The Final Plan shall meet the requirements of §§
1257.08 and
1257.09 and shall be approved by the City Engineer prior to approval of
improvement plans and/or before issuance of a building permit by the Chief
Building Official. The Final Plan shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
City Engineer achievement of the applicable performance standards in §
1257.09.
   (d)   Review and comment. The City Engineer shall review the Preliminary and
Final Plans submitted, and shall approve or return for revisions within 90 days
of such receipt of such plans with comments and recommendations for revisions.
A Preliminary or Final Plan rejected because of deficiencies shall receive a
narrative report stating specific problems and the procedures for filing a
revised Preliminary or Final Plan.
   (e)   Approval necessary. Land-clearing and soil-disturbing activities shall
not begin and zoning and/or building permits shall not be issued without an
approved Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan.
   (f)   Valid for two years. Approvals issued in accordance with this
regulation shall remain valid for two years from the date of approval.
(Ord. 2008-29, passed 4-7-2008; Ord. 2012-255, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 2016-
208A, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 2022-66, passed 3-7-2022)
§ 1257.07 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND FEDERAL REGULATIONS.
   Approvals issued in accordance with this regulation do not relieve the
applicant of responsibility for obtaining all other necessary permits and/or
approvals from other federal, state and/or county agencies. If requirements
vary, the most restrictive shall prevail. These permits may include, but are
not limited to, those listed below. Applicants are required to show proof of
compliance with these regulations before the city will issue a building or
zoning permit.
   (a)   Ohio Environmental Protection Agency (Ohio EPA) National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permits authorizing stormwater discharges
associated with construction activity or the most current version thereof.
Proof of compliance with these requirements shall be the applicant's notice of
intent (NOI) number from Ohio EPA, a copy of the Ohio EPA Director's
authorization letter for the NPDES permit or a letter from the site owner
certifying and explaining why the NPDES permit is not applicable.
   (b)   Section 401 of the Clean Water Act. Proof of compliance shall be a
copy of the Ohio EPA Water Quality Certification application tracking number,
public notice, project approval or a letter from the site owner certifying that
a qualified professional has surveyed the site and determined that Section 401
of the Clean Water Act, being 33 USC 1341 and 1344, is not applicable. Wetlands
and other waters of the United States shall be delineated by protocols accepted
by the United States Army Corps of Engineers at the time of application of this
regulation. The City Engineer or their duly authorized agent may require
affirmation of the delineation by the United States Army Corps of Engineers.
   (c)   Ohio EPA isolated wetland permit. Proof of compliance shall be a copy
of Ohio EPA's isolated wetland permit application tracking number, public
notice, project approval or a letter from the site owner certifying that a
qualified professional has surveyed the site and determined that Ohio EPA's
isolated wetlands permit is not applicable. Isolated wetlands shall be
delineated by protocols accepted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers
at the time of application of this regulation. The City Engineer or their duly
authorized agent may require affirmation of the delineation by the United
States Army Corps of Engineers.
   (d)   Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. Proof of compliance shall be a
copy of the United States Army Corps of Engineers individual permit
application, public notice or project approval, if an individual permit is
required for the development project. If an individual permit is not required,
the site owner shall submit proof of compliance with the United States Army
Corps of Engineer's nationwide permit program. This shall include one of the
following:
      (1)   A letter from the site owner certifying that a qualified
professional has surveyed the site and determined that Section 404 of the Clean
Water Act is not applicable; and
      (2)   A site plan showing that any proposed fill of waters of the United
States conforms to the general and special conditions specified in the
applicable nationwide permit. Wetlands, and other waters of the United States,
shall be delineated by protocols accepted by the United States Army Corps of
Engineers at the time of application of this regulation. The City Engineer or
their duly authorized agent may require affirmation of the delineation by the
United States Army Corps of Engineers.
   (e)   Ohio Dam Safety Law. Proof of compliance shall be a copy of the ODNR
Division of Soil and Water Resources permit application tracking number, a copy
of the project approval letter from the ODNR Division of Soil and Water
Resources, or a letter from the site owner certifying and explaining why the
Ohio Dam Safety Law is not applicable.
(Ord. 2008-29, passed 4-7-2008; Ord. 2012-255, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 2016-
208A, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 2022-66, passed 3-7-2022)
§ 1257.08 COMPREHENSIVE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLANS.
   (a)   Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan required. The applicant shall
develop a Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan describing how the quantity
and quality of stormwater will be managed after construction is completed for
every discharge from the site and/or into a water resource or small municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4). The plan will illustrate the type, location
and dimensions of every structural and non-structural SCM incorporated into the
site design, and the rationale for their selection. The rationale must address
how these SCMs will address flooding within the site as well as flooding that
may be caused by the development upstream and downstream of the site. The
rationale will also describe how the SCMs minimize impacts to the physical,
chemical and biological characteristics of on-site and downstream water
resources and, if necessary, correct current degradation of water resources
that is occurring or take measures to prevent predictable degradation of water
resources.
   (b)   Preparation by professional engineer. The Comprehensive Stormwater
Management Plan shall be prepared by a registered Professional Engineer and
include supporting calculations, plan sheets and design details. To the extent
necessary, as determined by the City Engineer, a site survey shall be performed
by a registered Professional Surveyor to establish boundary lines, measurements
or land surfaces.
   (c)   City procedures. The City Engineer may prepare and maintain procedures
providing specific criteria and guidance to be followed when designing the
stormwater management system for the site. These procedures may be updated from
time to time, at the discretion of the City Engineer based on improvements in
engineering, science, monitoring and local maintenance experience. The City
Engineer shall make the final determination of whether the practices proposed
in the Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan meet the requirements of this
regulation. Unless otherwise specified by the City Engineer, the city shall
rely on the most current edition of Ohio's Rainwater and Land Development
Manual for SCM design and specifications.
   (d)   Contents of Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan. The
Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan shall contain an application,
narrative report, construction site plan sheets, a long-term Inspection and
Maintenance Plan and Inspection and Maintenance Agreement, and a site
description with the following information provided:
      (1)   Site description:
         A.   A description of the nature and type of the construction activity
(e.g., residential, shopping mall, highway and the like);
         B.   Total area of the site and the area of the site that is expected
to be disturbed (i.e., grubbing, clearing, excavation, filling or grading,
including off-site borrow areas);
         C.   A description of prior land uses at the site;
         D.   An estimate of the impervious area and percent imperviousness
created by the soil-disturbing activity at the beginning and at the conclusion
of the project;
         E.   Selection (source and justification) and/or calculations of
runoff coefficients for water quality volume determination, peak discharge
control (curve number/critical storm method), and rational method;
         F.   Existing data describing the soils throughout the site, including
soil map units including series, complexes, and association, hydrologic soil
group, porosity, infiltration characteristics, depth to ground water, depth to
bedrock and any impermeable layers;
         G.   If available, the quality of any known pollutant discharge from
the site such as that which may result from previous contamination caused by
prior land uses;
         H.   The location and name of the immediate water resource(s) and the
first subsequent water resource(s);
         I.   The aerial (plan view) extent and description of water resources
at or near the site that will be disturbed or will receive discharges from the
project;
         J.   If applicable, identify the point of discharge to a municipal
separate storm sewer system and the location where that municipal separate
storm sewer system ultimately discharges to a stream, lake, or wetland. The
location and name of the immediate receiving stream or surface water(s) and the
first subsequent receiving water(s) and the aerial extent and description of
wetlands or other special aquatic sites at or near the site which will be
disturbed or which will receive discharges from undisturbed areas of the
project.
         K.   TMDLs applicable for the site [refer to TMDL community identifier
table at http://www.neohiostormwater.com/]; demonstrate that appropriate (SCMs)
have been selected to address these TMDLs.
         L.   Describe the current condition of water resources including the
vertical stability of stream channels and indications of channel incision that
may be responsible for current or future sources of high sediment loading or
loss of channel stability.
      (2)   Site map showing:
         A.   Limits of soil-disturbing activity on the site;
         B.   Soils map units for the entire site, including locations of
unstable or highly erodible soils;
         C.   Existing and proposed one-foot contours. This must include a
delineation of drainage watersheds expected before, during and after major
grading activities as well as the size of each drainage watershed in acres;
         D.   Water resource locations including springs, wetlands, streams,
lakes, water wells and associated setbacks on or within 200 feet of the site,
including the boundaries of wetlands or streams and first subsequent named
receiving water(s) the applicant intends to fill or relocate for which the
applicant is seeking approval from the United States Army Corps of Engineers
and/or Ohio EPA;
         E.   Existing and planned locations of buildings, roads, parking
facilities and utilities; and
         F.   The location of any in-stream activities including stream
crossings.
      (3)   Contact information: company name and contact information as well
as contact name, addresses and phone numbers for the following:
         A.   The professional engineer who prepared the Comprehensive
Stormwater Management
Plan; and
         B.   The site owner.
      (4)   Phase, if applicable, of the overall development plan;
      (5)   List of sublot numbers if project is a subdivision;
      (6)   Ohio EPA NPDES permit number and other applicable state and federal
permit numbers, if available, or status of various permitting requirements if
final approvals have not been received;
      (7)   Location, including complete site address and sublot number if
applicable;
      (8)   Location of any easements or other restrictions placed on the use
of the property;
      (9)   A.   A site plan sheet showing:
            1.   The location of each proposed post-construction SCMs; and
            2.   The geographic coordinates of the site and each proposed
practice in North American Datum Ohio State Plan North.
         B.   It is preferred that the entire site be shown on one plan sheet
to allow a complete view of the site during plan review. If a smaller scale is
used to accomplish this, separate sheets providing an enlarged view of areas on
individual sheets should also be provided.
      (10)   Inspection and Maintenance Agreement. The Inspection and
Maintenance Agreement required for SCMs under this regulation is a stand-alone
document between the city and the applicant. This agreement shall be recorded
with Cuyahoga County and a recorded copy provided to the city prior to the
final inspection approval in accordance with §
1257.11. The agreement shall contain the following information and provisions:
         A.   Identification of the landowner(s) or organization responsible
for long-term maintenance, including repairs, of the SCMs.
         B.   The landowner(s) or organization shall maintain SCMs in
accordance with this regulation.
         C.   The city and/or their duly authorized agent has the authority to
enter upon the property to conduct inspections as necessary, with prior
notification to the property owner, to verify that the SCMs are being
maintained and operated in accordance with this regulation.
         D.   The city shall maintain public records of the results of site
inspections, shall inform the landowner(s) or organization responsible for
maintenance of the inspection results, and shall specifically indicate in
writing any corrective actions required to bring the SCMs into proper working
condition.
         E.   If the city notifies the landowner(s) or organization responsible
for maintenance of the maintenance problems that require correction, the
specific corrective actions shall be taken within a reasonable time frame as
determined by the city.
         F.   The city is authorized to enter upon the property and to perform
the corrective actions identified in the inspection report if the landowner(s)
or organization responsible for maintenance does not make the required
corrections in the specified time period. The city shall be reimbursed by the
landowner(s) or organization responsible for maintenance for all expenses
incurred within ten days of receipt of invoice from the city, or more with
written approval from the City Engineer.
         G.   The method of funding long-term maintenance and inspections of
all SCMs.
         H.   A release of the city from all damages, accidents, casualties,
occurrences or claims that might arise or be asserted against the city from the
construction, presence, existence or maintenance of the SCMs.
      (11)   Inspection and maintenance plan:
         A.   This plan will be developed by the applicant and reviewed by the
city. Once the Inspection and Maintenance Plan is approved and incorporated
into the Post Construction Inspection and Maintenance Agreement, a copy of the
recorded agreement must be submitted to the city as part of the final
inspection approval as described in §
1257.11. The plan will include at a minimum:
            1.   The location of each SCM and identification of the drainage
area served by each SCM.
            2.   Photographs of each SCM, including all inlets and outlets upon
completion of construction.
            3.   Schedule of inspection.
            4.   A schedule for regular maintenance for each aspect of the
storm water management system and description of routine and non-routine
maintenance tasks to ensure continued performance of the system as is detailed
in the approved Comprehensive Storm Water Management Plan. A maintenance
inspection checklist shall be incorporated. The maintenance plan will include a
detailed drawing of each SCM and outlet structures with the parts of the outlet
structure labeled. This schedule may include additional standards, as required
by the City Engineer, to ensure continued performance of SCMs permitted to be
located in, or within 50 feet of, water resources.
            5.   The location and documentation of all access and maintenance
easements on the property.
         B.   Alteration or termination of these stipulations is prohibited
unless otherwise approved in the sole opinion of the city.
      (12)   Required calculations: the applicant shall submit calculations for
projected stormwater runoff flows, volumes and timing into and through all SCMs
for flood control, channel protection, water quality and the condition of the
habitat, stability and incision of each water resource and its floodplain, as
required in §
1257.09. These submittals shall be completed for both pre- and post-development
land use conditions and shall include the underlying assumptions and hydrologic
and hydraulic methods and parameters used for these calculations. The applicant
shall also include critical storm determination and demonstrate that the runoff
from offsite areas have been considered in the calculations;
      (13)   List of all contractors and subcontractors before construction:
prior to construction or before the pre-construction meeting, provide the list
of all contractors and subcontractors and their names, addresses and phone
numbers involved with the implementation of the Comprehensive Stormwater
Management Plan, including a written document containing signatures of all
parties as proof of acknowledgment that they have reviewed and understand the
requirements and responsibilities of the Comprehensive Stormwater Management
Plan. All contractors must be registered with the Building Department;
      (14)   Existing and proposed drainage patterns: the location and
description of existing and proposed drainage patterns and SCMs, including any
related SCMs beyond the development area and the larger common development
area; and
      (15)   For each SCM to be employed on the development area, include the
following:
         A.   Location and size, including detail drawings, maintenance
requirements during and after construction, and design calculations, all where
applicable;
         B.   Final site conditions including stormwater inlets and permanent
non-structural and structural SCMs. Details of SCMs shall be drawn to scale and
shall show volumes and sizes of contributing drainage areas; and
         C.   Any other structural and/or non-structural SCMs necessary to meet
the design criteria in this regulation and any supplemental information
requested by the city.
         D.   Each SCM shall be designated with an individual identification
number.
(Ord. 2008-29, passed 4-7-2008; Ord. 2012-255, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 2016-
208A, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 2022-66, passed 3-7-2022)
§ 1257.09 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (a)   General. The stormwater system, including SCMs for storage, treatment
and control, and conveyance facilities, shall be designed to minimize structure
flooding during the 100-year, 24-hour storm event; to maintain predevelopment
runoff patterns, flows and volumes; meet or exceed the city's stormwater design
standards for stormwater management; and to meet the following criteria:
      (1)   Integrated practices that address degradation of water resources.
         A.   The SCMs shall function as an integrated system that controls
flooding and minimizes the degradation of the physical, biological and chemical
integrity of the water resources receiving stormwater discharges from the site.
Acceptable practices shall:
            1.   Maintain predevelopment hydrology and groundwater recharge on
as much of the site as practicable;
            2.   Only install new impervious surfaces and compact soils where
necessary to support the future land use;
            3.   Compensate for increased runoff volumes caused by new
impervious surfaces and soil compaction by reducing stormwater peak flows to
less than predevelopment levels; and
            4.   Be designed according to the methodology included in the most
current edition of Rainwater and Land Development or another design manual
acceptable for use by the city.
         B.   SCMs that meet the criteria in this regulation, and additional
criteria required by the City Engineer, shall comply with this regulation.
      (2)   Practices designed for final use. SCMs shall be designed to achieve
the stormwater management objectives of this regulation, to be compatible with
the proposed post-construction use of the site, to protect the public health,
safety and welfare, and to function safely with routine maintenance.
      (3)   Stormwater management for all lots. Areas developed for a
subdivision, as defined in Chapter 1242, shall provide stormwater management
for the development of all subdivided lots. This shall include provisions for
lot grading and drainage that minimize structure flooding during the 100-year,
24-hour storm; and maintain, to the extent practicable, the pre-development
runoff patterns, volumes and peaks from each lot.
      (4)   Stormwater facilities in water resources. SCMs and related
activities shall not be constructed in water resources unless the applicant
shows proof of compliance with all appropriate permits from the Ohio EPA, the
United States Army Corps, and other applicable federal, state and local
agencies as required in §
1257.07, and the activity is in compliance with
Chapter 1254, all as determined by the City Engineer.
      (5)   Stormwater ponds, surface conveyance channels and underground
detention. All stormwater pond and surface conveyance designs must provide a
minimum of one and one-half foot freeboard above the projected peak stage
within the facility during the 100-year, 24-hour storm. Underground detention
systems, at a minimum, shall provide 1.1 times the required 100-year detention
volume. When designing stormwater ponds, conveyance channels and underground
detention, the applicant shall consider public safety as a design factor and
alternative designs must be implemented where site limitations would preclude a
safe design.
      (6)   Exemption. The site where soil-disturbing activities are conducted
shall be exempt from the requirements of this section if it can be shown to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer that the site is part of a larger common plan
of development where the stormwater management requirements for the site are
provided by an existing SCM, or if the stormwater management requirements for
the site are provided by practices defined in a regional or local stormwater
management plan approved by the city.
      (7)   Maintenance. All SCMs shall be maintained in accordance with §
1257.08 and/or 1288.02.
      (8)   Ownership. Unless otherwise required by the city, SCMs serving
multiple lots in subdivisions shall be on a separate lot held and maintained by
an entity of common ownership. SCMs serving single lots shall be placed on
these lots, protected within an easement and maintained by the property owner.
      (9)   Preservation of existing natural drainage. Practices that preserve
and/or improve the existing natural drainage shall be used to the maximum
extent practicable. Such practices may include minimizing site grading and
compaction; protecting and/or restoring water resources, riparian areas and
existing vegetation; vegetative buffer strips; phasing of construction
operations in order to minimize the amount of disturbed land at any one time,
and designation of tree preservation areas or other protective clearing and
grubbing practices; and maintaining unconcentrated stormwater runoff to and
through these areas. Post-construction stormwater practices shall provide
perpetual management of runoff quality and quantity so that a receiving
stream's physical, chemical and biological characteristics are protected and
ecological functions are maintained.
   (b)   Stormwater conveyance design criteria. All SCMs shall be designed to
convey stormwater to allow for the maximum removal of pollutants and reduction
inflow velocities. This shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Surface water protection. The City Engineer may allow modification
to streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands or other surface waters only if the
applicant shows proof of compliance with all appropriate permits from the Ohio
EPA, the United States Army Corps and other applicable federal, state and local
agencies as required in § 1257.07, and the activity is in compliance with
Chapter 1254, all as determined by the City Engineer. At a minimum, stream
relocation designs must show how the project will minimize changes to the
vertical stability, floodplain form, channel form and habitat of upstream and
downstream channels on and off the property.
      (2)   Off-site stormwater discharges. Off-site stormwater runoff that
discharges to or across the applicant's development site shall be conveyed
through the stormwater conveyance system planned for the development site at
its existing peak flow rates during each design storm. Off-site flows shall be
diverted around stormwater quality control facilities or, if this is not
possible, the stormwater quality control facility shall be sized to treat the
off-site flow. Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plans will not be approved
until it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City Engineer that off-site
runoff will be adequately conveyed through the development site in a manner
that does not exacerbate upstream or downstream flooding and erosion.
      (3)   Sheet flow. The site shall be graded in a manner that maintains
sheet flow over as large an area as possible. The maximum area of sheet flow
shall be determined based on the slope, the uniformity of site grading, and the
use of easements or other legally-binding mechanisms that prohibit re-grading
and/or the placement of structures within sheet flow areas. In no case shall
the sheet flow length be longer than 300 feet, nor shall a sheet flow area
exceed one and one-half acres. Flow shall be directed into an open channel,
storm sewer or other SCMs from areas too long and/or too large to maintain
sheet flow, all as determined by the City Engineer.
      (4)   Storm sewer systems. Open drainage systems to convey stormwater
overland to SCMs may be allowed with approval of the City Engineer. The
following criteria shall be used to design storm sewer systems.
         A.   Storm sewers shall be designed such that they do not surcharge
from runoff caused by the 10-year, 24-hour storm and that the hydraulic grade
line of the storm sewer stays below the gutter flow line of the overlying
roadway or below the top of the drainage structures outside the roadway during
a 25-year, 24-hour storm. The system shall be designed to meet these
requirements when conveying the flows from the contributing drainage area
within the proposed development and existing flows from off-site areas that are
upstream from the development.
         B.   The minimum inside diameter of pipe to be used in public storm
sewer systems shall be 12 inches.
         C.   All storm sewer systems shall be designed taking into
consideration the tailwater of the receiving facility or water resource. The
tailwater elevation used shall be based on the design storm frequency. The
hydraulic grade line for the storm sewer system shall be computed with
consideration for the energy losses associated with entrance into and exit from
the system, friction through the system and turbulence in the individual
manholes, catch basins and junctions within the system.
         D.   Full height headwalls shall be required at all storm sewer inlets
or outlets to and from open channels, ponds or lakes.
         E.   The inverts of all curb inlets, manholes, yard inlets, and other
structures shall be formed and channelized to minimize the incidence of
quiescent standing water where mosquitoes may breed.
      (5)   Water resource crossings. The following criteria shall be used to
design structures that cross a water resource in the city.
         A.   Water resource crossings, other than bridges, shall be designed
to convey the stream's flow for the minimum 25-year, 24-hour storm. The water
surface elevation shall be no less than one foot from the finished edge of
pavement or top of curb.
         B.   Bridges, open bottom arch or spans are the preferred crossing
technique and shall be considered in the planning phase of the development.
Bridges and open spans should be considered for all state scenic rivers, cold
water habitat, exceptional warm water habitat, seasonal salmonid habitat
streams and Class III headwater streams. The footers or piers for these bridges
and open spans shall not be constructed below the ordinary high water mark.
         C.   If a culvert or other closed bottom crossing is used, 25% of the
cross-sectional area or a minimum of one foot of box culverts and pipe arches
must be embedded below the channel bed. The conduit or conveyance must to be
sized to carry the 25-year storm under these conditions.
         D.   The minimum inside diameter of pipes to be used for crossings
shall be 12 inches.
         E.   The maximum slope allowable shall be a slope that produces a 10-
fps velocity within the culvert barrel under design flow conditions. Erosion
protection and/or energy dissipaters shall be required to properly control
entrance and outlet velocities.
         F.   All culvert installations shall be designed with consideration
for the tailwater of the receiving facility or water resource. The tailwater
elevation used shall be based on the design storm frequency.
         G.   Full height headwalls and integral concrete outfall pads shall be
required at all culvert inlets or outlets to and from open channels or lakes.
         H.   Streams with a drainage area of five square miles or larger shall
incorporate floodplain culverts at the bankfull elevation to restrict head loss
differences across the crossing so as to cause no rise in the 100-year storm
event.
         I.   Bridges shall be designed such that the hydraulic profile through
a bridge shall be below the bottom chord of the bridge for either the 100-year,
24-hour storm or the 100-year flood elevation as determined by FEMA, whichever
is more restrictive.
      (6)   Overland flooding. Overland flood routing paths shall be used to
convey stormwater runoff from the 100-year, 24-hour storm event to an adequate
receiving water resource or SCM such that the runoff is contained within the
drainage easement for the flood routing path and does not cause flooding of
buildings or related structures. The peak 100-year water surface elevation
along flood routing paths shall be at least one foot below the finished grade
elevation of all structures. When designing the flood routing paths, the
conveyance capacity of the site's storm sewers shall be taken into
consideration.
      (7)   Velocity dissipation. Velocity dissipation devices shall be placed
at discharge locations and along the length of any outfall to provide non-
erosive flow velocity from the structure to a water resource so that the
natural physical and biological characteristics and functions of the water
resource are maintained and protected.
   (c)   Stormwater quality control. The site shall be designed to direct
runoff to one or more SCMs that meet or exceed the criteria in the most current
Ohio EPA Construction General Permit.
   (d)   Stormwater quantity control. The Comprehensive Stormwater Management
Plan shall describe how the proposed SCMs are designed to meet the following
requirements for stormwater quantity control for each watershed in the
development.
      (1)   The peak discharge rate of runoff from the critical storm and all
more frequent storms occurring under post-development conditions shall not
exceed the peak discharge rate of runoff from a 1-year, 24-hour storm occurring
on the same development drainage area under pre-development conditions.
      (2)   Storms of less frequent occurrence (longer return periods) than the
critical storm, up to the 100-year, 24-hour storm shall have peak runoff
discharge rate no greater than the peak runoff rate from a 5-year, 24-hour
storm under pre-development conditions. The 1-, 2-, 5-,10-, 25-, 50- and 100-
year storms shall be considered in designing a facility to meet this
requirement.
      (3)   The critical storm for each specific development drainage area
shall be determined as follows:
         A.   Determine, using a curve number-based hydrologic method or other
hydrologic method approved by the City Engineer, the total volume (acre-feet)
of runoff from a 1-year, 24-hour storm occurring on the development drainage
area before and after development. These calculations shall meet the following
standards:
            1.   Calculations shall include the lot coverage assumptions used
for full build-out as proposed;
            2.   Calculations shall be based on the entire contributing
watershed to the development area;
            3.   Model pervious, directly connected impervious and disconnected
impervious areas as separate subwatersheds;
            4.   Drainage area maps shall include area, curve number, time of
concentrations. Time of concentration shall also show the flow path and the
separation in flow type;
            5.   Rainfall depth - Use the Huff & Angel 1992 "Rainfall Frequency
Atlas of the Midwest";
            6.   Temporal distribution - Use the SCS Type II rainfall
distribution for all design events with a recurrence interval greater than one
year. Include lot coverage assumptions used for full build out of the proposed
condition;
            7.   Curve numbers for the pre-development condition must reflect
the current land use or as determined soley by the city; and
            8.   Time of concentration - Use velocity based methods from (TR-55
NRCS USDA Urban Hydrology in Small Watersheds, 1986) to estimate travel time
(Tt) for overland (sheet) flow, shallow concentrated flow and channel flow.
               a.   Maximum sheet flow length is 300 feet.
               b.   Use the appropriate "unpaved" velocity equation for shallow
concentrated flow from Soil Conservation Service National Engineer Handbook
Section 4 - Hydrology (NEH-4).
         B.   To account for future post-construction improvements to the site,
calculations shall assume an impervious surface such as asphalt or concrete for
all parking areas and driveways, regardless of the surface proposed in the site
description. From the volume determined in division (d)(3)A. hereof, determine
the percent increase in volume of runoff due to development. Using the
percentage, select the 24-hour critical storm from Table 3.
Table 3: 24-Hour Critical Storm
If the Percentage of Increase in Volume of Runoff
is:                                               The Critical Storm will be:
Equal to or Greater Than: and Less Than:
—                       10                      1 year
10                        20                      2 year
20                        50                      5 year
50                        100                     10 year
100                       250                     25 year
250                       500                     50 year
500                       —                     100 year
For example, if the percent increase between the pre- and post-development
runoff volume for a 1-year storm is 35%, the Critical Storm is a 5-year
storm. The peak discharge rate of runoff for all storms up to this frequency
shall be controlled so as not to exceed the peak discharge rate from the 1-
year frequency storm under pre-development conditions in the development
drainage area. The post-development runoff from all less frequent storms will
be controlled to meet pre-development peak discharge rates for a 5 year
storm.
 
   (e)   Stormwater management on redevelopment projects. SCM's on previously
developed sites shall meet or exceed the criteria in the most current Ohio EPA
Construction General Permit.
(Ord. 2016-208A, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 2022-66, passed 3-7-2022)
§ 1257.10 EASEMENTS.
   Access to SCMs as required by the City Engineer for inspections and
maintenance shall be secured by easements for activities set forth in §§
1257.01(c) and
1257.05. The following conditions shall apply to all easements:
   (a)   Easements shall be included in the inspection and maintenance
requirements submitted with the Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan in
conformance with § 1289.02.
   (b)   Easements shall be approved by the city prior to approval of a final
plat and shall be recorded with Cuyahoga County.
   (c)   Unless otherwise required by the City Engineer, access easements
between a public right-of-way and all SCMs shall be no less than 20-feet wide.
The easement shall also incorporate the entire practice plus an additional 20-
foot wide band around the perimeter of the SCM.
   (d)   The easement shall be clear, graded and stabilized as necessary to
allow maintenance equipment to access and manipulate around and within each
facility.
   (e)   Easements shall be restricted against the construction therein of
buildings, fences, walls, landscaping, trees and other structures that may
obstruct the free flow of stormwater, operation and maintenance of the easement
and the passage of inspectors and maintenance equipment; and against the
changing of final grade from that described by the final grading plan approved
by the city. Any regrading and/or obstruction placed within an easement may be
removed by the city at the property owner's expense.
   (f)   Fences and landscaping may be allowed on a case by case basis, at the
sole discretion of the city with an affidavit and license agreement recorded
with Cuyahoga County.
(Ord. 2008-29, passed 4-7-2008; Ord. 2012-255, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 2016-
208A, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 2022-66, passed 3-7-2022)
§ 1257.11 MAINTENANCE AND FINAL INSPECTION APPROVAL.
   To receive final inspection and acceptance of any project, or portion
thereof, the following must be completed by the applicant and provided to the
City Engineer.
   (a)   Final stabilization must be achieved and all permanent SCMs must be
installed and made functional, as determined by the City Engineer and per the
approved Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan.
   (b)   An As-Built Certification, including an As-Built Survey and
Inspection, sealed, signed and dated by a professional engineer or professional
surveyor with a statement certifying that the stormwater control measures, as
designed and installed, meet the requirements of the Comprehensive Stormwater
Management Plan approved by the City Engineer. In evaluating this
certification, the City Engineer may require the submission of a new set of
stormwater calculations if he or she determines that the design was altered
significantly from the approved Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan. The
As-Built Survey must provide the location, dimensions and bearing of such
control measures and include the entity responsible for long-term maintenance.
   (c)   A copy of the complete and recorded Inspection and Maintenance Plan
and Inspection and Maintenance Agreement as specified in §
1257.08 must be provided to the City Engineer.
(Ord. 2008-29, passed 4-7-2008; Ord. 2012-255, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 2016-
208A, passed 12-19-2016)
§ 1257.12 ON-GOING INSPECTIONS.
   The owner and/or responsible party shall inspect SCMs regularly as described
in the Inspection and Maintenance Plan and Inspection and Maintenance
Agreement. The owner and/or responsible party shall submit their signed
stormwater system inspection and maintenance report on an annual basis by July
1 of each year. The city has the authority to enter upon the property to
conduct inspections as necessary, to verify that the SCMs are being maintained
and operated in accordance with this regulation. The landowner or land occupant
shall not deny access to the city for the purpose of carrying out the intent of
this regulation. Upon finding a malfunction or other need for maintenance or
repair, the city shall provide notification to the responsible party, as
detailed in Chapter 1288. Upon notification, the responsible party shall have
five working days, or other mutually agreed upon time, to makes repairs or
submit a plan with detailed action items and established timelines. Should
repairs not be made within this time, or a plan approved by the City Engineer
for these repairs not be in place, the city may undertake the necessary repairs
and assess the responsible party in accordance with Chapter 1288.
(Ord. 2008-29, passed 4-7-2008; Ord. 2012-255, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 2016-
208A, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 2022-66, passed 3-7-2022)
§ 1257.13 FEES.
   The Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan review, filing and inspection
fee is part of a complete site plan review fee. This site plan review fee is
required to be submitted to the city before the review process begins. Refer to
Chapter 1424 for current fee schedule.
(Ord. 2008-29, passed 4-7-2008; Ord. 2012-255, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 2016-
208A, passed 12-19-2016)
§ 1257.14 BOND.
   (a)   If a Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan is required by this
regulation, soil-disturbing activities shall not be permitted until a bond in
accordance with §
1254.12, has been deposited with the Finance Department. The stormwater bond
will be returned, less city administrative fees, when the following criteria
are met:
      (1)   City has performed a final inspection, received a final As-built,
Maintenance Plan and Inspection and Maintenance Agreement in accordance with §
1257.11.
      (2)   For subdivisions after 80% of the lots of the project have been
complete or 100% of the total project has been permanently stabilized and five
years from the time of permanent stabilization have passed.
   (b)   Once these criteria are met, the applicant shall be reimbursed all
bond monies that were not used for any part of the project as they relate to
this chapter. If all of these criteria are not met, the city may use the bond
monies to fix any outstanding issues with all stormwater management structures
on the site and the remainder of the bond shall be given to the private lot
owner/homeowners association for the purpose of long-term maintenance of the
project.
(Ord. 2008-29, passed 4-7-2008; Ord. 2012-255, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 2016-
208A, passed 12-19-2016)
§ 1257.15 INSTALLATION OF WATER QUALITY STORMWATER CONTROL MEASURES.
   The applicant may not direct runoff through any water quality structures, or
portions thereof that would be degraded by construction site sediment until the
entire area tributary to the structure has reached final stabilization as
determined by the City Engineer. This occurs after the completion of the final
grade at the site, after all of the utilities are installed, and the site is
subsequently stabilized with vegetation or other appropriate methods. The
developer must provide documentation acceptable to the City Engineer to
demonstrate that the site is completely stabilized. Upon this proof of
compliance, the water quality structure(s) may be completed and placed into
service. Upon completion of installation of these practices, all disturbed
areas and/or exposed soils caused by the installation of these practices must
be stabilized within two days.
(Ord. 2008-29, passed 4-7-2008; Ord. 2012-255, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 2016-
208A, passed 12-19-2016)
§ 1257.16 VIOLATIONS.
   No person shall violate or cause or knowingly permit to be violated any of
the provisions of this regulation, or fail to comply with any of such
provisions or with any lawful requirements of any public authority made
pursuant to this regulation, or knowingly use or cause or permit the use of any
lands in violation of this regulation or in violation of any permit granted
under this regulation.
(Ord. 2008-29, passed 4-7-2008; Ord. 2012-255, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 2016-
208A, passed 12-19-2016)
§ 1257.17 APPEALS.
   Any person aggrieved by any order, requirement, determination or any other
action or inaction by the city in relation to this regulation may appeal to the
Court of Common Pleas of Cuyahoga County. Such an appeal shall be made in
conformity with R.C. Chapter 2506. Written notice of appeal shall be served on
the city.
(Ord. 2008-29, passed 4-7-2008; Ord. 2012-255, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 2016-
208A, passed 12-19-2016)
§ 1257.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   Any person, firm, entity or corporation, including, but not limited
to, the owner of the property, his or her agents and assigns, occupant,
property manager and any contractor or subcontractor who violates or fails to
comply with any provision of this regulation is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree and shall be fined no more than $1,000 or imprisoned for no more
than 180 days, or both, for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or
continues.
   (b)   The imposition of any other penalties provided herein shall not
preclude the city instituting an appropriate action or proceeding in a court of
proper jurisdiction to prevent an unlawful development, or to restrain, correct
or abate a violation, or to require compliance with the provisions of this
regulation or other applicable laws, ordinances, rules, or regulations or the
orders of the city.
(Ord. 2008-29, passed 4-7-2008; Ord. 2012-255, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 2016-
208A, passed 12-19-2016)
TITLE EIGHT - ZONING (RESERVED)
PART FOURTEEN - BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE
         TITLE TWO - Building Standards
            Chap.
1402.   Ohio Building Code
            Chap.
1404.   Residential Code of Ohio for One-, Two- and Three-Family Dwellings
            Chap.
1406.   Ohio Plumbing Code
         TITLE FOUR - Building Administration
            Chap.
1420.   Building Department
            Chap.
1424.   Permits and Fees
            Chap.
1426.   Deposits
            Chap.
1428.   Plans and Specifications
            Chap.
1430.   Registration of Contractors
            Chap.
1432.   Penalties
         TITLE SIX - Miscellaneous Building Regulations
            Chap.
1440.   Air Conditioning
            Chap.
1442.   Automatic Sprinkler Systems
            Chap.
1448.   Chimneys, Stacks, Incinerators and Heating Apparatus
            Chap.
1450.   Culverts and Driveways
            Chap.
1454.   Demolition and Removal of Structures
            Chap.
1462.   Flood Damage Prevention
            Chap.
1466.   Handicapped Parking
            Chap.
1468.   Structure Moving
            Chap.
1482.   Sanitation, Drainage and Sewerage
            Chap.
1485.   Smoke Detectors
            Chap.
1486.   Swimming Pools
            Chap.
1488.   Undeveloped Land Site Plans
            Chap.
1489.   Residential Rental Occupancy Permit
         TITLE EIGHT - Housing
            Chap.
1496.   Trailers
TITLE TWO - BUILDING STANDARDS
            Chap.
1402.   Ohio Building Code
            Chap.
1404.   Residential Code of Ohio for One-, Two- and Three-Family Dwellings
            Chap.
1406.   Ohio Plumbing Code
CHAPTER 1402: OHIO BUILDING CODE
Editor’s note:
   This chapter, formerly titled “Ohio Basic Building Code” was re-titled “Ohio
Building Code” by Ordinance 2004-38, passed February 18, 2004.
Section
   
1402.01   Adoption
   
1402.02   Purpose
   
1402.03   Compliance; violations
   
1402.04   Enforcement
   
1402.05   File copies
   
1402.06   Definitions
   
1402.07   Conflict of laws
   
1402.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Enforcement, see R.C. §§ 3781.03, 3781.031, 3781.10(E), 3781.102, 3781.19
   Final jurisdiction, see R.C. § 3781.04
   Power to enact further and additional regulations, see R.C. § 3781.12
   Removal of unsafe structures, see R.C. §§ 715.26(B), 715.261
   Smoke detection system for apartments and condominiums, see R.C. § 3781.104;
O.A.C. 4101:2-89
   Submission of plans, see R.C. § 3791.04
§ 1402.01 ADOPTION.
   Pursuant to R.C. § 731.231, there is hereby adopted by and for the
municipality the Ohio Building Code (OBC), as adopted by the Ohio Board of
Building Standards, Department of Industrial Compliance, and as published in
Division 4101:1 of the Ohio Administrative Code (O.A.C.), save and except such
portions thereof as may be hereinafter amended or deleted.
(Ord. 2004-38, passed 2-18-2004; Ord. 2012-01, passed 2-21-2012)
§ 1402.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the OBC, as adopted in §
1402.01, is to:
   (a)   Provide uniform minimum standards and requirements for the erection,
construction, repair, alteration and maintenance of buildings, including
construction of industrialized units, such standards relating to the
conservation of energy, safety and sanitation of buildings for their intended
use and occupancy;
   (b)   Formulate such standards and requirements, so far as is practical, in
terms of performance objectives, so as to make adequate performance for the use
intended the test of acceptability;
   (c)   Permit, to the fullest extent feasible, the use of materials and
technical methods, devices and improvements, including the use of
industrialized units, which tend to reduce the cost of construction and
erection without affecting minimum requirements for the health, safety and
security of the occupants or users of buildings or industrialized units and
without preferential treatment of types or classes of materials or products or
methods of construction; and
   (d)   Encourage, so far as may be practical, the standardization of
construction practices, methods, equipment, material and techniques, including
methods employed to produce industrialized units.
§ 1402.03 COMPLIANCE; VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   No owner or any other person shall construct, erect, build or equip
any building or structure to which the OBC is applicable, or make any addition
thereto or alteration thereof, except in the case of repairs or maintenance
that does not affect the construction, sanitation, safety or any other vital
feature of such building or structure, without complying with this chapter,
R.C. Chapters 3781 and 3791 or the OBC, or fail to comply with any lawful order
issued pursuant thereto.
(R.C. §§ 3791.01, 3791.02)
   (b)   No architect, builder, engineer, plumber, carpenter, mason,
contractor, subcontractor, foreman or employee shall violate or assist in
violating any of the provisions of this chapter, R.C. Chapters 3781 and 3791 or
the OBC, or fail to comply with any lawful order issued pursuant thereto.
(R.C. §§ 3791.01, 3791.03)
   (c)   No owner or any other person shall proceed with the construction,
erection, alteration or equipment of any building or structure to which the OBC
is applicable without complying with this chapter and the plan and
specification submission and processing requirements of the municipality and/or
the OBC and until plans or drawings, specifications and data have been approved
or the industrialized unit has been inspected at the point of origin.
(R.C. § 3791.04)
§ 1402.04 ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   When the municipality finds that work or equipment is contrary to this
chapter, approved plans therefor or the OBC, notice in writing shall be sent to
the owner of the building involved or his or her agent. The notice shall state
where and in what respect the work or equipment does not conform to such lawful
requirements and shall specify a reasonable period of time in which to conform.
   (b)   Prior to enforcement of R.C. Chapters 3781 and 3791, or any rules
adopted pursuant thereto, including the OBC, as adopted in §
1402.01, by any remedy, civil or criminal, the municipality shall issue an
adjudication order within the meaning of R.C. §§ 119.06 to 119.13 or a stop
work order as provided in the O.A.C.
   (c)   Every adjudication order shall cite the law or rules directly involved
and shall specify what appliances, site preparations, additions or alterations
to structures, plans, materials, assemblages or procedures are necessary for
the same to comply with R.C. Chapters 3781 and 3791 and/or any rules adopted
pursuant thereto, including the provisions of the OBC adopted in §
1402.01.
   (d)   The order shall include notice to the party of the procedure for
appeal and right to a hearing if requested within 30 days of the mailing of the
notice. The notice shall also inform the party that at the hearing he or she
may be represented by counsel, present his or her arguments or contentions
orally or in writing, and present evidence and examine witnesses appearing for
or against him or her.
   (e)   Upon the issuance of any order provided for herein or in the O.A.C.,
the person receiving such order shall cease work upon the site preparations or
structure to be constructed, or, in the case of an industrialized unit, the
installation of the unit, or shall cease using the appliance, materials,
assemblages or manufactured product identified in the order until such time as
the appeal provided for in accordance with the provisions of R.C. § 3781.19,
and all appeals from such hearing, have been completed, or the order herein has
been released.
   (f)   Failure to cease work after receipt of a stop work order as provided
in § 4101:2-1-36 of the OBC is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
§ 1402.05 FILE COPIES.
   At least one copy of the OBC, as adopted in §
1402.01, is on file with the Chief Building Official for inspection by the
public.
(Ord. 2004-66, passed 3-29-2004)
§ 1402.06 DEFINITIONS.
   Wherever titles, words and phrases are used in portions of the OBC, as
adopted in §
1402.01, such terms shall be construed to mean the equivalent officer, word or
phrase applicable to the city.
§ 1402.07 CONFLICT OF LAWS.
   (a)   Whenever a provision of the OBC, as adopted in §
1402.01, conflicts with a provision of the Ohio Fire Code or any other order,
standard or rule of the Ohio Department of Commerce, Division of State Fire
Marshal, the provision of the OBC shall control, except that rules adopted and
orders issued by the Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3743 prevail in the
event of a conflict.
(R.C. § 3781.11(B))
   (b)   Whenever a provision of the OBC, as adopted in §
1402.01, conflicts with a provision of any other standard technical code
adopted by the municipality, other than as provided in division (a) hereof, or
any ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of Council, the stricter standard
shall prevail.
   (c)   When a special provision is made in a use group classification of the
OBC and is inconsistent with a general provision of the OBC relating to
buildings generally, the special provision governs, unless it appears that the
provisions are cumulative.
§ 1402.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1432.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1404: RESIDENTIAL CODE OF OHIO FOR ONE-, TWO- AND THREE-FAMILY
DWELLINGS
Section
   
1404.01   Residential Code of Ohio for One-, Two- and Three-Family Dwellings
adopted
   
1404.02   Purpose
   
1404.03   Application
   
1404.04   File copies
   
1404.05   Definitions
   
1404.06   Appeals
   
1404.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Access requirements, see §
1424.05
   Authority to adopt regulations in addition to state building standards, see
R.C. § 3781.01
   Authority to regulate and inspect building construction, alteration,
sanitation and the like, see R.C. §§ 715.26 et seq.
   Construction in flood hazard areas, see §
1462.04(d)
   Ohio Building Code, see R.C. §§ 3781.01 et seq.;
Ch. 1402
§ 1404.01 RESIDENTIAL CODE OF OHIO FOR ONE-, TWO- AND THREE-FAMILY DWELLINGS
ADOPTED.
   There is hereby adopted by and for the city the Residential Code of Ohio for
One-, Two- and Three-Family Dwellings, current edition, with references and any
and all amendments as adopted by the Ohio Board of Building Standards.
(Ord. 2003-298, passed 12-15-2003; Ord. 2006-105, passed 5-15-2006)
§ 1404.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of establishing rules and regulations of the Residential Code of
Ohio for One-, Two- and Three-Family Dwellings is to provide construction and
material specifications for all occupancies to which such code applies.
(Ord. 2003-298, passed 12-15-2003; Ord. 2006-105, passed 5-15-2006)
§ 1404.03 APPLICATION.
   The Residential Code of Ohio for One-, Two- and Three-Family Dwellings, as
adopted in §
1404.01, is applicable to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement,
replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, removal and
demolition of every residential building or structure, any appurtenances
connected or attached to such buildings or structures, and any accessory
structures.
(Ord. 2003-298, passed 12-15-2003; Ord. 2006-105, passed 5-15-2006)
§ 1404.04 FILE COPIES.
   At least one copy of the Residential Code of Ohio for One-, Two- and Three-
Family Dwellings as adopted in §
1404.01, is on file with the Building Department for inspection by the public.
(Ord. 2003-298, passed 12-15-2003; Ord. 2004-66, passed 3-29-2004; Ord. 2006-
105, passed 5-15-2006)
§ 1404.05 DEFINITIONS.
   Wherever titles, words or phrases are used in portions of the Residential
Code of Ohio for One-, Two- and Three-Family Dwellings, as adopted in §
1404.01, such terms shall be construed to mean the equivalent officer, word or
phrase applicable to the city.
(Ord. 2003-298, passed 12-15-2003; Ord. 2006-105, passed 5-15-2006)
§ 1404.06 APPEALS.
   In order to hear and decide appeals or orders, decisions or determinations
made by the Residential Building Official relative to the application and
interpretation of this Code, the applicant or other affected person(s) shall
have the right to appeal the Residential Building Official’s decisions through
the Planning Commission/Building Code Board of Appeals. The Planning Code Board
of Appeals shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant
with a duplicate copy to the Residential Building Official. Said decision shall
be final.
(Ord. 2006-105, passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 2008-66, passed 5-5-2008)
§ 1404.99 PENALTY.
   The penalty for any violation of this code shall be as per
Chapter 1432 of this code.
(Ord. 2003-298, passed 12-15-2003; Ord. 2006-105, passed 5-15-2006)
CHAPTER 1406: OHIO PLUMBING CODE
Section
   
1406.01   Current edition adopted
   
1406.03   Application
   
1406.04   File copies
   
1406.05   Definitions
   
1406.06   Materials
   
1406.07   Plastic building sewers, drains, D.W.V. piping, footer drains and
storm drains
   
1406.08   Conflict of laws
   
1406.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Permit fees, see §
1424.11
   Power to enforce State Building Code relating to sanitary construction, see
R.C. § 3781.03
   Regulations to control house sewers and connections to sewerage systems, see
R.C. § 729.51
   Sewer installations by master plumbers, see §
860.03
   Sewers, see
Ch. 1042
   Water, see
Ch. 1048
§ 1406.01 CURRENT EDITION ADOPTED.
   Pursuant to R.C. § 731.231, there is hereby adopted by and for the city the
Ohio Plumbing Code, the current edition with any and all amendments as adopted
by the Ohio Board of Building Standards, being Chapters 4101.3-1 through
4101.3-13 of the Ohio Administrative Code (O.A.C.), save and except such
portions thereof as may be hereinafter amended or deleted.
(Ord. 2004-38, passed 2-18-2004)
§ 1406.03 APPLICATION.
   The Ohio Plumbing Code, as adopted in §
1406.01, is hereby made expressly applicable to all buildings, structures and
occupancies in the city, including nonindustrialized one-, two- and three-
family dwellings and their appurtenant and accessory structures and including
mercantile, industrial and institutional occupancies.
§ 1406.04 FILE COPIES.
   At least one copy of the Ohio Plumbing Code, as adopted in §
1406.01, is on file with the Chief Building Official for inspection by the
public.
(Ord. 2004-66, passed 3-29-2004)
§ 1406.05 DEFINITIONS.
   Wherever titles, words and phrases are used in portions of the Ohio Plumbing
Code, as adopted in §
1406.01, such terms shall be construed to mean the equivalent officer, word or
phrase applicable to the city.
§ 1406.06 MATERIALS.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of the Ohio Plumbing Code, as adopted in §
1406.01, all water distribution and supply piping shall consist of the
following:
   (a)   Underground outside of buildings: Type K copper water tube;
   (b)   Underground inside of buildings: Type L copper water tube; and
   (c)   Inside or outside buildings above ground: Type L copper water tube.
(Ord. 1981-87, passed 7-6-1981; Ord. 2006-105, passed 5-15-2006)
§ 1406.07 PLASTIC BUILDING SEWERS, DRAINS, D.W.V. PIPING, FOOTER DRAINS AND
STORM DRAINS.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of the Ohio Plumbing Code, as adopted in §
1406.01:
   (a)   All Acrylonitrile - Butadine Styrene plastic pipe and fittings shall
conform to A.S.T.M. D-2661-80;
   (b)   All Polyvinyl Chloride plastic pipe and fittings shall conform to
A.S.T.M. D-2665-80; and
   (c)   Storm drain piping shall be provided with proper fittings for
attachment of storm leaders.
(Ord. 1981-87, passed 7-6-1981; Ord. 2006-105, passed 5-15-2006)
§ 1406.08 CONFLICT OF LAWS.
   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of the Ohio
Plumbing Code, as adopted in §
1406.01, and a provision of any other standard technical code adopted by the
city, or of any local ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation, the stricter
standard shall control.
§ 1406.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1432.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
TITLE FOUR - BUILDING ADMINISTRATION
            Chap.
1420.   Building Department
            Chap.
1424.   Permits and Fees
            Chap.
1426.   Deposits
            Chap.
1428.   Plans and Specifications
            Chap.
1430.   Registration of Contractors
            Chap.
1432.   Penalties
CHAPTER 1420: BUILDING DEPARTMENT
Section
   
1420.01   Appointment and term of the Chief Building Official; holding other
public office
   
1420.02   Chief Building Official
   
1420.021   Part-time Back-up Chief Building Official
   
1420.025   Building Inspectors
   
1420.03   Orders to correct violations; prosecution
   
1420.04   Records
   
1420.05   Monthly reports
   
1420.06   Annual reports
   
1420.07   Annual estimate of needed funds
   
1420.08   Right of entry
   
1420.09   Building inspections; reports to Council
   
1420.10   Petty Cash Fund (Repealed)
   
1420.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Building Code compliance requests, see §
1424.12
   Building permits and fees, see
Ch. 1424
   Enforcement of Ohio Building Code, see §
1402.04
   Issuance of building permits, see §
1428.05
   Overtime, see §
260.05(c)
   Review of new and exterior alterations to buildings, see Zoning Code
§ 1420.01 APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF THE CHIEF BUILDING OFFICIAL; HOLDING OTHER
PUBLIC OFFICE.
   The Chief Building Official shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by
Council for a term running concurrently with that of the Mayor, commencing
December 1, 1989. The Chief Building Official shall hold office until his or
her successor is appointed and qualified. Nothing herein contained shall
prevent the person holding such office from holding other public office, as
Council may prescribe.
(Ord. 1989-307, passed 12-18-1989; Ord. 2006-134, passed 6-5-2006)
§ 1420.02 CHIEF BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   There is hereby established the position of Chief Building Official. The
Chief Building Official shall be appointed by the Mayor pursuant to
Article V, § 5, of the City Charter. The Chief Building Official shall report
directly to the Director of Planning and Economic Development and shall perform
such duties as may be required by the Director of Planning and Economic
Development pursuant to the position’s job description on file in the Human
Resource Department. The Director of Planning and Economic Development may
delegate the Chief Building Official’s reporting and the determination of
duties to another individual.
(Ord. 1968-65, passed 3-18-1968; Ord. 2001-123, passed 6-4-2001; Ord. 2006-134,
passed 6-5-2006)
§ 1420.021 PART-TIME BACK-UP CHIEF BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   There is hereby established the part-time position of Back-up Chief Building
Official. The Back-up Chief Building Official shall be appointed by the Mayor
pursuant to
Article V, § 5, of the City Charter. The Back-up Chief Building Official shall
report directly to the Chief Building Official and perform such duties as
required pursuant to the position’s job description on file in the Human
Resource Department.
(Ord. 2005-240, passed 11-7-2005; Ord. 2006-134, passed 6-5-2006)
§ 1420.025 BUILDING INSPECTORS.
   There is hereby established the following Inspector classifications within
the Building Department, which positions shall be filled by appointment by the
Mayor pursuant to
Article V, § 5(b), of the City Charter. The Building Inspectors shall report
directly to the Chief Building Official and shall perform such duties as may be
required pursuant to the position’s job description on file in the Human
Resource Department.
   (a)   Building Inspector I;
   (b)   Building Inspector II. No person shall act as a Building Inspector II
unless he or she has a Class III building license, an electrical safety
inspector certification, a state plumbing inspector license or a mechanical
license; and
   (c)   Building Inspector III. No person shall act as a Building Inspector
III unless he or she has a Class III building inspector license and an
electrical safety inspector certification and/or a state plumbing inspector
license.
(Ord. 2001-249, passed 10-15-2001; Ord. 2006-134, passed 6-5-2006)
§ 1420.03 ORDERS TO CORRECT VIOLATIONS; PROSECUTION.
   Upon the report of a condition or perpetration in violation of this Building
and Housing Code the Chief Building Official shall immediately examine or cause
to be examined such violation, and if such violation exists, he or she shall
immediately order the owner, lessee, tenant or person responsible for such
violation to make such changes, alterations or repairs as shall satisfy the
conditions of this Building and Housing Code. It shall be the further duty of
the Chief Building Official to cause the prosecution of the person responsible
for such violation.
(Ord. 1928-113, passed 3-4-1929; Ord. 2006-134, passed 6-5-2006)
§ 1420.04 RECORDS.
   The Chief Building Official shall keep a suitable record, which is to be
kept on file in his or her office, of the location and character of every
building, structure or other work for which a certificate or permit is issued,
and a copy of every report of inspection of such building, structure or work,
so arranged that the full history of the various inspections of each building,
structure or other work shall appear therein in consecutive order, and the date
upon which such inspection was made. All original notes or records made by the
Chief Building Official when filed or at the termination of office shall be
signed and properly filed for permanent record.
(Ord. 1928-113, passed 3-4-1929; Ord. 2006-134, passed 6-5-2006)
§ 1420.05 MONTHLY REPORTS.
   The Chief Building Official shall make a monthly report to the Director of
Planning and Economic Development before the first Council meeting of each
month, showing the number of persons and certificates issued and the cost of
structures erected or to be erected for which permits have been issued within
the city, during the preceding month.
(Ord. 1928-113, passed 3-4-1929; Ord. 2006-134, passed 6-5-2006)
§ 1420.06 ANNUAL REPORTS.
   The Chief Building Official shall keep or cause to be kept a record of the
number, description, size and cost of every building or structure erected in
the city during his or her term of office for which certificates or permits
were issued, and shall report the same to the Director of Planning and Economic
Development annually on the second Monday of December.
(Ord. 1928-113, passed 3-4-1929; Ord. 2006-134, passed 6-5-2006)
§ 1420.07 ANNUAL ESTIMATE OF NEEDED FUNDS.
   The Chief Building Official shall, on or before the last Monday in each
year, make and file with the Director of Planning and Economic Development a
carefully prepared and itemized statement of any amount of money required by
his or her Department for all purposes for the ensuing year, beginning on the
first day of the next April, such estimate to be given for each month.
(Ord. 1928-113, passed 3-4-1929; Ord. 2006-134, passed 6-5-2006)
§ 1420.08 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Chief Building Official and his or her deputies, assistants or employees
assigned by him or her, or persons assigned to cooperate with him or her by
other departments of the city, so far as may be necessary for the performance
of their duties, shall have the right to enter upon any building site or
premises, or any new or unoccupied building, or any building being constructed,
repaired, altered or removed, or any building alleged to be unsafe or a menace
to life or limb, or damaged or menaced by fire, upon showing their badge of
office. No person shall interfere with them in the performance of such duties.
(Ord. 1928-113, passed 3-4-1929; Ord. 2006-134, passed 6-5-2006)
§ 1420.09 BUILDING INSPECTIONS; REPORTS TO COUNCIL.
   (a)   The Chief Building Official shall examine all buildings in the course
of erection, alteration, repair or removal, throughout the city, as often as
required to ensure efficient supervision, and shall make written reports to
Council of all violations of any law or ordinance which the Chief Building
Official is required to enforce, together with the street and number where such
violations are found, the name of the owner, agent, lessee, occupant,
architect, contractors and master mechanics, and all other matters relative
thereto.
(Ord. 1928-113, passed 3-4-1929)
   (b)   When, in the opinion of the Chief Building Official, heating
apparatus, illumination facilities or equipment, chimneys, flues or pipes in
any building or premises in the city are dangerous or likely to cause or
promote fires or explosions, he or she shall enter upon such building or
premises and examine and make an inspection of the same. Upon finding any of
the things hereinbefore enumerated to be defective or in a dangerous condition,
or being constructed in violation of this Building and Housing Code, he or she
shall thereupon cause to be delivered to the owner, lessee or occupant written
or printed instructions to remove or remedy the same in such manner and within
such reasonable time as may be necessary.
(Ord. 1968-50, passed 3-4-1968; Ord. 2006-134, passed 6-5-2006)
§ 1420.10 PETTY CASH FUND (REPEALED).
Editor’s note:
   Section 1420.10 was repealed by Ordinance 1996-87, passed May 6, 1996. See §
234.09 of the Administration Code.
§ 1420.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1432.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1424: PERMITS AND FEES
Section
   
1424.01   General provisions
   
1424.02   Permits for superstructures
   
1424.03   Time limitation on commencement of work
   
1424.04   Revocation of permits
   
1424.05   Access requirements
   
1424.06   Certificate of occupancy
   
1424.07   Temporary certificate of occupancy; deposit for uncompleted
engineering work
   
1424.08   Street address numbers
   
1424.09   Review of building permits and subdivision proposals for flood
hazards
   
1424.10   Water supply and firefighting facilities required prior to issuance
   
1424.11   Permit fees, deposits and bonds
   
1424.12   Zoning Code and Building Code compliance requests; application fee
   
1424.13   Plan revision fee
   
1424.14   Definitions
   
1424.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Building Department, see
Ch. 1420
   Demolition permit requirements in C-1 Districts, see Zoning Code
   Fire permit fees, see §
1610.09
   Issuance of building permits, see §
1428.05
   Time limitation for building application approval or acquisition of sign
permit, see Zoning Code
§ 1424.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Before proceeding with the construction, enlargement, alteration,
repair or removal of any building, other structure or appurtenances, including
driveways, a permit shall first be obtained by the owner and/or his or her
agent from the Chief Building Official and/or City Engineer. The application
shall be made in writing and upon forms furnished by the Chief Building
Official and/or City Engineer. It shall, except for removals, be accompanied by
a complete set of specifications, and by a complete set of plans and working
drawings made to a scale of not less than one-eighth of an inch to the foot,
and on Mylar, paper or cloth, in ink or by a process which will not fade or
obliterate. Plans and specifications for buildings or other structures,
excluding industrial, office and commercial facilities, shall be signed by the
owner and his or her agent.
   (b)   When the plans, drawings and specifications are found to conform to
the requirements of this Building and Housing Code, the Chief Building Official
and/or City Engineer shall issue a permit and affix to the plans, drawings and
specifications an official stamp of approval. The plans, drawings and
specifications shall then be returned to the applicant. One copy thereof shall
be filed with the Chief Building Official and/or City Engineer before
commencing the construction and shall remain on file per the City Building
Department’s record of retention requirements. One copy of the plans, drawings
and specifications, having the stamp of the Chief Building Official and/or City
Engineer, is to be kept on the work until completed.
(Ord. 1994-126, passed 8-15-1994; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1424.02 PERMITS FOR SUPERSTRUCTURES.
   No permit shall be issued for the erection of the superstructure of any
building above the foundation or basement wall until all of the approved plans,
specifications and details required by the provisions of this Building and
Housing Code are placed on file with the Chief Building Official.
(Ord. 1928-113, passed 3-4-1929)
§ 1424.03 TIME LIMITATION ON COMMENCEMENT OF WORK.
   If, after a permit has been issued, the operation called for by it shall not
have been begun within 12 months of the date thereof, such permit shall be
void. Before such operation can be begun, a new permit shall be taken out by
the owner or by his or her agent or architect and fees as hereafter fixed for
the original permits in §
1424.11 shall be paid therefor.
(Ord. 1928-113, passed 3-4-1929)
§ 1424.04 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   When the work for which any building permit was issued is not being
performed in conformity to the detailed statement, plans or specifications upon
which such permit was issued, it shall be the duty of the Chief Building
Official to notify the owner or his or her agent in writing, by posting a
notice on the building for which the permit is issued, that the work is being
constructed in violation of the permit and that such work must be suspended
until a permit for such deviation from the detailed statement, plans or
specifications is obtained, or that such work shall be made to conform to the
detailed statement, plans or specifications upon which a permit therefor was
issued. If the owner or his or her agent fails to comply with the notice on the
posting thereof, it shall be the further duty of the Chief Building Official to
revoke such permit. Written notice of such revocation, signed by the Chief
Building Official, shall be immediately served upon the owner, agent,
superintendent or contractor in charge of the work, or shall be posted on such
premises, and no person shall perform any work in or about such structure,
building or premises after the revocation of the permit and the posting of
notice thereof.
(Ord. 1928-113, passed 3-4-1929)
§ 1424.05 ACCESS REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this Building and Housing
Code or ordinances pertaining to buildings, no permit shall be issued by the
Chief Building Official or other authority for the construction of a dwelling,
and no dwelling shall be constructed, where the Chief Building Official shall,
upon investigation, find that there is no way, lane or street, either private
or public, connecting with the public thoroughfare system of the city available
as an ingress to and egress from such proposed dwelling, or that such proposed
means of ingress and egress, either private or public, has insufficient base
and bearing surface, either of gravel, rock or other hard material, to sustain
without difficulty in any season of the year fire apparatus, garbage and refuse
collection trucks, ambulances and other vehicular traffic desiring to reach
such dwelling.
   (b)   Upon the refusal of the Chief Building Official to issue a permit for
the construction of a dwelling, based upon his or her findings concerning the
matters specified herein, the applicant for a permit may, within ten days from
such refusal, file with the Clerk of Council an appeal in writing from such
refusal, and thereupon the Clerk of Council shall transmit such appeal to
Council, which in accordance with its standards and procedures, shall hear such
appeal at its next available meeting date and shall affirm, refuse or modify
the decision of the Chief Building Official as the facts so found by Council
shall justify, or shall grant such permit upon such conditions as it may deem
advisable in the interest of the public health and safety.
(Ord. 1951-53, passed 1-17-1952; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1424.06 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   (a)   Retail, commercial and industrial certificates. The owner or his or
her agent having charge of the construction of any retail, commercial or
industrial building is prohibited from allowing or permitting such structure to
be occupied, or to have furnishings installed or stored therein, until it has
been finally inspected and approved by the Engineering Department, the Chief
Building Official and, at his or her request, the Fire Chief. In addition to
the foregoing requirements, a change in ownership and/or building tenancy of a
nonresidential building shall require the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy. Such certificate shall not be issued until the Building Department,
and if required, the Fire Department has inspected and approved the building in
accordance with the relevant codified ordinances of the city, and not until the
Planning Director or his or her designee has approved the use in accordance
with the provisions of the City Zoning Code.
   (b)   Residential certificates. The owner or his or her agent having charge
of the construction of any residential dwelling, including a dwelling moved
within or into the city pursuant to a permit issued under
Chapter 1468, is prohibited from allowing or permitting such structure to be
occupied or to have furnishings installed or stored therein until it has been
finally inspected by the Engineering Department, the Chief Building Official
and, at his or her request, the Fire Chief. When the Engineering Department
finds that the final grades, sewers, water lines and drains have been installed
in accordance with the permits issued therefor, and when the Chief Building
Official and Fire Chief find that the structure has been completed in
accordance with the permits issued therefor and all laws and ordinances
applicable thereto, the Chief Building Official shall, upon application, issue
a certificate of occupancy to the person applying therefor. When the
Engineering Department, Chief Building Official and Fire Chief find that the
structure has been substantially completed so as to permit the safe and
healthful occupation of the structure, the Chief Building Official shall, upon
application, issue a temporary certificate of occupancy which shall list the
incomplete items to be completed, within 30 days of issuance, weather
permitting, with regard to exterior punch list items.
(Ord. 1987-211, passed 10-5-1987; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1424.07 TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY; DEPOSIT FOR UNCOMPLETED
ENGINEERING WORK.
   (a)   In addition to the procedures set forth in §§
1424.06 and
1430.02, when various items under the jurisdiction of the Engineering
Department cannot be completed prior to the issuance of a final certificate of
occupancy for residential, retail, commercial and industrial projects because
of inclement weather, the City Engineer may authorize the issuance of a
temporary certificate of occupancy. Said temporary certificate of occupancy
shall be conditioned upon the owner and/or his or her builder making a cash
deposit with the Director of Finance in an amount equal to one and one-half
times the value of the outstanding work, as determined by the City Engineer in
his or her sole discretion. At the time of acceptance of said deposit, the City
Engineer shall provide the owner and/or his or her builder a timetable wherein
the outstanding uncompleted items shall be completed to the satisfaction of the
City Engineer. If the owner and/or his or her builder does not comply with this
timetable, the City Engineer shall recommend forfeiture of all or a portion of
the deposit.
   (b)   The deposit shall be retained by the Director of Finance in a special
fund for the purposes outlined herein, until such time as the City Engineer
certifies that all outstanding items of uncompleted work have been
satisfactorily completed. Upon certification by the City Engineer, the deposit
shall be returned to the person making the deposit, less a fee of $100 to cover
inspection of the work.
   (c)   In the event that the person making the deposit fails to complete the
items of uncompleted work, the city shall make arrangements for such necessary
work and deduct the cost thereof from the deposit. If the deposit is
insufficient to reimburse the city, the Director of Finance shall take the
necessary steps to effect the collection of the remainder of the cost from the
person making the deposit. If the deposit exceeds the cost of such work, the
Director of Finance shall issue a check to return the excess to the person who
made such deposit.
(Ord. 1989-305, passed 12-4-1989; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1424.08 STREET ADDRESS NUMBERS.
   The owner or occupant of any residence or any retail, commercial or
industrial establishment shall be required to place the proper street address
number on or in front of the residence or building, with numerals no less than
three inches high, which shall be plainly discernible from the street. However,
if the street address number is placed on a mailbox at the street line with
numerals no less than one and one-half inches high, the street address number
on the residence or building shall not be required.
(Ord. 1975-76, passed 5-17-1976)
§ 1424.09 REVIEW OF BUILDING PERMITS AND SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS FOR FLOOD
HAZARDS.
   (a)   The Chief Building Official and City Engineer shall review all
building permit applications for new construction or substantial improvements
to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from
flooding. If a proposed building site is in a location that has a flood hazard,
any proposed new construction or substantial improvement, including
prefabricated and mobile homes, must:
      (1)   Be designed or modified and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse
or lateral movement of the structure;
      (2)   Use construction materials and utility equipment that is resistant
to flood damage; and
      (3)   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage.
   (b)   The City Engineer shall review subdivision proposals and other
proposed new developments to assure that:
      (1)   All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
      (2)   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical
and water systems, are located, elevated and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage; and
      (3)   Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
   (c)   The City Engineer shall require new or replacement water supply
systems and/or sanitary sewage systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems
into flood waters, and shall require on-site waste disposal systems to be
located so as to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them during
flooding.
(Res. 1975-60, passed 5-19-1975)
§ 1424.10 WATER SUPPLY AND FIREFIGHTING FACILITIES REQUIRED PRIOR TO ISSUANCE.
   No permit for the construction of any building shall be issued by the Chief
Building Official except where adequate water supply and facilities for
firefighting purposes are available, as determined by the Fire Chief. If the
Fire Chief finds, upon inspection of any building under construction, that
adequate water supply or facilities for firefighting purposes, as determined by
the Chief, are not being furnished as required, then the Chief Building
Official shall stop such construction and revoke the permit previously issued
therefor until such time as adequate water supply or facilities for
firefighting purposes, as determined by the Fire Chief, are furnished.
(Ord. 1989-76, passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1424.11 PERMIT FEES, DEPOSITS AND BONDS.
   (a)   Miscellaneous fees, deposits and bonds.
      (1)   Miscellaneous fees.
         A.   As outlined in
Chapter 1430, Registration of Contractors, the Contractor’s registration fee is
$100 annually, and incorporates any trade(s) as indicated by the applicant. In
addition, the provisions of Chapter 836, Landscape Contractors,
Chapter 860, Sewer Installers, shall be strictly adhered to where applicable.
Service Fee
Service                               Fee
Appeals to the Planning Commission/   $75
Building Code Board of Appeals
City Engineer review and grade set    $200
(where applicable)
Demolition of accessory structure     $50
Demolition of principal structure     $200
Disconnecting downspouts from sewers  $100
Drainage of stagnant water in cellars $35
or on lots or land
Fences                                $40
Fire prevention                       See §
                                      1610.09
                                      $100; in addition to the noted fee, the
House or accessory structure moving   provisions of
                                      Chapter 1468 shall be strictly adhered
                                      to
Hydrant use                           See §
                                      1650.01(c)
Re-inspection fee                     $100
Retaining wall                        $100
Satellite dish                        $50
Sewer connection                      See §
                                      1046.04
Topsoil removal                       $50
Trailers                              As per §
                                      1496.04
                                      See §§
Water connection                      1048.04,
                                      1048.043,
                                      1048.047
Zoning Code and Building Code
   Compliance requests             $200 (See §
                                      1424.12)
 
         B.   The following fees shall also be assessed when the work noted
below is performed prior to the issuance of the building permit, and shall
require the approval of the Chief Building Official and the City Engineer:
 
Service                                            Fee
Grading and clearing                               $100
Utility installations, including sewers and drains $100
 
         C.   Residential and nonresidential site plan review process includes
site plan reviews for new construction and additions, exterior alterations,
landscape plan, exterior building alterations, sign review, variances, minor
and major subdivisions, lot splits/consolidations and miscellaneous submittals
as outlined in
Chapters 1240 and 1291.
      (2)   Deposits.
         A.   In addition to the fees noted in this section and elsewhere in
the Codified Ordinances, the provisions of §§
1426.01,
1426.02 and
1426.03 relative to deposits shall be strictly adhered to.
         B.   Deposits shall also be required for incomplete work in accordance
with the provisions of §
1424.07 (temporary occupancy certificates).
         C.   Road opening/right-of-way deposits (§
1042.03):
Service Deposit
Service                                       Deposit
Boring
   Small (<12 in.) diameter boring         $1,500
   Large (12 in. or larger) diameter boring$2,000
Minor work on property owner’s side of stree$300
Open cutting
   Open cutting - 2 lane road              $3,000
   Open cutting - 4 lane road              $4,000
All amounts except $100 are refundable once work and restoration are complete;
the requirements of
Chapter 1020 shall be strictly adhered to
 
      (3)   Bonds. Bonds are required for the registration of contractors under
§§
860.04, Sewer Installers,
1072.02(d), Snow Removal Services and
Chapter 1430, Registration of Contractors and for applicable work under §§
1286.01, Topsoil Removal,
1426.06, Security for Re-Seeding,
1468.01, Structure Moving and § 1286.05, Wireless Communication Antennas and
Towers.
   (b)   Nonresidential building permit fee schedule. In addition to the fees,
deposits and bonds noted in division (a) above and elsewhere in these Codified
Ordinances, the following fees shall be charged prior to the commencement of
any work involving nonresidential properties in the city:
      (1)   New construction and additions
 
                                                          Base fee of $175,
Building permit                                           plus $20 per 100
                                                          square feet of floor
                                                          space
                                                          Base fee of $150 plus
Electrical                                                $25 per 1,000 square
                                                          feet of floor space
                                                          Base fee of $150 plus
Mechanical                                                $25 per 1,000 square
                                                          feet of floor space
                                                          Base fee of $150 plus
Plumbing                                                  $15 each fixture,
                                                          trap, appliance
                                                          device of gas outlet
Sprinkler (fire suppression)                               
   New and system modifications involving 20 heads or  $25 plus plan review
less                                                      fees
   New and system modifications involving more than 20 $150 plus $25 per
heads                                                     1,000 square feet of
                                                          floor space
 
      (2)   Interior or exterior renovations/remodeling.
 
Valuation          Permit Fee
$10,000 or less    $125
$10,001 to $20,000 $175
$20,001 and over   $175
Plus, $20 for every $1,000 or fraction thereof
 
      (3)   Miscellaneous permits and fees.
Permit Fee
Permit                                                                            Fee
Air conditioning (replacement units)                                               
   Up to 5 tons                                                                $25
   Over 5 tons and less than 10 tons                                           $35
   Over 10 tons and less than 25 tons                                          $40
   Over 25 tons                                                                $50
                                                                                  As per
Amusement devices                                                                 Chapter
                                                                                  804
Concrete or asphalt replacement                                                   $75
Emergency generator set                                                           $50
Fire alarm and fire suppression systems
                                                                                  $50 plus
   All new fire alarm system (independent of size)                             plan
                                                                                  review
                                                                                  fees
   System modifications involving more than 6 devices                          $50
                                                                                  $25 plus
   Alterations and additions to fire alarm systems involving 6 or less devices plan
                                                                                  review
                                                                                  fees
                                                                                  $25 plus
   Alternative fire suppression systems                                        plan
                                                                                  review
                                                                                  fees
   Incidental alterations/additions to fire alarm and fire suppression systems
which affect 2 devices or less may not be subject to permit and review fees at
the discretion of the Chief Building Official or Fire Prevention Officer
Miscellaneous underground electric                                                $50
                                                                                  $95/hour,
                                                                                  plus
                                                                                  Senate
                                                                                  Bill 359
                                                                                  3%
                                                                                  surcharge;
                                                                                  plans
                                                                                  examiner
Plans examiner fee                                                                fees shall
                                                                                  be the
                                                                                  same
                                                                                  whether
                                                                                  performed
                                                                                  by outside
                                                                                  parties or
                                                                                  city
                                                                                  staff.
Signs                                                                              
                                                                                  $1 sq.
   Permanent signs                                                             ft.,
                                                                                  minimum of
                                                                                  $30
                                                                                  $0.50/sq.
   Temporary signs                                                             ft.,
                                                                                  minimum of
                                                                                  $20
Sound/communication system                                                        $50
Temporary service                                                                 $50
Wireless communication antennas and towers                                        See §
                                                                                  1286.05
 
      (4)   Commercial. Reroofing and/or roof system replacement only;
construction projects (OBC regulated commercial and residential 4(+) family
buildings).
 
Valuation        Fee
$20,000 or less  $175 plus plan review and state 3% fees
$20,000 and over $175 plus $2 for every $1,000 or fraction thereof valuation
                 plus plan review and state 3% fees
 
   (c)   Residential building permit fee schedule. In addition to the fees,
deposits and bonds noted in division (a) above and elsewhere in these Codified
Ordinances, the following permit fees shall be charged prior to the
commencement of any work involving new residential construction, including
additions and accessory structures greater than 168 square feet, plus an
additional 1% of the total fees collected for plan review and inspections,
which shall be charged for the assessment to be paid to the Ohio Board of
Building Standards.
Permit Fee
Permit                                                    Fee
                                                          Base fee of $200 plus
Building permit                                           $15 per 100 square
                                                          feet of floor space
                                                          Base fee of $50 each
                                                          trade plus $10 each
HVAC, electrical and plumbing                             applicable trade per
                                                          100 square feet of
                                                          floor space
Miscellaneous permits and fees                             
   Air conditioning (replacement)                      $40
                                                          $50 each trade
                                                          includes
   Building, electrical and mechanical alterations     miscellaneous
                                                          alterations/
                                                          remodeling and
                                                          waterproofing
   Decks and patios                                    $50
                                                          $50 plus $10 each
   Detached garages                                    applicable trade per
                                                          100 square feet of
                                                          floor space
   Driveways, curb cuts, aprons, sidewalks, garage floo$50 each
   Fireplace                                           $50
   Furnace replacement                                 $50
   Garage sales                                        $5
   Hot water tank replacement                          $40
   Irrigation systems                                  $50
   Landscaping (new lawn installation or drainage)     $25
   Pools (above-ground)                                $50
   Pools (in-ground)                                   $75
   Re-roofing                                          $40
   Re-siding                                           $40
   Storage buildings, greenhouses, gazebos and similar $30
structures
 
(Ord. 2004-39, passed 2-18-2004; Ord. 2004-271, passed 12-6-2004; Ord. 2005-36,
passed 2-23-2005; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005; Ord. 2006-105, passed 5-15-
2006; Ord. 2006-247, passed 11-6-2006; Ord. 2007-199, passed 8-20-2007; Ord.
2008-66, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2009-272, passed 11-16-2009; Ord. 2012-2, passed
2-21-2012; Ord. 2020-52, passed 6-1-2020; Ord. 2024-205, passed 11-18-2024)
§ 1424.12 ZONING CODE AND BUILDING CODE COMPLIANCE REQUESTS; APPLICATION FEE.
   Any person requesting a Zoning Code or Building Code compliance request
shall first deposit with the Chief Building Official the amount of $200 as a
non-refundable application fee for each zoning or building compliance request.
(Ord. 1997-243, passed 11-3-1997; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1424.13 PLAN REVISION FEE.
   (a)   A plan revision fee in the amount of $200 shall be charged for the
review of any revised non-residential plan that is submitted to the city,
subsequent to the issuance of a building permit for the relevant construction
project or use. A plan revision fee in the amount of $50 shall be charged for
the review of any revised residential plan that is submitted to the city,
subsequent to the issuance of a building permit for the relevant construction
project or use.
   (b)   The Director of Planning and Community Development and/or his/her
designee shall have the discretion to waive a plan revision fee subject to
finding that the necessity for submitting the revised plan was initiated at the
specific request of the city and that the need for said plan revision could not
have otherwise been reasonably prevented by the applicant.
(Ord. 2015-126, passed 7-6-2015)
§ 1424.14 DEFINITIONS.
   PLAN REVISION. Any plan for the construction, reconstruction, removal,
alteration, installation, or modification of a building, structure, parking
area, landscaping, topography, accessory use, equipment, and/or any other
structure or site plan modification that is submitted to the city for review
after permits have been issued for the project in question.
(Ord. 2015-126, passed 7-6-2015)
§ 1424.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   Fines. Any construction, work or other action that is regulated under
§
1424.11 and which is performed prior to the issuance of the required permit
authorizing such construction, work or other action, shall be subject to the
assessment of fines as further specified herein. Any fine imposed under this
section shall not preclude the application of any additional relevant penalties
or actions as prescribed within the Building and Housing Code or any other
codified ordinance of the city.
      (1)   Fines doubling the cost of a permit. Any work for which permits are
required under §
1424.11 that is commenced without first obtaining the required permit(s), shall
result in the doubling of the permit fee as a fine, except as otherwise
specified under division (a)(2) below. However, under no circumstance shall a
fine of less than $150 be assessed.
      (2)   Fines based on project size. Notwithstanding the provisions of
division (a)(1) above, the commencement of any of the project categories
specified below without first obtaining the required permit(s) shall result in
the assessment of both the permit fee established for the project category
under §
1424.11, plus an additional fine of $1 per square foot, or per foot, of project
area as specified herein. However, under no circumstance shall a fine of less
than $150 be assessed.
Project Fine
Project                                      Fine
Decks, porches and patios                    $1 per square foot
Driveways                                    $1 per square foot
Fences, walls, retaining walls and similar   $1 per linear foot in length
structures
Relocation of a house or accessory structure $1 per square foot
Satellite dish                               $1 per square foot
Signs                                        $1 per square foot
Storage building, greenhouses and similar    $1 per square foot
structures
Swimming pools (in-ground or above-ground)   $1 per square foot
Wireless communication antennas and towers   $1 per linear foot in height
 
   (b)   Collection of fines.
      (1)   Any fine established under the provisions of this section shall be
assessed by the Chief Building Official to the owner of the property in
question, and/or to the contractor who has performed the work in question. The
assessed fine shall be paid prior to the issuance of any city building permit
that would either approve any finished work, and/or authorize the continuation
of any unfinished work.
      (2)   Any fine applied under the provisions of this section shall be
remitted to the city by the responsible person(s) or entity within 30 days of
the date of the notification of the assessing of the fine. If said fine is not
paid by the responsible person(s) or entity within 30 days, the fine may be
recovered by an action at law in accordance with
Chapter 1432 of this Code, or may to the extent permitted by law, be certified
to the County Auditor by resolution of City Council and placed on the tax
duplicate of the property for collection and shall become a lien on the land.
   (c)   Revocation of contractor registration. Any contractor registered with
the city who has performed work without first obtaining the required building
permits shall, at the discretion of the Chief Building Official, be subject to
the revocation of his or her authorization to perform further work within the
city.
   (d)   Appeals. Any determination by a city official to apply the fines or
other penalties prescribed under the provisions of this section may be appealed
to City Council within 14 days of the date of the notification of the assessing
of the fine or other penalty. Said appeal shall be heard at the next available
meeting of City Council. City Council shall have the authority to sustain,
modify or eliminate, the penalty.
   (e)   Waiver of an assessed fine. The Mayor shall have the discretion, upon
petition, to waive any assessed fine upon finding that all of the following
apply:
      (1)   The violation for which the fine was assessed could not have been
reasonably prevented by the contractor and/or property owner in question;
      (2)   The individual, company or corporation that performed the work has
submitted a valid application for a building permit not more than three regular
business days of City Hall after the date that the work in question was
performed; and
      (3)   The work that was performed has been determined to be in compliance
with all City Building Codes, Zoning Codes and all other codified ordinances of
the city.
(Ord. 2009-272, passed 11-16-2009; Ord. 2010-128, passed 6-21-2010)
CHAPTER 1426: DEPOSITS
Section
   
1426.01   Deposit for removal of earth, debris and building materials, (street
cleaning deposit)
   
1426.02   Deposit for damage to public property
   
1426.03   Deposit for improvements
   
1426.04   Grade at the building site
   
1426.05   Reduction of certain deposits (Repealed)
   
1426.06   Security for reseeding
   
1426.07   Cul-de-sac deposit
   
1426.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Building Department, see
Ch. 1420
   Improvements in subdivisions, see
Ch. 1250
   Issuance of building permits, see §
1428.05
   Permits and fees, see
Ch. 1424
   Property destruction generally, see
Ch. 642
§ 1426.01 DEPOSIT FOR REMOVAL OF EARTH, DEBRIS AND BUILDING MATERIALS, (STREET
CLEANING DEPOSIT).
   In addition to the fees prescribed in §
1424.11, the City Engineer shall, before issuing any permit for construction
involving excavation, grading, filling or the hauling of earth to or from the
site of such construction, collect from the applicant for such permit a deposit
of $500 and deposit the same with the Director of Finance. On the completion of
the work for which such permit was granted, the Director of Finance shall
refund the deposit to the applicant, subject to the following conditions.
   (a)   The Director of City Services shall cause to be removed all earth,
debris or building material which may be placed, left or permitted to remain on
any pavement, sidewalk or tree lawn in the course of the work for which such
permit is granted, unless the applicant promptly causes such earth, debris or
material to be removed.
   (b)   The Director of City Services shall report to the Director of Finance
the cost of such removal, which cost shall be charged against the applicant.
Such cost, so far as met by the deposit, shall be paid into the treasury for
the use of the Service Fund. The deposit, or such balance thereof as may remain
after the deduction of the aforementioned cost, shall be refunded to the
applicant.
(Ord. 1988-235, passed 1-3-1989; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1426.02 DEPOSIT FOR DAMAGE TO PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (a)   Before any person is granted a permit for the construction,
enlargement, alteration, repair or removal of any dwelling, building or other
structure, which work may result in damage to a city street, highway, sidewalk,
tree lawn, gutter or utility, he or she shall be required to deposit with the
Director of Finance the sum of $500 for each such permit, as security that any
such damage which may be caused will be repaired in a manner satisfactory to
the city. The deposit shall be retained by the Director of Finance in a special
fund for the purposes outlined herein until such time as the City Engineer
certifies that all damage to the aforesaid property has been satisfactorily
repaired or replaced. Upon such certification by the City Engineer, the deposit
shall be returned to the person making the deposit, less a fee of $100 to cover
inspection of the work.
   (b)   In the event that the person making the deposit fails to repair any of
the damage, the city shall make arrangements for such necessary repairs or
replacements and deduct the cost thereof from the deposit. If the deposit is
insufficient to reimburse the city, the Director of Finance shall take the
necessary steps to effect the collection of the remainder of the cost from the
person making the deposit. If the deposit exceeds the cost of such repairs or
replacements, the Director of Finance shall issue a check to return the excess
to the person who made such deposit.
   (c)   The requirements of this section shall not apply to any person who has
made a like deposit with the city for making a tap or connection to any water
main, sewer or drain or for the repair thereof.
(Ord. 1988-235, passed 1-3-1989; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1426.03 DEPOSIT FOR IMPROVEMENTS.
   Any person who is not under contract with the city, but who is authorized
and granted a permit to make improvements within public roads, streets or
thoroughfares or within public grounds, shall be required to execute and file,
with the Director of Finance, agreements and bonds in amounts determined by the
City Engineer, and in a form satisfactory to the Director of Law, to ensure
that:
   (a)   The improvements will be completed within a period of time deemed
reasonable and necessary by the City Engineer, and in an amount equal to the
estimated cost of the improvements; and
   (b)   The improvements will be maintained properly after their completion,
for a period of time and in the amount deemed reasonable and necessary by the
City Engineer, not exceeding two years.
(Ord. 1961-14, passed 2-6-1961; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1426.04 GRADE AT THE BUILDING SITE.
   The City Engineer shall establish the grade for any proposed building. The
finished grade at the building shall not be less than a 2% gradient above the
crown of the road, as measured from the edge of the dedicated portion of the
road, except that in any particular case where the applicant can show that, by
reason of exceptional topographical or other physical conditions, the
establishment of a 2% gradient would cause practical difficulties or undue
hardship, the City Engineer may allow the establishment of a different grade
which is just and proper, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship. Before
proceeding beyond the foundation for such building, the applicant shall request
further inspection by the City Engineer, who shall determine whether such
foundation has been constructed in accordance with the established grade. At
the direction of the City Engineer, the Chief Building Official shall not
permit the continuance of construction beyond the foundation for any building
if he or she finds that the foundation has not been constructed in accordance
with the established grade.
(Ord. 1961-14, passed 2-6-1961; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1426.05 REDUCTION OF CERTAIN DEPOSITS (REPEALED).
Editor’s note:
   Section 1426.03 was repealed by Ordinance 2005-152, passed June 20, 2005.
§ 1426.06 SECURITY FOR RESEEDING.
   (a)   Before any person is granted permission to make changes in the contour
of any land proposed to be subdivided, developed or changed in use by grading
or excavating or by the removal or destruction of the natural topsoil, trees or
other vegetative covering thereon, he or she shall be required to, at the
option of the City Engineer, either provide a performance bond, in a form
satisfactory to the Director of Law, or deposit with the Director of Finance
the sum of $5 per linear foot of roadway, as security that he or she shall
undertake the immediate reseeding of disturbed ground with quick-growing
vegetation to provide erosion control and prevent siltation in accordance with
the conditions of approval of the City Engineer pursuant to §
1254.01 of these Codified Ordinances. The performance bond or deposit shall be
retained by the Director of Finance until such time as the City Engineer
certifies that there has been satisfactory reseeding of disturbed ground with
quick-growing vegetation to provide erosion control and to prevent siltation.
Upon such certification by the City Engineer, the performance bond or deposit
shall be returned to the person providing the same, less a fee to cover
inspection of the work.
   (b)   In the event that the person submitting the bond fails to reseed the
disturbed ground, the city shall take any and all actions necessary to enforce
the performance insured by the surety. In the event that the person making the
deposit fails to reseed the disturbed ground, the city shall make arrangements
for the necessary reseeding and deduct the cost thereof from the deposit. If
the deposit is insufficient to reimburse the city, the Director of Finance
shall take the necessary steps to effect the collection of the remainder of the
cost from the person making the deposit. If the deposit exceeds the cost of
such reseeding, the Director of Finance shall issue a check to return the
excess to the person who made the deposit.
(Ord. 1981-59, passed 7-6-1981)
§ 1426.07 CUL-DE-SAC DEPOSIT.
   (a)   Each cul-de-sac shall be landscaped in accordance with rules and
regulations of the City Engineer. The developer of a cul-de-sac shall deposit
with the Director of Finance the sum of $2,000 per cul-de-sac, which funds so
deposited shall be used by the city for the landscaping of the common areas in
the cul-de-sac.
   (b)   Such deposit shall be made to the Director of Finance prior to the
commencement of improvements.
(Ord. 1984-133, passed 9-17-1984)
§ 1426.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1432.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1428: PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS
Section
   
1428.01   Submittal to Chief Building Official, et al.
   
1428.02   Scale of plans
   
1428.03   Plan and drawing requirements
   
1428.04   Specifications
   
1428.05   Imperfect plans and specifications; refusal to issue permit
   
1428.06   Stamped plans
   
1428.07   Plans for electric wiring
   
1428.08   Alteration or erasure of plans
   
1428.09   Look-alike homes
   
1428.10   Care of residential building sites
   
1428.11   Concrete sidewalks and garage floors
   
1428.12   Landscaping plans for industrial structures
   
1428.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Development plans for Industrial, Motorist Service and Office Park
Districts, see Zoning Code
   Plans for multiple-family developments, see Zoning Code
   Review of plans by Bureau of Fire Prevention, see §
1620.02
§ 1428.01 SUBMITTAL TO CHIEF BUILDING OFFICIAL, ET AL.
   (a)   All applications for permits, and all plans and specifications in
support thereof, shall be first submitted by the applicant to the Chief
Building Official.
   (b)   If the application pertains to industrial, commercial, retail or
public building permits or apartment permits, all of such data shall be
submitted for study by the Chief Building Official to the City Architect, the
City Engineer and the Fire Department, who or which shall prepare reports and
submit copies thereof to Council.
(Ord. 1968-65, passed 3-18-1968; Ord. 1987-207, passed 10-5-1987)
§ 1428.02 SCALE OF PLANS.
   When the lot to be shown thereon shall be less than 100 feet in its
narrowest dimension, and not more than 200 feet in length, such plan shall be
drawn to a uniform scale of one-sixteenth of an inch to a foot. When such lot
shall exceed either of the aforesaid dimensions, the plat shall be drawn to a
scale of one thirty-second of an inch to the foot. Such plans, if drawn to an
engineer’s scale (one inch equals 20 feet and one inch equals 40 feet), shall
be accepted as equivalent to one-sixteenth and one thirty-second, respectively,
as aforesaid.
(Ord. 1928-113, passed 3-4-1929)
§ 1428.03 PLAN AND DRAWING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   All plans and drawings, required by this Building Code to be filed
with the Chief Building Official, shall be drawn on paper or cloth, in ink, or
by some process that will not fade or obliterate, to a scale of not less than
one-eighth of an inch to the foot, except as otherwise provided in §
1428.02. All distances, heights, dimensions, thicknesses and sizes of walls,
supporting members, structural parts and openings shall be accurately figured,
and all drawings made accurate and complete, showing the entire sewerage,
drain, soil and waste pipes, and heating and lighting systems, in the plan. The
Chief Building Official may require the plans and drawings required by this
Building Code to be prepared by a registered architect or licensed engineer, if
in his or her judgment this is necessary. All details shall be shown to a scale
of not less than one-eighth of one inch to one foot.
   (b)   If the structure to be built includes the erection or installation of
any signs for which a permit is required under § 1288.04, the plans and
drawings shall show all such signs.
(Ord. 1969-23, passed 2-17-1969)
§ 1428.04 SPECIFICATIONS.
   Each set of plans submitted shall be accompanied by a set of specifications
describing the materials to be used and the work intended to be done, which
specifications shall be written in ink, typewritten or printed. The various
subjects therein shall be grouped in the order of their construction, and shall
all be done in clear and specific language sufficient to enable the Chief
Building Official to obtain full and complete information as to the extent and
character of the work to be done.
(Ord. 1928-113, passed 3-4-1929)
§ 1428.05 IMPERFECT PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS; REFUSAL TO ISSUE PERMIT.
   If the matter mentioned in any application for a permit, or in the plans and
specifications accompanying and illustrating the same, indicates to the Chief
Building Official that the work to be done is not clearly or specifically
defined, or is imperfect, or is not in all respects in accordance with the
provisions of this Building Code, he or she shall refuse to issue a permit
until such application, plans and specifications shall have been made to
conform in every respect with the requirements thereof. All unfigured plans
shall be deemed incomplete.
(Ord. 1928-113, passed 3-4-1929)
§ 1428.06 STAMPED PLANS.
   When application plans and specifications conform to the requirements of
this Building Code, the Chief Building Official is authorized to apply to such
plans and specifications his or her official stamp, stating that the drawings
and specifications to which the same will have been applied have been examined
by him or her and comply with these regulations. The plans and specifications
so stamped shall be returned to the applicant, and a copy of such plans,
properly stamped, shall be kept on the building or work until the same has been
completed. A copy of such plans shall be left with the Chief Building Official,
who will return the drawings to the architect or owner when the work has been
completed in accordance with such plans, and only when request for such return
is made in writing and filed with the copy of the plans left with the Chief
Building Official. If no such request for return of plans is made, then the
Chief Building Official’s office may destroy these plans on the completion of
the work.
(Ord. 1928-113, passed 3-4-1929)
§ 1428.07 PLANS FOR ELECTRIC WIRING.
   Before issuing a permit for the erection, alteration or enlargement of any
building or structure, plans showing the electrical installation, and covering
the wiring and all details connected therewith, must be satisfactory to the
Chief Building Official and in accordance with the sections in this Building
Code providing for electric wiring and electric installation in buildings.
(Ord. 1928-113, passed 3-4-1929)
§ 1428.08 ALTERATION OR ERASURE OF PLANS.
   No person shall erase, alter or modify any lines, figures or coloring
contained upon any drawings or specifications filed with the Chief Building
Official. If, during the progress of the execution of the work, it is desired
to deviate, in any manner affecting the construction or any other essential
aspect of the building, from the terms of the application, plans or
specifications, notice of such intention to alter or deviate shall be given in
writing to the Chief Building Official, and his or her written assent shall be
obtained before such alteration or deviation may be made. If such change or
deviation affects the bearing or structural parts of such building, or its
classification or grade of occupancy, new plans thereof shall be submitted to
the Chief Building Official for approval.
(Ord. 1928-113, passed 3-4-1929)
§ 1428.09 LOOK-ALIKE HOMES.
   (a)   The Chief Building Official shall not approve any application for a
permit to erect, construct, alter or enlarge any building or structure in a
residential district which shall be like or substantially like any neighboring
structure, as hereinafter defined, then in existence or for which a building
permit has been issued, or which is included in the same building permit
application, in more than three of the following seven respects:
      (1)   Height of the main roof ridge or, in the case of a building or
structure with a flat roof, the highest point of the roof beams above the
elevation of the first floor;
      (2)   Height of the main roof ridge above the tip of the plate (all flat
roofs shall be deemed identical in this dimension);
      (3)   Length of the main roof ridge or, in the case of a building or
structure with a flat roof, length of the main roof;
      (4)   Width between outside walls at the ends of the building or
structure measured under the main roof at right angles to the length thereof;
      (5)   Relative location of windows in the front elevation and in each of
both side elevations with respect to each other and with respect to any door,
chimney, porch or attached garage in the same elevation;
      (6)   Relative location of any attached garage, porch or gable, if any,
in the front elevation with respect to each other and the remainder of the
building or structure; and
      (7)   Building materials to be used in the exterior surface of the house.
   (b)   Buildings or structures shall be deemed to be like each other in any
dimension with respect to which the difference between them is not more than
two feet. Buildings or structures between which the only difference in the
relative location of elements is and end-to-end or side-to-side reversal of
such elements, shall be deemed to be like each other in the relative location
of such elements.
   (c)   In relation to premises on which a building or structure is sought to
be erected, constructed, placed, altered or enlarged, a building or structure
shall be deemed to be a neighboring building or structure if the lot upon which
it or any part of it has been or will be located is any one of the following
lots:
      (1)   Any lot on the street upon which the building or structure to be
located on the premises would front, which lot is within seven lots along the
street in either direction from the premises, without regard to intervening
street lines;
      (2)   Any lot, any part of the street line frontage of which is across
the street from the premises or from the lot referred to in division (c)(l)
hereof;
      (3)   Any lot, any part of the street line frontage of which faces the
end of, and is within the width of, the street, if there are less than two lots
between the premises and the end of the street;
      (4)   Any lot on another street which adjoins the premises on such other
street; or
      (5)   Any lot, any part of the street line frontage of which is across
such other street from the premises or from a lot referred to in division (c)
(4) hereof.
(Ord. 1963-15, passed 2-4-1963; Ord. 1968-64, passed 3-18-1968)
   (d)   (1)   The Planning Commission may relax the requirements of this
section for the R-3-A and R-3-B (Multi-Family Residential - Senior Housing)
Zoning District or R-1-F (Single-Family Residential-Golf Course Community)
developments at the specific request of the developer either as part of the
original development review process or as a subsequent amendment to an approved
plan.
      (2)   The Planning Commission shall only approve deviations from the
requirements of this section upon the consideration of proposed deed
restrictions and/or a specific development plan strictly governing the
frequency of building facade recurrence within the development, and only upon
determination that the proposed deviations are consistent with standards of
high quality construction and design, are esthetically appealing, and will not
negatively impact property values within the area. Under no circumstances,
however, shall the Planning Commission approve a development proposal where any
two adjacent homes are identical in appearance.
      (3)   Any decision of the Planning Commission to relax the look-alike
home standards of this Code shall be final, except that the Council may make a
request within ten days of the Planning Commission’s final determination on the
issue that the proposed look-alike home modification be submitted for its
further review beginning at its next available meeting, in which case, the
ultimate determination of the Council shall be final.
      (4)   Any question as to whether an individual residence is in compliance
with a city-approved development plan and/or deed restriction modifying the
look-alike home provisions of this section shall be referred to the Planning
Commission for final determination.
(Ord. 1996-145, passed 8-5-1996; Ord. 2004-112, passed 6-7-2004; Ord. 2008-66,
passed 5-5-2008)
§ 1428.10 CARE OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDING SITES.
   During construction, the owner and/or builder shall keep the building site
for a residential dwelling as neat and clean and as free of debris as possible.
Lumber, concrete blocks, bricks, paper or other building materials shall be
kept in neat and orderly piles. Failure to comply with the conditions of this
section shall be grounds for revocation of the building permit by the Chief
Building Official in addition to other penalties prescribed by this Code.
(Ord. 1968-39, passed 3-4-1968)
§ 1428.11 CONCRETE SIDEWALKS AND GARAGE FLOORS.
   Where sidewalks are being constructed on a residential lot immediately
adjacent to the residence or garage, the owner or contractor shall provide a
gravel fill which shall be tamped, and metal rods shall be placed in the
adjoining walls, and six-inch metal mesh shall be provided to prevent the
sinking of such sidewalks. In those instances where a concrete floor is to be
constructed in a garage immediately adjacent to the house, and in those
instances where a concrete driveway is being constructed immediately adjacent
to a concrete floor in the garage, and no ledge has been provided for such
garage floor or driveway to rest on, then the owner or builder shall provide
metal rods, in the walls of the residence or in the edge of the concrete garage
floor so as to prevent the settling of the garage floor or driveway below the
level existing at the time of construction. The concrete to be used for the
construction of all driveways and sidewalks on residential lots shall be at
least six and one-half sacks of cement per cubic yard and 6% (plus or minus 2%)
air entrainment. All concrete for driveways and sidewalks shall be installed in
accordance with standards and specifications prescribed and on file in the
office of the City Engineer. Before any concrete is poured under the
circumstances described in this section, except for the pouring of driveways
and sidewalks which inspection shall be scheduled through the office of the
City Engineer, the Chief Building Official or his or her duly authorized
representative shall be informed so that an inspection can be made, prior to
the pouring of the concrete, to ensure compliance with this section.
(Ord. 1968-40, passed 4-1-1968; Ord. 2012-118, passed 5-7-2012)
§ 1428.12 LANDSCAPING PLANS FOR INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURES.
   In connection with the application for a permit to erect an industrial
building, there shall be included in the plans submitted for such building the
landscaping plan for the lot on which such structure is to be located.
(Ord. 1969-188, passed 9-22-1969)
§ 1428.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1432.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1430: REGISTRATION OF CONTRACTORS
Section
   
1430.01   Registration required
   
1430.02   Application for certificate; qualification; suspension
   
1430.03   Appeal
   
1430.04   Effective period of certificates; renewals; fees
   
1430.05   Insurance
   
1430.06   Revocation of certificates
   
1430.07   Homeowner’s exception
   
1430.08   Public works exception
   
1430.09   Bond
   
1430.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Landscape contractors, see
Ch. 836
   Master plumbers to install sewers, see §
860.03
   Plumbing, see R.C. Ch. 3703
   Power to license, see R.C. § 715.27
   Snow removal contractors, see §
1072.02
§ 1430.01 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   No general building contractor or plumbing, electrical, HVAC and
refrigeration, fire alarm or fire suppression, cement or asphalt paving,
masonry, excavating, sewer installer, carpentry, roofing, insulation, siding
installer or demolition, fence, swimming pool, waterproofing, windows and door,
tree service, 3-party utilities, sign installers, low voltage electric, or
landscaping contractor shall perform any work in the city without first
obtaining a certificate of registration from the Chief Building Official.
Additional trades shall be required to register at the discretion of the Chief
Building Official.
(Ord. 1979-12, passed 2-5-1979; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005; Ord. 2024-206,
passed 11-18-2024)
§ 1430.02 APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE; QUALIFICATION; SUSPENSION.
   (a)   Application for a certificate of registration shall be upon a form
issued by the Chief Building Official. Such application shall be granted if the
Chief Building Official finds that the applicant is qualified to perform the
work for which the application is sought.
   (b)   Evidence of repeated violations of this Building Code or other
ordinances shall be sufficient to disqualify the applicant from receiving the
certificate of registration.
   (c)   Should the Chief Building Official determine that a person to whom a
certificate of registration has been issued has failed to complete items listed
on a temporary occupancy permit for the construction of a residential dwelling,
as specified in §
1424.06, within 30 days of the issuance of the temporary occupancy permit,
weather permitting, the Chief Building Official shall suspend the registration
of the contractor to perform any additional new construction within the city.
The suspension shall remain in effect until the incomplete items on the
temporary occupancy permit have been corrected or completed and an occupancy
permit has been issued for the residential dwelling pursuant to §
1424.06.
(Ord. 1987-211, passed 10-5-1987; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1430.03 APPEAL.
   Any applicant to whom a certificate of registration has been denied or
suspended by the Chief Building Official may appeal such decision to the
Council, whose decision shall be final.
(Ord. 1987-211, passed 10-5-1987; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1430.04 EFFECTIVE PERIOD OF CERTIFICATES; RENEWALS; FEES.
   The certificate of registration shall be valid for the calendar year in
which issued and shall be renewed annually thereafter. Fees shall be as
required in §
1424.11.
(Ord. 1996-215, passed 11-18-1996; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1430.05 INSURANCE.
   Each applicant for a certificate of registration shall furnish evidence of
general liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000 each occurrence and
$2,000,000 general aggregate.
(Ord. 1996-215, passed 11-18-1996; Ord. 2005-237, passed 11-21-2005)
§ 1430.06 REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATES.
   The certificate of registration may be revoked at any time by the Chief
Building Official for violation of this Building Code or ordinances or other
laws, rules or regulations of the city, or for any other cause which, in the
opinion of the Chief Building Official, justifies such action.
(Ord. 1976-124, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 1430.07 HOMEOWNER’S EXCEPTION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a homeowner desiring to
perform work on any premises at which he or she either has permanent residence,
or that such person owns and lets out for rent or lease, so long as such
person, or any other person involved in any work on site, are not employed as a
matter of business in the residential construction trade. If any person or
persons working on said property are employed as a matter of business in the
residential construction trade, such person or persons shall be subject to the
contractor registration requirements as provided herein at the discretion and
determination of the Chief Building Official. The homeowner in question shall
submit an affidavit to the Chief Building Official stating exactly the nature
and extent of the work to be performed by the homeowner himself or herself and
by any others. Any work performed by such homeowner and others shall be subject
to all provisions of this Building Code and to all inspections authorized by
the Chief Building Official.
(Ord. 1976-124, passed 7-6-1976; Ord. 2011-112, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 1430.08 PUBLIC WORKS EXCEPTION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any contractor performing
public works directly for the city.
(Ord. 1976-124, passed 7-6-1976; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1430.09 BOND.
   Each applicant for a certificate of registration shall furnish a contractor
registration bond in the amount of $25,000 guaranteeing material and
workmanship in conformity with this Building Code and other laws of the city
and shall be for the benefit of any party damaged by the principal’s failure to
comply with duties, terms, conditions, provisions and requirements of the
ordinances of the city applying to such work and the lawful orders of the city
issued under such ordinances.
(Ord. 1996-215, passed 11-18-1996; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005; Ord. 2005-
237, passed 11-21-2005)
§ 1430.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1432.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1432: PENALTIES
Section
   
1432.99   General Code penalty; equitable remedies
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Orders to correct violations; prosecution, see §
1420.03
   Penalties and sentencing for misdemeanors, see
Ch. 698
   Revocation of contractors’ certificates of registration, see §
1430.06
   Violations of Ohio Building Code, see §
1402.04
§ 1432.99 GENERAL CODE PENALTY; EQUITABLE REMEDIES.
   (a)   (1)   Any responsible party, including any owner or owners of any
premises, building, structure, wall, platform, staging, flooring, or part
thereof, where anything in violation of this Building and Housing Code shall be
placed or shall exist, and/or any architect, contractor, builder, plumber,
carpenter, mason or electrician who may be employed to assist in the commission
of any such violation, and/or all persons or corporations who shall violate any
of the provisions of this Building and Housing Code or fail to comply
therewith, or any requirement thereof, or who shall build in violation of any
detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. Each
separate violation shall constitute a separate offense, and a separate offense
shall be deemed to be committed for each day during which the violation or
noncompliance occurs or continues.
      (2)   Should any specific offense for which any responsible party, as
specified above, has been found guilty in any court of law be repeated within a
two-year period of the date of the conviction for such offense, such
responsible party shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each
separate violation shall constitute a separate offense, and a separate offense
shall be deemed to be committed for each day during which the violation or
noncompliance occurs or continues.
   (b)   The application of the penalty provided in division (a) hereof shall
not be deemed to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions or the
application of any other equitable remedy.
(Ord. 2009-272, passed 11-16-2009)
TITLE SIX - MISCELLANEOUS BUILDING REGULATIONS
            Chap.
1440.   Air Conditioning
            Chap.
1442.   Automatic Sprinkler Systems
            Chap.
1448.   Chimneys, Stacks, Incinerators and Heating Apparatus
            Chap.
1450.   Culverts and Driveways
            Chap.
1454.   Demolition and Removal of Structures
            Chap.
1462.   Flood Damage Prevention
            Chap.
1466.   Handicapped Parking
            Chap.
1468.   Structure Moving
            Chap.
1482.   Sanitation, Drainage and Sewerage
            Chap.
1485.   Smoke Detectors
            Chap.
1486.   Swimming Pools
            Chap.
1488.   Undeveloped Land Site Plans
            Chap.
1489.   Residential Rental Occupancy Permit
CHAPTER 1440: AIR CONDITIONING
Section
   
1440.01   Units in commercial, industrial or warehouse structures
   
1440.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Industrial Districts, see Zoning Code
   Permit fees, see §
1424.11
   Standards and licensing of air conditioning contractors, see R.C. § 3781.102
§ 1440.01 UNITS IN COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL OR WAREHOUSE STRUCTURES.
   Air conditioning units requiring the use of water, hereafter installed in
any commercial, industrial or warehouse structure, shall be equipped with a
system to provide for the recirculation and re-use within the unit of the water
originally used by the unit for cooling purposes. The installation of any other
type of unit is hereby prohibited.
(Ord. 1970-22, passed 3-2-1970)
§ 1440.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1432.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1442: AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS
Section
   
1442.01   Installation in mercantile occupancies
   
1442.02   Water supply; maximum number of sprinklers
   
1442.03   Check valves; shut-off valves
   
1442.04   Alarms installed on system
   
1442.05   Fire Department connections
   
1442.06   Outside audible alarms
   
1442.07   Water flow alarm
   
1442.08   Permit required
   
1442.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Fire Department, see
Ch. 242
   Fire equipment standards, service and repair, see §
1660.09
   Firefighting facilities required prior to issuance of building permits, see
§
1424.10
   Ohio Fire Code and BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, see
Ch. 1610
   Sale and use of fire equipment, see §
1660.09
   Water generally, see
Ch. 1048
§ 1442.01 INSTALLATION IN MERCANTILE OCCUPANCIES.
   In mercantile occupancies hereafter erected or altered, or in the event of a
change of tenancy in mercantile occupancies, an approved automatic sprinkler
system shall be installed and maintained in all storage rooms exceeding 100
square feet in area.
(Ord. 1989-75, passed 4-17-1989)
§ 1442.02 WATER SUPPLY; MAXIMUM NUMBER OF SPRINKLERS.
   Approved automatic sprinkler systems may be supplied from the domestic water
system, provided the domestic water system is designed to adequately support
the design flow of the largest number of sprinklers in any one of the enclosed
areas. When supplied by the domestic water system, the maximum number of
sprinklers in any one enclosed room or area shall be 20, which number shall be
capable of totally protecting the room or area.
(Ord. 1989-75, passed 4-17-1989)
§ 1442.03 CHECK VALVES; SHUT-OFF VALVES.
   A check valve shall be provided at the point where the suppression system
piping is connected to the domestic water piping, to prevent contamination of
the domestic water supply. A shut-off valve may be permitted if precautions are
taken to ensure that no one may unknowingly close such valve and render the
system inoperative.
(Ord. 1989-75, passed 4-17-1989)
§ 1442.04 ALARMS INSTALLED ON SYSTEM.
   At least one audible or visual alarm shall be installed on the system to
give warning when the system is operating. The location of such alarm shall be
approved by a Fire Official.
(Ord. 1997-240, passed 11-3-1997)
§ 1442.05 FIRE DEPARTMENT CONNECTIONS.
   (a)   Every sprinklered building shall be equipped with one or more Fire
Department connections approved by a Fire Official. The water supply pipe from
the sprinkler system to the Fire Department connection shall be not less than
four inches in size.
   (b)   In addition, there shall be a Fire Department connection for each
sprinkler system on the front footage. The location of said Fire Department
connection shall be determined by a Fire Official.
   (c)   A sprinkler system connected to the domestic water supply of a
building is not required to have a Fire Department connection.
(Ord. 1997-240, passed 11-3-1997)
§ 1442.06 OUTSIDE AUDIBLE ALARMS.
   All buildings regulated by the Ohio Building Code (OBC), which are protected
by an automatic sprinkler system, shall be equipped with an approved outside
audible alarm. The type and location of said audible alarm shall be determined
by the Fire Official.
(Ord. 1997-240, passed 11-3-1997)
§ 1442.07 WATER FLOW ALARM.
   All automatic sprinkler systems shall have an approved water flow alarm
device. Alarm signals shall be transmitted to an approved central station
facility.
(Ord. 1997-240, passed 11-3-1997)
§ 1442.08 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A permit shall be obtained prior to the installation of any automatic
sprinkler system, hood suppression system, fire alarm system, and any
alternative fire suppression system and a fee paid in accordance with the
provisions of §
1424.11.
(Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1442.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1432.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1448: CHIMNEYS, STACKS, INCINERATORS AND HEATING APPARATUS
Section
   
1448.01   Definitions
   
1448.02   Furnace and boiler rooms
   
1448.03   General requirements
   
1448.04   Chimney construction specifications
   
1448.05   Incinerators for other than multiple-family dwellings prohibited
   
1448.06   Incinerator construction and installation
   
1448.07   Metal smokestacks
   
1448.08   Fireplaces
   
1448.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Ohio Fire Code and BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, see
Ch. 1610
   Open burning, see §§
660.08,
660.084
   Responsibility upon discovery of unfriendly fires, see §
1660.08
   Ventilation of heaters and burners, see §
660.01
§ 1448.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   CHIMNEY. A vertical shaft of masonry (brick or stone exterior) or
metal, noncombustible, heat-resisting material approved by the Building
Department and approved and tested by Underwriters’ Laboratories, Inc. for the
use intended, which encloses one or more flues for the purpose of removing
products of combustion from solid, liquid or gas fuel.
   (b)   DRAFT HOOD. A device placed in and made a part of the flue pipe from
an appliance, or a part of an appliance itself, which is to be designed to
assure the ready escape of all the products of combustion in the event of no
draft, backdraft and stoppage beyond the draft hood, or to prevent a backdraft
from entering the appliance, and to neutralize the effects of stack action of
the chimney flue upon the operation of the appliance.
   (c)   FLUE. A vertical passageway for products of combustion.
   (d)   HOOD. As applied to a heating device, means a canopy or a similar
device placed over a stove, range or other heating installation connected to a
venting duct.
   (e)   SMOKEPIPE. A pipe or breeching connecting a heating apparatus and a
flue.
(Ord. 1963-52, passed 5-6-1963)
§ 1448.02 FURNACE AND BOILER ROOMS.
   (a)   Every furnace installed in any building, other than a one-family
dwelling, shall be enclosed and separated from the rest of the building by
walls, partitions, floors and ceilings of noncombustible construction or of
one-hour fire-resistance construction. Buildings having a capacity, for their
particular use, of more than 75 persons or of assembly occupancy, shall have
their furnace(s) separated from the rest of the building by wall, partition,
floor and ceiling construction having a fire-resistance rating of not less than
two hours, or as required below. In no case shall the enclosing construction be
located within two and one-half feet of the furnace on the rear and sides, and
four feet in the front.
   (b)   The surfaces of combustible materials less than 30 inches above a
furnace shall be covered with not less than No. 24 U.S. gauge sheet metal,
whose edges shall be extended not less than 12 inches beyond the top of the
heating unit.
   (c)   Every boiler carrying more than 15 pounds per square inch pressure,
with a rating in excess of ten boiler horsepower, shall be installed in a
separate room or compartment and separated from the rest of the building by
walls and partitions having at least a two-hour fire-resistance rating and by
floor and ceiling construction having not less than a two and one-half hour
fire rating.
(Ord. 1963-52, passed 5-6-1963)
§ 1448.03 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   All chimneys, stacks, heating equipment and other apparatus liable to
cause undue heating to surrounding materials or parts of any building shall be
well and carefully constructed and maintained at all times in a safe condition.
When operated under the most severe service conditions, they shall not cause
any combustible material adjacent to them to attain a higher temperature than
125°F. Whenever any such apparatus is found to be defective or in such a
condition as is liable to cause a fire, the Chief Building Official or Fire
Chief shall order the same repaired at once or, in case the same is not
repaired within a reasonable length of time, he or she may order it removed at
the owner’s expense. This authority shall extend to such apparatus existing
before the adoption of this chapter as well as to that constructed subsequent
to its adoption. Any rebuilding shall be done in accordance with all the
requirements of this chapter.
   (b)   Chimneys and flues shall be required for all dwellings and all heating
or heat-producing appliances. No flue shall have a smokepipe connection in more
than one story of a building. The smokepipe of a heating appliance shall not be
connected into the flue of an incinerator which has a rubbish chute identical
to the smoke flue. All smokepipe or vent outlets shall be provided with metal
or tile thimbles, carefully fitted into the linings of the flue, causing no
restrictions to the size of the same, and all such inlets shall be proportioned
in accordance with the size of the smokepipe or vent which they receive, so as
to prevent the escape of smoke, gas or sparks, and shall rigidly hold the pipe
or vent in place. When eight by 12-inch flue liners are used, the smokepipe
shall enter the flue on the 12-inch side or the flue will be made larger for a
distance of two feet above the smokepipe to permit the smokepipe to enter
without flattening, except when the smokepipe is not as wide as the flue.
(Ord. 1977-31, passed over veto 4-18-1977)
   (c)   (1)   For each furnace the minimum net area of any flue shall be 64
square inches for square or rectangular flues, and 55 square inches for any
round or oval flue. The flue area of any heating apparatus, other than domestic
stoves, shall be adequate to carry off combustive products without attaining a
stack temperature in excess of 650°F in the outgoing gases. Minimum effective
flue area shall not be less than the following:
 
Fireplaces (not less than 1/10 the fireplace opening) 96 square inches
Stoves, ranges and small room heaters                 40 square inches
Warm air furnaces, steam and hot water boilers        64 square inches
 
      (2)   These sizes are applicable only with connection to a flue. Such
minimum effective flue areas shall be provided by a flue liner with the short
dimension not less than one-half of the long dimension. When more than two
flues are connected or contained in the same chimney, each unit of the two
flues shall be separated from any other flues by masonry not less than three
and three-quarter inches bonded to the wall of the chimney.
      (3)   The joining of two or more smokepipes to a single flue connection
will be permitted, provided that the smokepipe and flue are of sufficient size
to serve all of the appliances thus connected and provided that, except for
vents for gas appliances, the several smokepipes are constructed to comply with
the severest requirements for any one of those connected. All smokepipes shall
be as short and straight as possible. No smokepipes shall pass through any
floor or ceiling. Where a smokepipe must pass through a partition, it must be
provided with a double metal ventilated thimble not less than three diameters
of original pipe. Smokepipes shall not come within 20 inches of any unprotected
combustible material, whether plastered or not.
   (d)   No chimney shall carry any load other than its own weight. Steel or
other incombustible structural members shall not be supported by the required
thickness of chimney wall, but may be supported by an adequate masonry buttress
constructed integrally with the chimney. All chimney foundations shall be of
solid brick masonry or reinforced 2,500 pound concrete, extending at least
three feet below the grade line and at least one and one-half feet into virgin
soil. Such a foundation shall distribute the weight of the chimney uniformly so
as not to exceed one-half of the soil-bearing capacity beneath same, and shall
be so constructed and proportioned to carry the entire chimney structure
without settling and cracking. All chimneys shall be securely stayed against
wind pressures and shall be designed to resist a horizontal wind load of 25
pounds per square foot for heights up to 100 feet. In no case shall the
overturning moment due to wind stress exceed two-thirds of the moment of
stability due to dead load only. The calculation method shall be made to the
acceptability of the Building Department.
   (e)   No chimney shall be allowed to corbel more than six inches in any
direction. Such corbelling shall be accomplished with a maximum of one-inch
projection for each course of brick. No chimney shall be corbelled from a wall
which is less than 12 inches in thickness unless it projects equally on each of
its sides or provides that in the second story of a two-story dwelling the
corbelling on the exterior of the enclosing walls may equal the wall thickness.
   (f)   When chimneys occur in masonry walls, they shall be bonded to the wall
every fifth course of brick or 16 inches height of wall. No change may take
place in size and shape of a chimney, where it passes through the roof, when
made within six inches below or above the roof joists, rafters, trusses and the
like.
   (g)   An opening shall be provided at the base of each flue of all stacks
and chimneys for cleanout purposes, and each such opening shall be provided
with a cast-iron or better cleanout door and frame. When ash pits are used
under fireplaces, each and every fireplace shall be provided with its own
separate ash pit, equipped with a cast-iron door and frame on its cleanout
opening. The doors and frames are to be arranged to remain tightly closed when
not in use.
   (h)   All incinerators, stacks and any chimney smokestack or flue which
emits sparks or sized to cause a hazard to buildings and surrounding property
shall be equipped with a spark arrester of proper size and construction to
prevent the emission of dangerous sparks. The sides of the spark arrester (or
circumference) shall be equal to at least the smallest dimension of the chimney
flue. The total area of the spark arrester shall not be less than four times
the area of the flue. If a square flue is used, the vertical side of the spark
arrester shall not be less than the smallest flue dimension. If a circular flue
is used, the vertical side of the spark arrester shall not be less than the
flue diameter. The maximum size of mesh shall be one-half inch.
   (i)   (1)   Whenever a building is hereafter erected, enlarged or raised,
the owner of such building shall, at his or her own expense, carry up, either
independently or on his or her own building, all chimneys and smoke flues of an
adjoining building which are within ten feet of any portion of the wall
extending above such chimney or flue. The construction of such chimneys and
flues shall conform to all the requirements of this Building Code. Such
chimneys and flues shall be carried simultaneously with the walls.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of the owner of the building to be erected,
enlarged or raised, to notify in writing, at least ten days before such work is
to begin, the owner of the chimneys and flues affected of his or her intention
to carry up such chimneys and flues.
   (j)   The Building Department and its representatives may order that a test
be made on any chimney for smoke leaks at the owner’s expense, if, in the
judgment of the Building Department, it is necessary.
(Ord. 1963-52, passed 5-6-1963)
§ 1448.04 CHIMNEY CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS.
   (a)   Chimneys with a smoke flue having no side or diameter in excess of 24
inches shall be built of eight inches of brick, solid masonry or stone. If
provided with a standard terra cotta flue of not less than five-eighths of an
inch in thickness, the walls may be only four inches in thickness.
   (b)   Chimneys having any side or diameter more than 24 inches, but not
having an area in excess of 900 square inches, shall be lined with a firebrick
lining four inches minimum thickness laid in fireproof mortar, for a distance
of not less than two feet below the lowest smoke inlet and extending upward at
least 20 feet. The remainder of the chimney shall have the same lining or may
have a standard terra cotta flue lining. Such firebrick may be considered as a
part of the thickness required for the surrounding walls, except in cases where
there is an air space between such lining and surrounding walls. In such cases
the surrounding walls shall be the full thickness required. In no case shall
they be less than eight inches in thickness.
   (c)   All chimneys with a flue area greater than 900 square inches, and
other chimneys subject to excessive heat, shall be lined with firebrick at
least four inches thick and extending from below the flue opening to a height
of one-fifth the chimney height for steam boilers, or to one-half the chimney
exposed to temperatures of 800 to 1,200°F and for the full height for
temperatures over 1,200°F. At least a two-inch air space shall be allowed in
all cases between lining and the outer wall. The lining material shall not be
considered as carrying any stress. This requirement also applies to smoke flues
of high pressure (over 15 pounds pressure) appliances.
   (d)   Chimneys shall be finished on top with one of the following:
      (1)   A three-inch stone cap;
      (2)   A solid masonry laid up in cement lime mortar;
      (3)   A solid three-inch minimum concrete cap; and
      (4)   Cast-iron plates at least three-fourths of an inch thick.
   (e)   All chimneys shall be built at least four feet above flat roofs, or a
minimum of two feet above the peaks of pitched roofs, and chimneys for iron
cupolas and other similar purposes shall project at least 15 feet above the
highest point of any roof within 50 feet.
(Ord. 1963-52, passed 5-6-1963)
§ 1448.05 INCINERATORS FOR OTHER THAN MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No incinerator in a one- or two-family dwelling shall be operated
within the city after January 1, 1987.
   (b)   An incinerator may be installed in each multiple-family dwelling which
is constructed or erected after the effective date of this section. Such
incinerator shall be sufficient in design and capacity to dispose of all
garbage, rubbish and waste materials created on the premises and shall in all
respects fully meet the requirements of the applicable sections of this
chapter.
(Ord. 1992-162, passed 9-21-1992)
§ 1448.06 INCINERATOR CONSTRUCTION AND INSTALLATION.
   (a)   Built-in incinerators shall be supported on masonry or concrete floors
and shall have the sides and top made of brick not less than eight inches
thick, which will be composed of two four-inch walls with an air space between,
or a complete metal unit may be used with four-inch masonry walls on all sides
and the top. The flue shall be constructed of brick, not less than four inches
thick, with a fire clay tile flue lining. The minimum size of the flue shall be
12 inches with a maximum opening of 72 square inches. No flue feed incinerators
will be permitted.
   (b)   Portable incinerators shall be constructed of cast-iron or steel
supported on a proven structurally supported noncombustible floor and shall be
so designed that when operating at full capacity the sides shall not reach a
higher temperature than 300°F and the top shall not reach a higher temperature
than 400°F. No wood or other combustible portion of the building shall be
within two feet of the sides, within four feet of the front, or within three
feet of the top of such incinerator. Every such incinerator shall be connected
with a smokepipe, as required in this section, to a flue constructed as herein
required.
   (c)   Industrial incinerators shall be supported on masonry or concrete
foundations and shall have sides and a top of not less than eight inches of
brick, the inner four inches of which shall be firebrick. The burnt gases shall
be conducted directly from the incinerator by a masonry breeching lined with
firebrick to a masonry flue. Such flue shall be at least eight inches thick for
the first 25 feet above the breeching, the inner four inches of which shall be
firebrick, and at least four inches thick in addition to a fire clay tile flue
lining for the remainder of its height. There shall be an air space between the
inner four inches of firebrick and the outer wall of the flue. All units shall
be required to have a forced draft gas washer or approved equal.
   (d)   Every incinerator shall conform to the requirements and
recommendations of the Regulations of the National Board of Fire Underwriters
for Incinerators, NBFU Pamphlet No. 82.
   (e)   No incinerator shall be installed, after the effective date of this
section, which is not equipped and constructed so it can be operated without
producing objectionable quantities of smoke and so that no objectionable or
obnoxious odors will be emitted from the chimney.
   (f)   No incinerator shall be approved that does not feature provisions for
over-fire air to permit reasonably smokeless incineration of the contents,
irrespective of the depths of the charge, provided the charge is within its
range capacity.
(Ord. 1963-52, passed 5-6-1963; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1448.07 METAL SMOKESTACKS.
   (a)   Metal smokestacks will not be allowed in the following types of
occupancies:
      (1)   Residential - transient;
      (2)   Residential - nontransient;
      (3)   Hospitals and homes;
      (4)   Schools and school assembly halls;
      (5)   Business offices;
      (6)   Storage buildings; and
      (7)   Places of assembly.
   (b)   All metal stacks shall have iron or steel base plates resting on a
foundation of brick, stone or concrete, or may be supported on a structural
steel or masonry boiler setting which is adequate to carry the superimposed
load.
   (c)   All metal stacks shall be properly anchored to the foundation or
supports by means of anchor bolts of adequate size and number.
   (d)   Metal stacks may be designed in accordance with requirements of being
self-supporting and resist all wind stresses without guys, or they may be
designed with the assumption that they will be laterally stayed with guys or
braces. In the latter case, they shall be stayed laterally at intervals of not
over 30 feet by steel cables, rods or struts designed to safely resist the
maximum wind pressure from any direction. All guys shall be secured to a
structural steel ring which encircles and which is riveted or welded to the
stack. Steel stacks shall be provided with tackle blocks or hooks and steel
wire cables not less than three-eighths of an inch in diameter for the purpose
of painting. Cables shall be greased at least once a year.
   (e)   Steel stacks which are constructed inside of a nonfireproof building
shall be entirely enclosed with masonry walls not less than eight inches thick,
except that metal stacks for small stoves in temporary sheds, contractors’
offices and similar buildings may be unprotected if adequately separated from
all wood or other combustible material. The shaft between the stack and the
enclosing wall in such a building shall be roofed over with incombustible
material, and no wood shall be used in any way inside of such shaft.
   (f)   If such stacks are constructed inside of fireproof buildings, they
shall be enclosed by a partition wall made of brick, terra cotta, concrete or
other incombustible materials not less than four inches thick. Such stacks in
fireproof buildings may be made self-supporting for the entire height or may be
supported from the floors at intervals, but in either case the construction
shall provide for all contingencies due to changes in temperature. The shaft
formed between the stack and the enclosing partition shall be roofed in with
steel plates or other incombustible material.
   (g)   Where such stack passes through a roof only, which is of nonfireproof
construction, it shall be separated from any combustible material of such roof
by a clear space of at least 12 inches, over which space shall be placed a hood
or shield of metal at least six inches above the roof, permitting free air
circulation around the stack.
   (h)   Metal smokestacks installed outside of a building shall not be located
within two feet of any structure built of combustible material.
   (i)   No metal stacks shall be made of metal less in thickness than one two-
hundred-fortieth of the diameter of the stack, and stacks over 50 feet high
shall not be made of metal less than three-sixteenths of an inch thick.
   (j)   All metal stacks shall be at least ten feet higher than the highest
point of buildings or roofs of buildings within a radius of 50 feet.
   (k)   Lengthening or alterations may be required by the Building Department
of any chimney, stack or flue which may cause a nuisance or be a fire hazard to
surrounding property, regardless of the 50-foot requirement above, unless the
nuisance or fire hazard can be abated in some other way.
   (l)   The exposed length of any metal stack above the ground or roof shall
be inspected at least every two years by a competent steeplejack, employed by
the owner or user of such stack, who shall furnish the Building Department with
a certificate as to the condition of such stack and its support. Such
certificate shall be accepted only from steeplejacks who are registered with
the Department after it is determined that they are competent.
   (m)   All stacks shall be kept in good condition and the exposed portion
shall be kept well painted.
(Ord. 1963-52, passed 5-6-1963)
§ 1448.08 FIREPLACES.
   (a)   All fireplaces designed to burn solid fuel shall be constructed of
masonry supported from the ground or upon fireproof construction. The back and
sides of such fireplaces shall be at least six and one-half inches thick up to
the point where flue lining commences, above which the construction shall
comply with all requirements for masonry chimneys. Every such fireplace shall
have a separate and distinct flue having a net area of not less than 45 square
inches. No wood or other combustible material shall be permitted to enter the
required thickness of masonry around the fireplace or flue. A permit shall be
required and a fee paid in accordance with §
1424.11 before the construction of any fireplace may commence.
   (b)   The joint between the face brick or tile used for the mantel facing
shall be slushed solid with mortar.
   (c)   The hearth shall be at least 20 inches wide measured from the outer
face of the masonry and shall extend at least 16 inches on each side of the
fireplace opening. The hearth shall be of brick or concrete at least four
inches thick supported on brick arches, reinforced concrete or steel joists, or
on steel bars not over eight inches apart. One end of the hearth supports shall
rest on the fireplace supports.
   (d)   Every fireplace using heating appliances, for which natural or
artificial gas is used as fuel, shall be provided with a suitable vent flue
having a net area of not less than 12 square inches, and having all joints
properly sealed.
   (e)   Flues will not be required when approved gas heating appliances are
used for space heaters which meet the following requirements. A space heater
shall produce no carbon monoxide. This requirement shall be deemed met when:
      (1)   A concentration not in excess of 0.02% is present in an air-free
sample of combustion products when tested in a room with approximately a normal
oxygen supply; and
      (2)   When the heater is operated in a reduced oxygen supply, a
concentration not in excess of 0.05% is produced in a 1,000 cubic foot airtight
room with no air changes occurring during the combustion of an amount of gas
liberating 20,000 B.T.U.
(Ord. 1963-52, passed 5-6-1963)
   (f)   Notwithstanding any applicable sections of this chapter to the
contrary, the installation of free-standing fireplaces with metal chimneys,
smokestacks or flues shall be permitted in single-family nontransient
residences, provided that such fireplace and appurtenances shall have been
tested and approved by Underwriters’ Laboratories, Inc. for the intended use.
(Ord. 1977-39, passed 4-4-1977; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1448.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1432.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1450: CULVERTS AND DRIVEWAYS
Section
   
1450.01   Construction of driveway entrances; culvert required; specifications
   
1450.02   Temporary driveways; storage of materials, equipment and vehicles in
rights-of-way during construction
   
1450.03   Restoration of curb cuts
   
1450.04   One driveway on major roads (Repealed)
   
1450.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Drainage in subdivisions, see §
1250.20
   Driveway aprons, see
Ch. 1026
   Plastic drains, see §
1406.07
   Private driveways, see §§
432.20,
434.035
   Sanitation, drainage and sewerage, see
Ch. 1482
§ 1450.01 CONSTRUCTION OF DRIVEWAY ENTRANCES; CULVERT REQUIRED; SPECIFICATIONS.
   No person shall construct or maintain any driveway entrance to private
property within any public road in the city unless a culvert is provided
therefor in accordance with the terms of this chapter or unless the City
Engineer determines that such culvert is unnecessary. Any such culvert shall be
constructed of corrugated galvanized iron or reinforced concrete and shall be a
minimum of 12 inches in diameter and 20 feet in length of other length
acceptable to the City Engineer. The exact size and length of the pipe and its
grade shall be determined by the City Engineer. Such culvert shall be installed
at a depth that will permit the unrestricted flow of ditch water under the
driveway and through such culvert in accordance with standards and
specifications prescribed and on file in the office of the City Engineer.
Application for the construction of a culvert shall be made to the office of
the City Engineer and its construction shall be subject to the supervision of
the City Engineer to ensure that it complies in all respects with the terms of
this chapter. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to property
fronting on streets having a curb and gutter.
(Ord. 1960-67, passed 9-19-1960)
§ 1450.02 TEMPORARY DRIVEWAYS; STORAGE OF MATERIALS, EQUIPMENT AND VEHICLES IN
RIGHTS-OF-WAY DURING CONSTRUCTION.
   Prior to the start of construction of any building or other structure, a
temporary driveway of limestone or other suitable material shall be provided
and maintained at the job site, until the driveway is completed, to prevent the
carrying of mud and other debris onto public streets and highways or any other
street or road as defined in
Chapter 1220. The owner, builder or other person in charge of the construction
shall add additional limestone or other suitable material during the course of
the work if deemed necessary by the City Engineer to prevent mud and other
debris being carried on the public streets and highways. The owner, builder or
other person in charge of the construction shall not permit the storage of
construction materials and equipment or the parking of vehicles on tree lawns
or within the berms of the right-of-way of any street or highway during the
period of construction.
(Ord. 1968-42, passed 3-4-1968)
§ 1450.03 RESTORATION OF CURB CUTS.
   All developers or builders shall be required to restore any curb cuts not
utilized for driveway purposes prior to the full refund of any deposits filed
with the city.
(Ord. 1985-146, passed 9-3-1985)
§ 1450.04 ONE DRIVEWAY ON MAJOR ROADS (REPEALED).
Editor’s note:
   Section 1450.04 was repealed by Ordinance 1994-93, passed August 15, 1994.
§ 1450.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1432.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1454: DEMOLITION AND REMOVAL OF STRUCTURES
Section
   
1454.01   Permit and deposits required
   
1454.02   Utilities
   
1454.03   Common utility lines
   
1454.04   Removal of premises as a whole
   
1454.05   Brick or brick-frame structures over two stories
   
1454.06   Access to fire hydrants or water supply
   
1454.07   Removal of overhead lines
   
1454.08   Removal specifications; basements; top dressing of site
   
1454.09   Cistern and vault spaces
   
1454.10   Underground storage tanks and cesspools
   
1454.11   Disposal of waste material
   
1454.12   Time of demolition and removal
   
1454.13   Sidewalk repair
   
1454.14   Protection of public facilities
   
1454.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Debris removal, see §
660.15
   Demolition permit requirements in C-1 Districts, see Zoning Code
   Deposit for removal of building materials, see §
1426.01
   Permit fee for demolition, see §
1424.11
§ 1454.01 PERMIT AND DEPOSITS REQUIRED.
   Prior to commencing the demolition or removal of any structure, the owner or
his or her authorized agent shall apply for and receive a permit pursuant to §§
1424.11,
1426.01 and
1426.02 of this Building and Housing Code and pay the fees required therein.
(Ord. 1979-12, passed 2-5-1979)
§ 1454.02 UTILITIES.
   Prior to commencing work, the permittee will be responsible for having all
utilities, including cable, electric, telephone, water, gas and steam service,
for each structure shut off and utility lines removed from the building in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter and the utility companies
involved. All sewer connections from the demolished building shall be
bulkheaded at a point specified by the Engineering Department. It is the
responsibility of the permittee to see that an inspector from the Engineering
Department is present at the time of bulkheading the sewer connections. Any
damage done to any curb, sidewalk or pavement, water connections, gas mains,
telephone ducts, power ducts or any public utility not mentioned, in the
street’s right-of-way during the sewer connection bulkheading operation, is the
responsibility of the permittee and must be replaced or repaired at no cost to
the city. Any repair or replacement of the above-mentioned items must be done
to the satisfaction of the utility and the city.
(Ord. 1979-12, passed 2-5-1979; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1454.03 COMMON UTILITY LINES.
   In the case of common utility lines and/or sewer lines which exist between
two or more structures, whether they be side by side, or front and rear, it is
the responsibility of the permittee to make the necessary arrangements for
having bypasses installed, so that service to the remaining structure or
structures may continue.
(Ord. 1979-12, passed 2-5-1979)
§ 1454.04 REMOVAL OF PREMISES AS A WHOLE.
   No structure shall be removed from the premises as a whole or in a
substantially whole condition without first obtaining a moving permit as
specified under §
1424.11.
(Ord. 1979-12, passed 2-5-1979)
§ 1454.05 BRICK OR BRICK-FRAME STRUCTURES OVER TWO STORIES.
   No structure over two stories of brick or brick and frame construction shall
be razed by the method of using a cable and end loader to cut bearing walls.
Work shall be performed by a crane of appropriate size.
(Ord. 1979-12, passed 2-5-1979)
§ 1454.06 ACCESS TO FIRE HYDRANTS OR WATER SUPPLY.
   Fire hydrants or an approved water supply must be accessible at all times in
accordance with the requirements of the Fire Department.
(Ord. 1979-12, passed 2-5-1979)
§ 1454.07 REMOVAL OF OVERHEAD LINES.
   The permittee shall arrange for the safe removal of utility poles, pipe
vents and overhead lines.
(Ord. 1979-12, passed 2-5-1979)
§ 1454.08 REMOVAL SPECIFICATIONS; BASEMENTS; TOP DRESSING OF SITE.
   The permittee shall remove the entire building, including all walls, roofs
and floors, to two feet below the ground level, and all basement floors shall
be broken up. Basements shall be filled and compacted with material approved by
the City Engineer. Topsoil shall be placed over each structure site to a depth
of approximately four inches and the area re-seeded as specified by the City
Engineer.
(Ord. 1979-12, passed 2-5-1979; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1454.09 CISTERN AND VAULT SPACES.
   All cisterns and/or vault spaces shall be broken up, filled with materials
approved by the City Engineer, and properly compacted and re-seeded. The
permittee shall not remove, damage or destroy the vaults of private or public
utilities.
(Ord. 1979-12, passed 2-5-1979; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1454.10 UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANKS AND CESSPOOLS.
   All underground storage tanks shall be removed and disposed of. Where
cisterns or cesspools exist, the permittee shall notify the city of the
existence of the same prior to the filling or destruction thereof. Cisterns
and/or cesspools shall be emptied with the contents disposed of as prescribed
by law, with the cavities or voids filled with approved material.
(Ord. 1979-12, passed 2-5-1979; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1454.11 DISPOSAL OF WASTE MATERIAL.
   The permittee shall dispose of any and all waste material removed from the
site in an approved manner. The permittee shall maintain records showing the
disposition of all waste material and specifically shall have on site, dump
receipts and/or receipts from an approved commercial waste removal company,
signed and dated by the operator of such company. If requested by the city, the
permittee shall make available for inspection and duplicating, copies of all
waste removal receipts and pertinent disposal permit numbers.
(Ord. 1979-12, passed 2-5-1979)
§ 1454.12 TIME OF DEMOLITION AND REMOVAL.
   Unless otherwise specified, the demolition and removal of structures
pursuant to this chapter shall be completed within 14 days of commencement.
(Ord. 1979-12, passed 2-5-1979)
§ 1454.13 SIDEWALK REPAIR.
   Where the replacement of sidewalks has been made necessary to perform any of
the work, the voids or spaces resulting from such removal shall be filled with
granular material, and the sidewalk replaced in accordance with the standard
sidewalk specifications of the city.
(Ord. 1979-12, passed 2-5-1979)
§ 1454.14 PROTECTION OF PUBLIC FACILITIES.
   The permittee shall protect all sidewalks, curbs, pavements and other public
or private facilities on site or on adjacent properties. If any damaged items
are not repaired or replaced within 30 days after written notice is issued to
the permittee, the city may repair the same and the costs thereof shall be
charged to the permittee and deducted from his or her deposit.
(Ord. 1979-12, passed 2-5-1979; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1454.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1432.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1462: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
   
1462.01   General provisions
   
1462.02   Definitions
   
1462.03   Administration
   
1462.04   Use and development standards for flood hazard reduction
   
1462.05   Appeals and variances
   
1462.06   Enforcement
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Altering, polluting and diverting watercourses, see §
660.04
   Flood control by soil conservation district supervisors, see R.C. § 1515.08
   Flood insurance, see R.C. §§ 1506.04, 3941.02(A)(1)
   Water supply, sanitation, ditches, see R.C. §§ 6101.01 et seq.
§ 1462.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Statutory authorization. Article XVIII, § 3, of the Ohio Constitution
grants municipalities the legal authority to adopt land use and control
measures for promoting the health, safety and general welfare of its citizens.
Therefore, the City Council does ordain the following regulations.
   (b)   Findings of fact. The city has special flood hazard areas that are
subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base. Additionally, structures that are inadequately
elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute
to the flood loss. In order to minimize the threat of such damages and to
achieve the purposes hereinafter set forth, these regulations are adopted.
   (c)   Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of these regulations to
promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to:
      (1)   Protect human life and health;
      (2)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
      (3)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      (4)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
      (5)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
      (6)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the proper use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to protect property and
minimize future flood blight areas;
      (7)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions;
      (8)   Minimize the impact of development on adjacent properties within
and near flood prone areas;
      (9)   Ensure that the flood storage and conveyance functions of the flood
hazard area are maintained;
      (10)   Minimize the impact of development on the natural, beneficial
values of the flood hazard area;
      (11)   Prevent flood hazard area uses that are either hazardous or
environmentally incompatible; and
      (12)   Meet community participation requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
   (d)   Methods of reducing flood loss. In order to accomplish its purposes,
these regulations include methods and provisions for:
      (1)   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health,
safety and property due to water hazards, or which result in damaging increases
in flood heights or velocities;
      (2)   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities,
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      (3)   Controlling the alteration of natural flood hazard areas, stream
channels and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
flood waters;
      (4)   Controlling filling, grading, dredging, excavating and other
development which may increase flood damage; and
      (5)   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers, which
will unnaturally divert flood, waters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
   (e)   Lands to which these regulations apply. These regulations shall apply
to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city as
identified in division (f) hereof, including any additional areas of special
flood hazard annexed by the city.
   (f)   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. For the
purposes of these regulations, the following studies and/or maps are adopted:
      (1)   Flood Insurance Study Cuyahoga County, Ohio and Incorporated Areas
and Flood Insurance Rate Map Cuyahoga County, Ohio and Incorporated Areas both
effective December 3, 2010;
      (2)   Other studies and/or maps, which may be relied upon for
establishment of the flood protection elevation, delineation of the 100-year
flood hazard area, floodways or delineation of other areas of special flood
hazard; and
      (3)   A.   Any hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis authored by
a registered professional engineer in the state which has been approved by the
city as required by §
1462.04(c); and
         B.   Any revisions to the aforementioned maps and/or studies are
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations.
Such maps and/or studies are on file at the City Hall at 34200 Bainbridge Road,
Solon, Ohio.
   (g)   Abrogation and greater restrictions. These regulations are not
intended to repeal any existing ordinances including subdivision regulations,
zoning or building codes. In the event of a conflict between these regulations
and any other ordinance, the more restrictive shall be followed. These
regulations shall not impair any deed restriction covenant or easement but the
land subject to such interests shall also be governed by the regulations.
   (h)   Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of these
regulations, all provisions shall be:
      (1)   Considered as minimum requirements;
      (2)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
      (3)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes. Where a provision of these regulations may be in conflict with
a state or federal law, such state or federal law shall take precedence over
these regulations.
   (i)   Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection
required by these regulations is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes
and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can
and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by human-made
or natural causes. These regulations do not imply that land outside the areas
of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damage. These regulations shall not create liability on the
part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, for any flood damage that results from reliance on these
regulations or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
   (j)   Severability. Should any section or provision of these regulations be
declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the regulations as a whole, or any part thereof
other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. 2010-195, passed 9-20-2010)
§ 1462.02 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in these
regulations shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give these regulations the most reasonable application.
   (a)   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure on the same lot with, and of a nature
customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal structure.
   (b)   APPEAL. A request for review of the Flood Hazard Area Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of these regulations or a request for a
variance.
   (c)   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year. The base flood may also be referred to as the 1% chance
annual flood or 100-year flood.
   (d)   BASE (100-YEAR) FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The water surface elevation of
the base flood in relation to a specified datum, usually the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, and
usually expressed in feet mean sea level (MSL). In Zone AO areas, the base
flood elevation is the natural grade elevation plus the depth number (from one
to three feet).
   (e)   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
   (f)   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
   (g)   ENCLOSURE BELOW THE LOWEST FLOOR. See LOWEST FLOOR.
   (h)   EXECUTIVE ORDER 11988 (FLOOD HAZARD AREA MANAGEMENT). Issued by
President Carter in 1977, this order requires that no federally assisted
activities be conducted in or have the potential to affect identified special
flood hazard areas, unless there is no practicable alternative.
   (i)   FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA). The agency with the
overall responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance Program.
   (j)   FILL. A deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.
   (k)   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   (l)   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). Usually the initial map, produced by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency or United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development, for a community depicting approximate special flood
hazard areas.
   (m)   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development has delineated the areas of special flood hazard.
   (n)   FLOOD INSURANCE RISK ZONES. Zone designations on FHBMs and FIRMs that
indicate the magnitude of the flood hazard in specific areas of a community.
Following are the zone definitions.
      (1)   ZONE A. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood;
base flood elevations are not determined.
      (2)   ZONES A1-30 and ZONE AE. Special flood hazard areas inundated by
the 100-year flood; base flood elevations are determined.
      (3)   ZONE AO. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year
flood; with flood depths of one to three feet (usually sheet flow on sloping
terrain); average depths are determined.
      (4)   ZONE AH. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year
flood; flood depths of one to three feet (usually areas of ponding); base flood
elevations are determined.
      (5)   ZONE A99. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year
flood to be protected from the 100-year flood by a federal flood protection
system under construction; no base flood elevations are determined.
      (6)   ZONE B AND ZONE X (SHADED). Areas of 500-year flood; areas subject
to the 100-year flood with average depths of less than one foot or with
contributing drainage area less than one square mile; and areas protected by
levees from the base flood.
      (7)   ZONE C AND ZONE X (UNSHADED). Areas determined to be outside the
500-year flood hazard area.
   (o)   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official report in which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development has provided flood profiles, floodway boundaries (sometimes
shown on flood boundary and floodway maps), and the water surface elevations of
the base flood.
   (p)   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The base flood elevation plus two
feet of freeboard. In areas where no base flood elevations exist from any
authoritative source, the flood protection elevation can be historical flood
elevations, or base flood elevations determined and/or approved by the Flood
Hazard Area Administrator.
   (q)   FLOODWAY.
      (1)   The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that have been reserved in order to pass the base flood discharge. A
FLOODWAY is typically determined through a hydraulic and hydrologic engineering
analysis such that the cumulative increase in the water surface elevation of
the base flood discharge is no more than a designated height. In no case shall
the designated height be more than one foot at any point within the community.
      (2)   The FLOODWAY is an extremely hazardous area, and is usually
characterized by any of the following: moderate to high velocity flood waters,
high potential for debris and projectile impacts and moderate to high erosion
forces.
   (r)   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for the purposes of flood hazard area management. FREEBOARD tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights
greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway
conditions, such as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice
jams, and the hydrologic effect of urbanization in a watershed.
   (s)   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the United States Department of Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listings on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district; or
      (3)   Individually listed on the state’s inventory of historic places
maintained by the Ohio Historic Preservation Office.
   (t)   HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC ENGINEERING ANALYSIS. An analysis performed
by a professional engineer, registered in the state, in accordance with
standard engineering practices as accepted by FEMA, used to determine flood
elevations and/or floodway boundaries.
   (u)   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). An official FEMA determination, by
letter, to amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary
and floodway maps, and flood insurance studies. LOMCs are broken down into the
following categories:
      (1)   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). A formal review and
comment by FEMA as to whether a proposed project complies with the minimum
National Flood Insurance Program flood hazard area management criteria. A CLOMR
does not amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary
and floodway maps, or flood insurance studies.
      (2)   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). A revision based on technical data
showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood
hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and
establishes that a specific property is not located in a special flood hazard
area.
      (3)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). A revision based on technical data
that, usually due to human-made changes, shows changes to flood zones, flood
elevations, flood hazard area and floodway delineations, and planimetric
features. One common type of LOMR, a LOMR-F, is a determination concerning
whether a structure or parcel has been elevated by fill above the base flood
elevation and is, therefore, excluded from the special flood hazard area.
   (v)   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement) of a structure. This definition excludes an ENCLOSURE BELOW THE
LOWEST FLOOR which is an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely
for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, provided that such enclosure is built in accordance with the
applicable design requirements specified in these regulations for enclosures
below the lowest floor.
   (w)   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle. For the purposes of
these regulations, a manufactured home includes manufactured homes and mobile
homes as defined in R.C. Chapter 3733.
   (x)   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. As specified in the O.A.C. 3701-27-01, means
any tract of land upon which three or more manufactured homes, used for
habitation are parked, either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and
includes any roadway, building, structure, vehicle or enclosure used or
intended for use as part of the facilities of the park. A tract of land that is
subdivided and the individual lots are not for rent or rented, but are for sale
or sold for the purpose of installation of manufactured homes on the lots, is
not a manufactured home park, even though three or more manufactured homes are
parked thereon, if the roadways are dedicated to the local government
authority.
   (y)   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). A federal program enabling
property owners in participating communities to purchase insurance protection
against losses from flooding. This insurance is designed to provide an
insurance alternative to disaster assistance to meet the escalating costs of
repairing damage to buildings and their contents caused by floods.
Participation in the NFIP is based on an agreement between local communities
and the federal government that states if a community will adopt and enforce
flood hazard area management regulations to reduce future flood risks to all
development in special flood hazard areas, the federal government will make
flood insurance available within the community as a financial protection
against flood loss.
   (z)   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the initial effective date of the City of Solon Flood
Insurance Rate Map, February 4, 1981, and includes any subsequent improvements
to such structures.
   (aa)   PERSON. Includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation,
partnership, association or any other entity, including state and local
governments and agencies. An AGENCY is further defined in R.C. § 111.15 as any
governmental entity of the state and includes, but is not limited to, any
board, department, division, commission, bureau, society, council, institution,
state college or university, community college district, technical college
district or state community college. AGENCY does not include the general
assembly, the controlling board, the adjutant general’s department or any
court.
   (bb)   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   (cc)   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ARCHITECT. A person registered to engage in
the practice of architecture under the provisions of R.C. §§ 4703.01 to
4703.19.
   (dd)   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. A person registered as a
professional engineer under R.C. Chapter 4733.
   (ee)   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL SURVEYOR. A person registered as a
professional surveyor under R.C. Chapter 4733.
   (ff)   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA also known as AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD
HAZARD. The land in the flood hazard area subject to a 1% or greater chance of
flooding in any given year. SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS are designated by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency on flood insurance rate maps, flood
insurance studies, flood boundary and floodway maps and flood hazard boundary
maps as Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-30 and A99. SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS may also
refer to areas that are flood prone and designated from other federal, state or
local sources of data including, but not limited to, historical flood
information reflecting high water marks, previous flood inundation areas and
flood prone soils associated with a watercourse.
   (gg)   START OF CONSTRUCTION. The date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of
the permit date. The ACTUAL START means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of a building.
   (hh)   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, manufactured home, or gas or
liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
   (ii)   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred. SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE also means flood related damage sustained
by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the
cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or
exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   (jj)   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement
of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of
the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. When the
combined total of all previous improvements or repairs made during the life of
the structure equals or exceeds 50% of a structure’s market value, that
structure is considered a SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. This term includes
structures, which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual
repair work performed.
      (2)   The term does not, however, include:
         A.   Any improvement to a structure that is considered new
construction;
         B.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which have been identified prior to the application for a development permit by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
         C.   Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the
alteration would not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.
   (kk)   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the standards of these regulations
consistent with the variance conditions herein.
   (ll)   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with these regulations.
(Ord. 2010-195, passed 9-20-2010)
§ 1462.03 ADMINISTRATION.
   (a)   Designation of the Flood Hazard Area Administrator. The Public Works
Commissioner is hereby appointed to administer and implement these regulations
and is referred to herein as the Flood Hazard Area Administrator.
   (b)   Duties and responsibilities of the Flood Hazard Area Administrator.
The duties and responsibilities of the Flood Hazard Area Administrator shall
include but are not limited to:
      (1)   Evaluate applications for permits to develop in special flood
hazard areas;
      (2)   Interpret flood hazard area boundaries and provide flood hazard and
flood protection elevation information;
      (3)   Issue permits to develop in special flood hazard areas when the
provisions of these regulations have been met, or refuse to issue the same in
the event of noncompliance;
      (4)   Inspect buildings and lands to determine whether any violations of
these regulations have been committed;
      (5)   Make and permanently keep all records for public inspection
necessary for the administration of these regulations including flood insurance
rate maps, letters of map amendment and revision, records of issuance and
denial of permits to develop in special flood hazard areas, determinations of
whether development is in or out of special flood hazard areas for the purpose
of issuing flood hazard area development permits, elevation certificates,
variances and records of enforcement actions taken for violations of these
regulations;
      (6)   Enforce the provisions of these regulations;
      (7)   Provide information, testimony, or other evidence as needed during
variance hearings;
      (8)   Coordinate map maintenance activities and FEMA follow-up; and
      (9)   Conduct substantial damage determinations to determine whether
existing structures, damaged from any source and in special flood hazard areas
identified by FEMA, must meet the development standards of these regulations.
   (c)   Flood Hazard Area development permits. It shall be unlawful for any
person to begin construction or other development activity including, but not
limited to, filling; grading; construction; alteration, remodeling or expanding
any structure; or alteration of any watercourse wholly within, partially within
or in contact with any identified special flood hazard area, as established in
§
1462.01(f), until a flood hazard area development permit is obtained from the
Flood Hazard Area Administrator. Such flood hazard area development permit
shall show that the proposed development activity is in conformity with the
provisions of these regulations. No such permit shall be issued by the Flood
Hazard Area Administrator until the requirements of these regulations have been
met.
   (d)   Application required. An application for a flood hazard area
development permit shall be required for all development activities located
wholly within, partially within, or in contact with an identified special flood
hazard area. Such application shall be made by the owner of the property or his
or her authorized agent, herein referred to as the applicant, prior to the
actual commencement of such construction on a form furnished for that purpose.
Where it is unclear whether a development site is in a special flood hazard
area, the Flood Hazard Area Administrator may require an application for a
flood hazard area development permit to determine the development’s location.
Such applications shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Site plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions
and topography of the area in question; the location of existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of
the foregoing;
      (2)   Elevation of the existing, natural ground where structures are
proposed;
      (3)   Elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed
structures;
      (4)   Such other material and information as may be requested by the
Flood Hazard Area Administrator to determine conformance with, and provide
enforcement of these regulations; and
      (5)   Technical analyses conducted by the appropriate design professional
registered in the state and submitted with an application for a flood hazard
area development permit when applicable:
         A.   Floodproofing certification for nonresidential floodproofed
structure as required in §
1462.04(e);
         B.   Certification that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor of
a structure not meeting the design requirements of §
1462.04(d)(5) are designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces;
         C.   Description of any watercourse alteration or relocation that the
flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be diminished, and
maintenance assurances as required in §
1462.04(i)(3);
         D.   A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis demonstrating that the
cumulative effect of proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood by more than one foot in special flood hazard areas
where the Federal Emergency Management Agency has provided base flood
elevations but no floodway as required by §
1462.04(i)(2);
         E.   A hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis showing impact of
any development on flood heights in an identified floodway as required by §
1462.04(i)(1);
         F.   Generation of base flood elevation(s) for subdivision and large-
scale developments as required by §
1462.04(c); and
         G.   Volumetric calculations demonstrating compensatory storage has
been provided as required by §
1462.04(i)(4).
   (e)   Review and approval of a flood hazard area development permit
application.
      (1)   Review.
         A.   After receipt of a complete application, the Flood Hazard Area
Administrator shall review the application to ensure that the standards of
these regulations have been met. No flood hazard area development permit
application shall be reviewed until all information required in division (d)
hereof has been received by the Flood Hazard Area Administrator.
         B.   The Flood Hazard Area Administrator shall review all flood hazard
area development permit applications to assure that all necessary permits have
been received from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from
which prior approval is required. The applicant shall be responsible for
obtaining such permits as required including permits issued by the United
States Army Corps of Engineers under § 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act, being
33 USC 1 et seq. and § 404 of the Clean Water Act, being 33 USC 1341 and 1344,
and the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency under § 401 of the Clean Water
Act, being 33 USC 1341.
      (2)   Approval. Within 30 days after the receipt of a complete
application, the Flood Hazard Area Administrator shall either approve or
disapprove the application. If an application is approved, a flood hazard area
development permit shall be issued. All flood hazard area development permits
shall be conditional upon the commencement of work within one year. A flood
hazard area development permit shall expire one year after issuance unless the
permitted activity has been substantially begun and is thereafter pursued to
completion.
   (f)   Inspections. The Flood Hazard Area Administrator shall make periodic
inspections at appropriate times throughout the period of construction in order
to monitor compliance with permit conditions.
   (g)   Post-construction certifications required. The following as-built
certifications are required after a flood hazard area development permit has
been issued.
      (1)   For new or substantially improved residential structures, or
nonresidential structures that have been elevated, the applicant shall have a
Federal Emergency Management Agency elevation certificate completed by a
registered surveyor to record as-built elevation data. For elevated structures
in Zone A and Zone AO areas without a base flood elevation, the elevation
certificate may be completed by the property owner or owner’s representative;
and
      (2)   For all development activities subject to the standards of division
(j)(1) hereof, a letter of map revision.
   (h)   Revoking a flood hazard area development permit. A flood hazard area
development permit shall be revocable, if among other things, the actual
development activity does not conform to the terms of the application and
permit granted thereon. In the event of the revocation of a permit, an appeal
may be taken to the Appeals Board in accordance with §
1462.05.
   (i)   Exemption from filing a development permit.
      (1)   An application for a flood hazard area development permit shall not
be required for:
         A.   Maintenance work such as roofing, painting and basement sealing,
or for small nonstructural development activities (except for filling and
grading) valued at less than $5,000;
         B.   Development activities in an existing or proposed manufactured
home park that are under the authority of the Ohio Department of Health and
subject to the flood damage reduction provisions of the O.A.C. § 3701;
         C.   Major utility facilities permitted by the Ohio Power Siting Board
under R.C. Chapter 4906;
         D.   Hazardous waste disposal facilities permitted by the Hazardous
Waste Siting Board under R.C. Chapter 3734; and
         E.   Development activities undertaken by a federal agency and which
are subject to Federal Executive Order 11988 - Flood Hazard Area Management.
      (2)   Any proposed action exempt from filing for a flood hazard area
development permit is also exempt from the standards of these regulations.
   (j)   Map maintenance activities. To meet National Flood Insurance Program
minimum requirements to have flood data reviewed and approved by FEMA, and to
ensure that city flood maps, studies and other data identified in §
1462.01(f) accurately represent flooding conditions so appropriate flood hazard
area management criteria are based on current data, the following map
maintenance activities are identified.
      (1)   Requirement to submit new technical data.
         A.   For all development proposals that impact floodway delineations
or base flood elevations, the community shall ensure that technical data
reflecting such changes be submitted to FEMA within six months of the date such
information becomes available. These development proposals include:
            1.   Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease base flood
elevations or alter floodway boundaries;
            2.   Fill sites to be used for the placement of proposed structures
where the applicant desires to remove the site from the special flood hazard
area;
            3.   Alteration of watercourses that result in a relocation or
elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of
culverts; and
            4.   Subdivision or large scale development proposals requiring the
establishment of base flood elevations in accordance with §
1462.04(c).
         B.   It is the responsibility of the applicant to have technical data,
required in accordance with division (j)(1) hereof, prepared in a format
required for a conditional letter of map revision or letter of map revision,
and submitted to FEMA. Submittal and processing fees for these map revisions
shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
            1.   A LOMR shall be required for any changes to the FEMA flood
data prior to the issuance of the flood hazard area development permit.
         C.   The Flood Hazard Area Administrator shall require a conditional
letter of map revision prior to the issuance of a flood hazard area development
permit for:
            1.   Proposed floodway encroachments that increase the base flood
elevation;
            2.   Proposed development which increases the base flood elevation
by more than one foot in areas where FEMA has provided base flood elevations
but no floodway; and
            3.   Decrease in BFE.
         D.   Flood hazard area development permits issued by the Flood Hazard
Area Administrator shall be conditioned upon the applicant obtaining a letter
of map revision from FEMA for any development proposal subject to division (j)
(1)A. hereof.
      (2)   Right to submit new technical data. The Flood Hazard Area
Administrator may request changes to any of the information shown on an
effective map that does not impact flood hazard area or floodway delineations
or base flood elevations, such as labeling or planimetric details. Such a
submission shall include appropriate supporting documentation made in writing
by the Mayor, and may be submitted at any time.
      (3)   Annexation/detachment. Upon occurrence, the Flood Hazard Area
Administrator shall notify FEMA in writing whenever the boundaries of the city
have been modified by annexation or the community has assumed authority over an
area, or no longer has authority to adopt and enforce flood hazard area
management regulations for a particular area. In order that the city flood
insurance rate map accurately represent the city boundaries, include within
such notification a copy of a map of the city suitable for reproduction,
clearly showing the new corporate limits or the new area for which the city has
assumed or relinquished flood hazard area management regulatory authority.
   (k)   Data use and flood map interpretation. The following guidelines shall
apply to the use and interpretation of maps and other data showing areas of
special flood hazard.
      (1)   In areas where FEMA has not identified special flood hazard areas,
or in FEMA identified special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and
floodway data have not been identified, the Flood Hazard Area Administrator
shall review and reasonably utilize any other flood hazard data available from
a federal, state or other source.
      (2)   Base flood elevations and floodway boundaries produced on FEMA
flood maps and studies shall take precedence over base flood elevations and
floodway boundaries by any other source that reflect a reduced floodway width
and/or lower base flood elevations. Other sources of data, showing increased
base flood elevations and/or larger floodway areas than are shown on FEMA flood
maps and studies, shall be reasonably used by the Flood Hazard Area
Administrator.
      (3)   When preliminary flood insurance rate maps and/or flood insurance
study have been provided by FEMA:
         A.   Upon the issuance of a letter of final determination by the FEMA,
the preliminary flood hazard data shall be used and replace all previously
existing flood hazard data provided from FEMA for the purposes of administering
these regulations; and
         B.   Prior to the issuance of a letter of final determination by FEMA,
the use of preliminary flood hazard data shall only be required where no base
flood elevations and/or floodway areas exist or where the preliminary base
flood elevations or floodway area exceed the base flood elevations and/or
floodway widths in existing flood hazard data provided from FEMA. Such
preliminary data may be subject to change and/or appeal to FEMA.
      (4)   The Flood Hazard Area Administrator shall make interpretations,
where needed, as to the exact location of the flood boundaries and areas of
special flood hazard. A person contesting the determination of the location of
the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the
interpretation as provided in §
1462.05.
      (5)   Where a map boundary showing an area of special flood hazard and
field elevations disagree, the base flood elevations or flood protection
elevations (as found on an elevation profile, floodway data table, established
high water marks and the like) shall prevail.
   (l)   Substantial damage determinations.
      (1)   Damages to structures may result from a variety of causes including
flood, tornado, wind, heavy snow, fire and the like. After such a damage event,
the Flood Hazard Area Administrator shall:
         A.   Determine whether damaged structures are located in special flood
hazard areas;
         B.   Conduct substantial damage determinations for damaged structures
located in special flood hazard areas; and
         C.   Make a reasonable attempt to notify owners of substantially
damaged structures of the need to obtain a flood hazard area development permit
prior to repair, rehabilitation or reconstruction.
      (2)   Additionally, the Flood Hazard Area Administrator may implement
other measures to assist with the substantial damage determination and
subsequent repair process. These measures include issuing press releases,
public service announcements, and other public information materials related to
the flood hazard area development permits and repair of damaged structures;
coordinating with other federal, state and local agencies to assist with
substantial damage determinations; providing owners of damaged structures
materials and other information related to the proper repair of damaged
structures in special flood hazard areas; and assist owners of substantially
damaged structures with increased cost of compliance insurance claims.
(Ord. 2010-195, passed 9-20-2010)
§ 1462.04 USE AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
   The following use and development standards apply to development wholly
within, partially within, or in contact with any special flood hazard area as
established in §
1462.01(f) or
1462.03(k)(1).
   (a)   Use regulations.
      (1)   Permitted uses. All uses not otherwise prohibited in this section
or any other applicable land use regulation adopted by the city are allowed
provided they meet the provisions of these regulations.
      (2)   Prohibited uses.
         A.   Private water supply systems in all special flood hazard areas
identified by FEMA, permitted under R.C. Chapter 3701; and
         B.   Infectious waste treatment facilities in all special flood hazard
areas, permitted under R.C. Chapter 3734.
   (b)   Water and wastewater systems. The following standards apply to all
water supply, sanitary sewerage and waste disposal systems not otherwise
regulated by the Ohio Revised Code:
      (1)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems;
      (2)   New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into flood waters; and
      (3)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to or contamination from them during flooding.
   (c)   Subdivisions and large developments.
      (1)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage and are subject to all applicable standards in these
regulations;
      (2)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
      (3)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage;
      (4)   In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation
data are not available, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering analysis that generates base flood elevations for all subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments containing at least 50 lots or five
acres, whichever is less; and
      (5)   The applicant shall meet the requirement to submit technical data
to FEMA in §
1462.03(j)(1)A.4. when a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis is completed that
generates base flood elevations as required by division (c)(4) hereof.
   (d)   Residential structures.
      (1)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. Where a
structure, including its foundation members, is elevated on fill to or above
the base flood elevation, the requirements for anchoring (division (d)(1)
hereof) and construction materials resistant to flood damage (division (d)(2)
hereof) are satisfied.
      (2)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with methods and materials resistant to flood damage.
      (3)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or elevated so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
      (4)   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to or above the flood protection elevation. Where flood
protection elevation data are not available, the structure shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least two feet above the highest
adjacent natural grade. Support structures and other foundation members shall
be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as designed in
accordance with ASCE 24, Flood Resistant Design and Construction.
      (5)   New construction and substantial improvements, including
manufactured homes, that do not have basements and that are elevated to the
flood protection elevation using pilings, columns, posts or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to allow unimpeded movement of flood
waters may have an enclosure below the lowest floor provided the enclosure
meets the following standards:
         A.   Be used only for the parking of vehicles, building access or
storage;
         B.   Be designed and certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters; or
         C.   Have a minimum of two openings on different walls having a total
net area not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area,
and the bottom of all such openings being no higher than one foot above grade.
The openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other coverings or
devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
      (6)   Manufactured homes shall be affixed to a permanent foundation and
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
      (7)   Repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure, shall
be exempt from the development standards of §
1462.04(d).
      (8)   In AO Zones, new construction and substantial improvement shall
have adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters
around and away from the structure.
   (e)   Nonresidential structures.
      (1)   New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall meet the requirements of §
1462.04(d)(1) through (d)(3) and (d)(5) through (d)(7) hereof.
      (2)   New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to or above the level of the flood
protection elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall meet all of the following standards:
         A.   Be dry floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water to the level of the
flood protection elevation;
         B.   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
         C.   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect,
through the use of a Federal Emergency Management Agency floodproofing
certificate, that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
§
1462.04(e)(2)A. and (e)(2)B. hereof.
      (3)   Where flood protection elevation data are not available, the
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least
two feet above the highest adjacent natural grade.
   (f)   Accessory structures. Relief to the elevation or dry floodproofing
standards may be granted for accessory structures containing no more than 600
square feet. Such structures must meet the following standards:
      (1)   They shall not be used for human habitation;
      (2)   They shall be constructed of flood resistant materials;
      (3)   They shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the
minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
      (4)   They shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;
      (5)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall
be elevated or floodproofed to or above the level of the flood protection
elevation; and
      (6)   They shall meet the opening requirements of §
1462.04(d)(5)C. hereof.
   (g)   Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles must meet at least one of
the following standards:
      (1)   They shall not be located on sites in special flood hazard areas
for more than 180 days;
      (2)   They must be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
      (3)   They must meet all standards of §
1462.04(d) hereof.
   (h)   Above ground gas or liquid storage tanks. All above ground gas or
liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation or lateral movement
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads.
   (i)   Assurance of flood carrying capacity. Pursuant to the purpose and
methods of reducing flood damage stated in these regulations, the following
additional standards are adopted to assure that the reduction of the flood
carrying capacity of watercourses is minimized.
      (1)   Development in floodways.
         A.   In floodway areas, development shall cause no increase in flood
levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. Prior to issuance of
a flood hazard area development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic
and hydraulic analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer,
demonstrating that the proposed development would not result in any increase in
the base flood elevation; or
         B.   Development in floodway areas causing increases in the base flood
elevation may be permitted provided all of the following are completed by the
applicant:
            1.   Meet the requirements to submit technical data in §
1462.03(j)(1);
            2.   An evaluation of alternatives, which would not result in
increased base flood elevations and an explanation why these alternatives are
not feasible;
            3.   Certification that no structures are located in areas that
would be impacted by the increased base flood elevation;
            4.   Documentation of individual legal notices to all impacted
property owners within and outside the community, explaining the impact of the
proposed action on their property; and
            5.   Concurrence of the Mayor and the Chief Executive Officer of
any other communities impacted by the proposed actions.
      (2)   Development in riverine areas with base flood elevations but no
floodways.
         A.   In riverine special flood hazard areas identified by FEMA where
base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been designated,
the cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot at any point. Prior to issuance of a flood hazard
area development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer, demonstrating that
this standard has been met; or
         B.   Development in riverine special flood hazard areas identified by
FEMA where base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been
designated causing more than one foot increase in the base flood elevation may
be permitted provided all of the following are completed by the applicant:
            1.   An evaluation of alternatives which would result in an
increase of one foot or less of the base flood elevation and an explanation why
these alternatives are not feasible; and
            2.   Division (i)(1)B.1. and (i)(1)B.3. through (i)(1)B.5. hereof.
      (3)   Alterations of a watercourse. For the purpose of these regulations,
a watercourse is altered when any change occurs within its banks. The extent of
the banks shall be established by a field determination of the bankfull stage.
The field determination of bankfull stage shall be based on methods presented
in Chapter 7 of the USDA Forest Service General Technical Report RM-245, Stream
Channel Reference Sites: An Illustrated Guide to Field Technique or other
applicable publications available from a federal, state or other authoritative
source. For all proposed developments that alter a watercourse, the following
standards apply.
         A.   The bankfull flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated
portion of the watercourse shall not be diminished. Prior to the issuance of a
flood hazard area development permit, the applicant must submit a description
of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result
of the proposed development, and certification by a registered professional
engineer that the bankfull flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not
be diminished.
         B.   Adjacent communities, the United States Army Corps of Engineers
and the Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Division of Water, must be
notified prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. Evidence of
such notification must be submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
         C.   The applicant shall be responsible for providing the necessary
maintenance for the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood carrying capacity will not be diminished. The Flood Hazard Area
Administrator may require the permit holder to enter into an agreement with the
city specifying the maintenance responsibilities. If an agreement is required,
it shall be made a condition of the flood hazard area development permit.
         D.   The applicant shall meet the requirements to submit technical
data in §
1462.03(j)(1)A.3. when an alteration of a watercourse results in the relocation
or elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of
culverts.
      (4)   Compensatory storage required for fill. Fill within the area of
special flood hazard shall result in a no net loss of natural flood hazard area
storage. The volume of the loss of floodwater storage due to filling in the
special flood hazard area shall be offset by providing an equal volume of flood
storage by excavation or other compensatory measures at or adjacent to the
development site.
   (j)   Fill. The following standards apply to all fill activities in special
flood hazard areas.
      (1)   Fill sites, upon which structures will be constructed or placed,
must be compacted to 95% of the maximum density obtainable with the Standard
Proctor Test method or an acceptable equivalent method.
      (2)   Fill slopes shall not be steeper than one foot vertical to two feet
horizontal.
      (3)   Adequate protection against erosion and scour is provided for fill
slopes. When expected velocities during the occurrence of the base flood of
five feet per second armoring with stone or rock protection shall be provided.
When expected velocities during the base flood are five feet per second or less
protection shall be provided by covering them with vegetative cover.
      (4)   Fill shall be composed of clean granular or earthen material.
(Ord. 2010-195, passed 9-20-2010)
§ 1462.05 APPEALS AND VARIANCES.
   (a)   Appeals Board established.
      (1)   The City of Solon Planning Commission is hereby appointed to serve
as the Appeals Board for these regulations as established by City Code.
      (2)   Records of the Appeals Board shall be kept and filed in City Hall
at 34200 Bainbridge Road, Solon, Ohio.
   (b)   Powers and duties.
      (1)   The Appeals Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by
the Flood Hazard Area Administrator in the administration or enforcement of
these regulations; and
      (2)   Authorize variances in accordance with division (d) hereof.
   (c)   Appeals.
      (1)   Any person affected by any notice and order, or other official
action of the Flood Hazard Area Administrator may request and shall be granted
a hearing on the matter before the Appeals Board provided that such person
shall file, within 20 days of the date of such notice and order, or other
official action, a brief statement of the grounds for such hearing or for the
mitigation of any item appearing on any order of the Flood Hazard Area
Administrator’s decision. Such appeal shall be in writing, signed by the
applicant, and be filed with the Flood Hazard Area Administrator. Upon receipt
of the appeal, the Flood Hazard Area Administrator shall transmit said notice
and all pertinent information on which the Flood Hazard Area Administrator’s
decision was made to the Appeals Board.
      (2)   Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the Appeals Board shall fix a
reasonable time for the appeal, give notice in writing to parties in interest,
and decide the appeal within a reasonable time after it is submitted.
   (d)   Variances. Any person believing that the use and development standards
of these regulations would result in unnecessary hardship may file an
application for a variance. The Appeals Board shall have the power to
authorize, in specific cases, such variances from the standards of these
regulations, not inconsistent with federal regulations, as will not be contrary
to the public interest where, owning to special conditions of the lot or
parcel, a literal enforcement of the provisions of these regulations would
result in unnecessary hardship.
      (1)   Application for a variance.
         A.   Any owner, or agent thereof, of property for which a variance is
sought shall make an application for a variance by filing it with the Flood
Hazard Area Administrator, who upon receipt of the variance shall transmit it
to the Appeals Board.
         B.   Such application at a minimum shall contain the following
information: name, address and telephone number of the applicant; legal
description of the property; parcel map; description of the existing use;
description of the proposed use; location of the flood hazard area; description
of the variance sought; and reason for the variance request.
         C.   All applications for variance shall be accompanied by a variance
application fee set in the schedule of fees adopted by the city.
      (2)   Public hearing. At such hearing the applicant shall present such
statements and evidence as the Appeals Board requires. In considering such
variance applications, the Appeals Board shall consider and make findings of
fact on all evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other
sections of these regulations and the following factors:
         A.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
         B.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
         C.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         D.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the community;
         E.   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
that are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
         F.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
         G.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
         H.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and flood hazard area management program for that area;
         I.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         J.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
         K.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
      (3)   A.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
            1.   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
            2.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the
property. Increased cost or inconvenience of meeting the requirements of these
regulations does not constitute an exceptional hardship to the applicant;
            3.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights beyond that which is allowed in these
regulations; additional threats to public safety; extraordinary public expense,
nuisances, fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing
local laws;
            4.   A determination that the structure or other development is
protected by methods to minimize flood damages; and
            5.   A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
         B.   Upon consideration of the above factors and the purposes of these
regulations, the Appeals Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances, as it deems necessary to further the purposes of these regulations.
      (4)   Other conditions for variances.
         A.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if
any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
         B.   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level, providing items in division (d)(2)A. to (d)(2)K.
hereof have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half
acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
         C.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and the cost of flood insurance
will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest
floor elevation.
   (e)   Procedure at hearings.
      (1)   All testimony shall be given under oath.
      (2)   A complete record of the proceedings shall be kept, except
confidential deliberations of the Board, but including all documents presented
and a verbatim record of the testimony of all witnesses.
      (3)   The applicant shall proceed first to present evidence and testimony
in support of the appeal or variance.
      (4)   The Administrator may present evidence or testimony in opposition
to the appeal or variance.
      (5)   All witnesses shall be subject to cross-examination by the adverse
party or their counsel.
      (6)   Evidence that is not admitted may be proffered and shall become
part of the record for appeal.
      (7)   The Board shall issue subpoenas upon written request for the
attendance of witnesses. A reasonable deposit to cover the cost of issuance and
service shall be collected in advance.
      (8)   The Board shall prepare conclusions of fact supporting its
decision. The decision may be announced at the conclusion of the hearing and
thereafter issued in writing or the decision may be issued in writing within a
reasonable time after the hearing.
   (f)   Appeals. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Appeals Board may
appeal such decision to City Council in accordance with Chapter 1293 of the
Codified Ordinance. If the appeal is denied, variance is modified, or variance
is denied by City Council, the aggrieved may appeal such decision to the
Cuyahoga County Court of Common Pleas, as provided in R.C. Chapter 2506.
(Ord. 2010-195, passed 9-20-2010)
§ 1462.06 ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   Compliance required.
      (1)   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, erected,
constructed, reconstructed, repaired, extended, converted, enlarged or altered
without full compliance with the terms of these regulations and all other
applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of these
regulations, unless specifically exempted from filing for a development permit
as stated in §
1462.03(i).
      (2)   Failure to obtain a flood hazard area development permit shall be a
violation of these regulations and shall be punishable in accordance with
division (c) hereof.
      (3)   Flood hazard area development permits issued on the basis of plans
and applications approved by the Flood Hazard Area Administrator authorize only
the use, and arrangement, set forth in such approved plans and applications or
amendments thereto. Use, arrangement or construction contrary to that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and punishable in
accordance with §
1462.06(c) hereof.
   (b)   Notice of violation. Whenever the Flood Hazard Area Administrator
determines that there has been a violation of any provision of these
regulations, he or she shall give notice of such violation to the person
responsible therefore and order compliance with these regulations as
hereinafter provided. Such notice and order shall:
      (1)   Be put in writing on an appropriate form;
      (2)   Include a list of violations, referring to the section or sections
of these regulations that have been violated, and order remedial action, which,
if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of these regulations;
      (3)   Specify a reasonable time for performance;
      (4)   Advise the owner, operator or occupant of the right to appeal; and
      (5)   Be served on the owner, occupant or agent in person. However, this
notice and order shall be deemed to be properly served upon the owner, occupant
or agent if a copy thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to the
person’s last known mailing address, residence or place of business, and/or a
copy is posted in a conspicuous place in or on the dwelling affected.
   (c)   Violations and penalties. Violation of the provisions of these
regulations or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed
to be a strict liability offense, and shall constitute a first degree
misdemeanor. Any person who violates these regulations or fails to comply with
any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined $1,000 or
imprisoned as provided by the laws of the city. Each day such violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained
shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation. The city shall prosecute any violation of
these regulations in accordance with the penalties stated herein.
(Ord. 2010-195, passed 9-20-2010)
CHAPTER 1466: HANDICAPPED PARKING
Section
   
1466.01   Spaces required
   
1466.02   Specifications
   
1466.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Assault, see §
636.02
   Failure to provide for a functionally impaired person, see §
636.23
   Off-street parking and loading, see Zoning Code
   Parking facilities for handicapped persons, see §
452.04
   Parking generally, see
Ch. 452
§ 1466.01 SPACES REQUIRED.
   All parking areas serving industrial, office, retail, commercial and/or
institutional facilities shall be required to provide handicapped parking
spaces to facilitate access to their buildings by handicapped persons.
(Ord. 1984-127, passed 10-1-1984)
§ 1466.02 SPECIFICATIONS.
   All striping, signage and space designation for handicapped parking shall be
done in accordance with the direction of the Chief Building Official, who shall
adopt reasonable rules and regulations governing the number, location and
marking of handicapped parking spaces.
(Ord. 1986-48, passed 3-17-1986)
§ 1466.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1432.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1468: STRUCTURE MOVING
Section
   
1468.01   Permit required; requirements
   
1468.02   Approval of Police Chief; supervision
   
1468.03   Conformity to Zoning and Building Codes
   
1468.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Demolition and removal of structures, see
Ch. 1454
   Permit fee for moving of buildings, see §
1424.11
   Sidewalk obstructions, see §
660.10
   Street obstructions, see §
412.01
§ 1468.01 PERMIT REQUIRED; REQUIREMENTS.
   No person shall move, or cause to be moved, a building or other structure
over public streets within the city without first having obtained a structure
moving permit from the City Engineer. No permit shall be issued to any person
until the applicant has complied with the following requirements:
   (a)   Submitted evidence of insurance as approved by the Director of Law,
indemnifying the applicant and the city in the sum of not less than $1,000,000
for property damage and $1,000,000/$2,000,000 for death or personal injury;
   (b)   Submitted a bond in the amount to be determined by the City Engineer
and satisfactory to the Director of Law, indemnifying the city for any loss or
damage to streets or other public property such as but not limited to the
removal of fire alarm wires, traffic lights and street lights and the cost of
tree trimming and police protection and other expenses incurred by the city in
connection with the moving of the structure;
   (c)   Submitted a letter signed by an official of any adjoining city or
village into which the structure is to move to the effect that such city or
village will permit the movement of the structure onto the streets of such
adjoining city or village; and
   (d)   If the building is to be located in Solon, a performance bond with
adequate surety in the amount of $3,000 shall be deposited with the Director of
Finance, in form satisfactory to the Director of Law, to insure that such
building will be securely attached to a foundation on the lot where it is to be
located, connected with all necessary and available utilities, and rendered
completely habitable within a period of 120 days after the permit is issued,
and also to insure that all grading and drainage plans, including, but not
limited to, rear yard drains, have been performed as approved by the
Engineering Department.
(Ord. 1984-129, passed 10-15-1984)
§ 1468.02 APPROVAL OF POLICE CHIEF; SUPERVISION.
   Before the City Engineer shall issue any structure moving permit he or she
shall first secure the approval of the Police Chief relative to any traffic
control problems and to clearances and gross weight of the structure on the
streets. The moving of any such building or structure shall be subject to the
supervision and direction of the Police Chief and the City Engineer during the
occupancy of a public street by such building or structure. In the process of
moving, a house or other structure shall not be permitted to be parked or to
remain in a stationary position on any public street or on any lot other than
one to which it is being moved.
(Ord. 1966-248, passed 12-29-1966)
§ 1468.03 CONFORMITY TO ZONING AND BUILDING CODES.
   The City Engineer shall not issue a structure moving permit unless it is
first determined by the Planning Department that the proposed location of the
building or structure conforms to the Zoning Code and that the building or
structure fully meets all the requirements, standards and specifications of the
Zoning Code and this Building and Housing Code. The Planning Department shall
also examine the design, use of materials, finish grade lines and orientation
of all structures proposed to be moved, and the Planning Department shall not
approve the granting of a moving permit unless it is satisfied that the
buildings or structures will maintain a high character of community development
and will protect real estate within the neighborhood from impairment or
destruction of value.
(Ord. 1984-129, passed 10-15-1984)
§ 1468.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1432.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1482: SANITATION, DRAINAGE AND SEWERAGE
Section
   
1482.01   Establishment of Drainage and Sanitation Committee; duties.
(Repealed)
   
1482.02   Committee’s approval required for water supplies and sewage disposal.
(Repealed)
   
1482.03   Special permits for temporary drainage (Repealed)
   
1482.04   Leaching device installation; percolation test (Repealed)
   
1482.05   Discharge of domestic wastes into septic tanks (Repealed)
   
1482.06   Cleaning of septic tanks (Repealed)
   
1482.065   Individual home disposal systems
   
1482.07   Drainage of stagnant water in cellars or on lots or land
   
1482.08   Connection to public sewers
   
1482.09   Illicit discharge, stormwater inflow to the POTW and illegal
connection control
   
1482.10   Drainage for habitable construction
   
1482.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Drainage in subdivisions, see §
1250.20
   Industrial wastes, see
Ch. 1044
   Plastic drain pipe, see §
1406.07
   Safety, sanitation and health, see
Ch. 660
   Sewers generally, see
Ch. 1042
§ 1482.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF DRAINAGE AND SANITATION COMMITTEE; DUTIES.
(REPEALED).
Editor’s note:
   Section 1482.01 was repealed by Ordinance 2000-193, passed July 5, 2000.
§ 1482.02 COMMITTEE’S APPROVAL REQUIRED FOR WATER SUPPLIES AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
(REPEALED).
Editor’s note:
   Section 1482.02 was repealed by Ordinance 2000-193, passed July 5, 2000.
§ 1482.03 SPECIAL PERMITS FOR TEMPORARY DRAINAGE (REPEALED).
Editor’s note:
   Section 1482.03 was repealed by Ordinance 2000-193, passed July 5, 2000.
§ 1482.04 LEACHING DEVICE INSTALLATION; PERCOLATION TEST (REPEALED).
Editor’s note:
   Section 1482.04 was repealed by Ordinance 2000-193, passed July 5, 2000.
§ 1482.05 DISCHARGE OF DOMESTIC WASTES INTO SEPTIC TANKS (REPEALED).
Editor’s note:
   Section 1482.05 was repealed by Ordinance 2000-193, passed July 5, 2000.
§ 1482.06 CLEANING OF SEPTIC TANKS (REPEALED).
Editor’s note:
   Section 1482.06 was repealed by Ordinance 2000-193, passed July 5, 2000.
§ 1482.065 INDIVIDUAL HOME DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.
   Individual home disposal systems shall comply with the Cuyahoga County Board
of Health Standards and Requirements.
(Ord. 2000-193, passed 7-5-2000)
§ 1482.07 DRAINAGE OF STAGNANT WATER IN CELLARS OR ON LOTS OR LAND.
   (a)   All cellars, lots and parcels of land upon or in which pools of
stagnant water may stand or collect, or which may be moist or wet because of
defective drainage or otherwise, shall be drained or sewered by the person
owning, controlling or occupying such cellar, lot or parcel of land.
   (b)   Any person who desires or is required to install drainage pipe on his
or her property shall submit his or her plan to the City Engineer for approval
and obtain a permit. The fee for such permit shall be as noted in §
1424.11.
(Ord. 2000-193, passed 7-5-2000; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 1482.08 CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWERS.
   No owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant of any lot or land located
within the city shall establish, construct, maintain or permit to remain a
privy, cesspool or other receptacle for sewage or excreta, or a connection to a
private sewer, ditch or other outlet, if such lot or land is accessible to a
public sewer constructed and used for the purpose of conveying sewage. When
such public sewer is available or is hereafter made available, a building sewer
to such public sewer shall be established and used by such owner, agent,
lessee, tenant or occupant.
(Ord. 2000-193, passed 7-5-2000)
§ 1482.09 ILLICIT DISCHARGE, STORMWATER INFLOW TO THE POTW AND ILLEGAL
CONNECTION CONTROL.
   (a)   Purpose and scope.
      (1)   The purpose of this regulation is to provide for the health, safety
and general welfare of the citizens of the city through the regulation of
illicit discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) and the
regulation of stormwater inflow to the publicly-owned treatment works (POTW).
This regulation establishes methods for controlling the introduction of
pollutants into the MS4 in order to comply with requirements of the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process as required by
the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency (Ohio EPA). This regulation also
establishes methods to control the introduction of stormwater inflow into the
POTW in order to comply with the requirements of the city’s NPDES permit for
that facility.
      (2)   The objectives of this regulation are:
         A.   To prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the
MS4;
         B.   To prohibit stormwater inflow to the POTW; and
         C.   To establish legal authority to carry out inspections, monitoring
procedures and enforcement actions necessary to ensure compliance with this
regulation.
   (b)   Applicability. This regulation shall apply to all residential,
commercial, industrial or institutional facilities responsible for discharges
to the MS4 or to the POTW, and on any lands in the city, except for those
discharges generated by the activities detailed in division (g)(1) hereof.
   (c)   Definitions. The words and terms used in this regulation, unless
otherwise expressly stated, shall have the following meaning.
      (1)   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants to
stormwater. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures and
practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal,
or drainage from raw materials storage.
      (2)   COMMUNITY. The City of Solon, its designated representatives,
boards or commissions.
      (3)   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION AGENCY (USEPA). The United States Environmental Protection Agency,
including but not limited to the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency (Ohio
EPA), or any duly authorized official of said agency.
      (4)   FLOATABLE MATERIAL. In general this term means any foreign matter
that may float or remain suspended in the water column, and includes, but is
not limited to, plastic, aluminum cans, wood products, bottles and paper
products.
      (5)   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Any material including any substance, waste or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration or physical,
chemical or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property
or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or
otherwise managed.
      (6)   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. As defined at 40 C.F.R. Part 122.26(b)(2) means
any discharge to an MS4 that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except for
those discharges to an MS4 pursuant to a NPDES permit or noted in division (g)
hereof.
      (7)   ILLEGAL CONNECTION. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface
or subsurface, that allows an illicit discharge to enter the MS4 or that allows
stormwater to enter the POTW.
      (8)   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). As defined at 40
C.F.R. Part 122.26(b)(8), MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM means a
conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems,
municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, human-made channels
or storm drains):
         A.   Owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough, county,
parish, district, municipality, township, county, district, association or
other public body (created by or pursuant to state law) having jurisdiction
over sewage, industrial wastes, including special districts under state law
such as a sewer district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an
authorized Indian tribal organization, or a designated and approved management
agency under § 208 of the Clean Water Act that discharges to waters of the
United States;
         B.   Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
         C.   Which is not a combined sewer; and
         D.   Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as
defined at 40 C.F.R. Part 122.2.
      (9)   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORMWATER
DISCHARGE PERMIT. A permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority
delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on
an individual, group or general area-wide basis.
      (10)   OFF-LOT DISCHARGING HOME SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM. A system
designed to treat home sewage on-site and discharges treated wastewater
effluent off the property into a stormwater or surface water conveyance or
system.
      (11)   ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK. The point of the bank to which the
presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave an area
marked by erosion, destruction or prevention of woody terrestrial vegetation,
predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized characteristic.
The ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK defines the bed and bank of a watercourse.
      (12)   OWNER/OPERATOR. Any individual, association, organization,
partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as
either the owner or on the owner’s behalf.
      (13)   POLLUTANT. Anything that causes or contributes to pollution.
POLLUTANTS may include, but are not limited to, paints, varnishes, solvents,
oil and other automotive fluids, non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes, yard
wastes, refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned
objects, floatable materials, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, hazardous
materials, wastes, sewage, dissolved and particulate metals, animal wastes,
residues that result from constructing a structure, and noxious or offensive
matter of any kind.
      (14)   PROBABLE CAUSE. Reasonable grounds for belief in the existence of
fact warranting the proceedings complained of.
      (15)   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). As defined in 40 C.F.R.
Part 403.3, means a treatment works which is owned by a state or municipality.
This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage,
treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes
of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances only
if they convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant.
      (16)   STORMWATER. Any surface flow, runoff and drainage consisting
entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from
such precipitation.
      (17)   STORMWATER INFLOW. Stormwater and other unpermitted releases to
the city’s POTW.
      (18)   WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community. From the standpoint of
a source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions.
      (19)   WATERCOURSE. Any brook, channel, creek, river or stream, either
continuous or intermittent, having an established, and defined bed and bank, as
determined by the ordinary high water mark, and definite direction of flow.
   (d)   Disclaimer of liability. Compliance with the provisions of this
regulation shall not relieve any person from responsibility for damage to any
person otherwise imposed by law. The provisions of this regulation are
promulgated to promote the health, safety and welfare of the public and are not
designed for the benefit of any individual or for the benefit of any particular
parcel of property.
   (e)   Conflicts, severability, nuisances and responsibility.
      (1)   Where this regulation is in conflict with other provisions of law
or ordinance, the most restrictive provisions, as determined by the city, shall
prevail.
      (2)   If any clause, section or provision of this regulation is declared
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the validity
of the remainder shall not be affected thereby.
      (3)   This regulation shall not be construed as authorizing any person to
maintain a nuisance on their property, and compliance with the provisions of
this regulation shall not be a defense in any action to abate such a nuisance.
      (4)   Failure of the city to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly
conditions or to recommend corrective measures shall not relieve the site owner
from the responsibility for the condition or damage resulting therefrom, and
shall not result in the city, its officers, employees or agents being
responsible for any condition or damage resulting therefrom.
   (f)   Responsibility for administration. The city shall administer,
implement and enforce the provisions of this regulation. The city may contract
with the Cuyahoga County Board of Health, or other private or public sector
entity the city deems necessary, to conduct inspections and monitoring and to
assist with enforcement actions.
   (g)   Discharge and connection prohibitions.
      (1)   Prohibition of illicit discharges.
         A.   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, an illicit
discharge into the MS4. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illicit
discharge to the MS4 is prohibited except as described below:
            1.   Water line flushing; landscape irrigation; diverted stream
flows; rising ground waters; uncontaminated ground water infiltration;
uncontaminated pumped ground water; discharges from potable water sources;
foundation drains; air conditioning condensate; irrigation water; springs;
water from crawl space pumps; footing drains; lawn watering; individual
residential, non- commercial, or charity car washing; flows from riparian
habitats and wetlands; dechlorinated/debrominated/desalinated swimming pool
discharges; street wash water; dye tests; and discharges or flows from
firefighting activities. These discharges are exempt until such time as they
are determined by the city to be significant contributors of pollutants to the
MS4;
            2.   Discharges specified in writing by the city as being necessary
to protect public health and safety; and
            3.   Discharges from off-lot discharging home sewage treatment
systems permitted by the Cuyahoga County Board of Health for the purpose of
discharging treated sewage effluent in accordance with O.A.C. 3701-29, or other
applicable Cuyahoga County Board of Health regulations, until such time as the
Ohio Environmental Protection Agency issues an NPDES permitting mechanism for
residential one-, two- or three-family dwellings. These discharges are exempt
unless such discharges are deemed to be creating a public health nuisance by
the Cuyahoga County Board of Health.
         B.   In compliance with the city’s Stormwater Management Program,
discharges from all off-lot discharging home sewage treatment systems must
either be eliminated or have coverage under an appropriate NPDES permit issued
and approved by the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency. When such permit
coverage is available, discharges from off-lot discharging home sewage
treatment systems will no longer be exempt from the requirements of this
regulation.
      (2)   Prohibition of illegal connections. The construction, use,
maintenance or continued existence of illegal connections to the MS4 is
prohibited.
         A.   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection, except for basement floor drains originally constructed and
connected to the MS4 and in full compliance with city regulations in place at
the time of connection. Such connections shall be exempt from this regulation
until such time as the city determines they are a significant source of illicit
discharges to the MS4.
         B.   A person is considered to be in violation of this regulation if
the person connects a line conveying illicit discharges to the MS4, or allows
such a connection to continue.
      (3)   Prohibition of stormwater inflow. No person shall discharge, or
cause to be discharged, stormwater into the POTW. The commencement, conduct or
continuance of any stormwater discharge to the POTW is prohibited.
      (4)   Prohibition of the discharge of woody debris, lawn clippings,
floatable materials and other similar materials. No person shall discharge, or
cause to be discharged, woody debris lawn clippings, floatable materials or
similar materials into the MS4 or below the ordinary high water mark of a
watercourse within the city.
   (h)   Monitoring of illicit discharges, stormwater inflow and illegal
connections.
      (1)   Establishment of an illicit discharge, stormwater inflow and
illegal connection monitoring program. The city shall establish a program to
detect and eliminate illicit discharges and illegal connections to the MS4 and
stormwater inflow to the POTW. This program shall include the mapping of the
MS4, including MS4 outfalls and home sewage treatment systems; the routine
inspection of stormwater outfalls to the MS4, and the systematic investigation
of potential residential, commercial, industrial and institutional facilities
for the sources of any dry weather flows found as the result of these
inspections.
      (2)   Inspection of residential, commercial, industrial or institutional
facilities.
         A.   The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities
subject to this regulation as often as may be necessary to determine compliance
with this regulation. The city shall give 24 hours notice before said
inspection.
         B.   The city shall have the right to set up at facilities subject to
this regulation such devices as are necessary to conduct monitoring and/or
sampling of the facility’s stormwater discharge, as determined by the city.
         C.   The city shall have the right to require the facility owner/
operator to install monitoring equipment as necessary. This sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in safe and proper
operating condition by the facility owner/operator at the owner/operator’s
expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be
calibrated by the city to ensure their accuracy.
         D.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and reasonable
access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed
by the facility’s owner/operator at the written or oral request of the city and
shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the
facility owner/operator.
         E.   Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a facility
subject to this regulation for the purposes of illicit discharge inspection is
a violation of this regulation.
         F.   If the city is refused access to any part of the facility from
which stormwater is discharged, and the city demonstrates probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this regulation, or that there is a
need to inspect and/or sample as part of an inspection and sampling program
designed to verify compliance with this regulation or any order issued
hereunder, or to protect the public health, safety and welfare, the city may
seek issuance of a search warrant, civil remedies including but not limited to
injunctive relief, and/or criminal remedies from any court of appropriate
jurisdiction.
         G.   Any costs associated with these inspections shall be assessed to
the facility owner/operator.
   (i)   Enforcement.
      (1)   Notice of violation. When the city finds that a person has violated
a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this regulation, the city may
order compliance by written notice of violation. Such notice must specify the
violation and shall be hand-delivered, and/or sent by mail, to the owner/
operator of the facility. Such notice may require the following actions:
         A.   The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
         B.   The elimination of illicit discharges, stormwater inflow or
illegal connections;
         C.   That violating discharges, inflow practices or operations cease
and desist;
         D.   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; or
         E.   The implementation of source control or treatment best management
practices (BMPs).
      (2)   Abatement. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of
affected property is required, the notice of violation shall set forth a
deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said
notice shall further advise that, should the facility owner/operator fail to
remediate or restore within the established deadline, a legal action for
enforcement may be initiated.
      (3)   Compliance standards. Any person receiving a notice of violation
must meet compliance standards within the time established in the notice of
violation.
      (4)   Administrative hearing. If the violation has not been corrected
pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, the city
shall schedule an administrative hearing before the Mayor or the Mayor’s
designee to determine reasons for noncompliance and to determine the next
enforcement activity. Notice of the administrative hearing shall be hand
delivered and/or sent by mail. A decision shall be issued within ten days of
such administrative hearing. An appeal to such decision must be filed with City
Council within 14 days of said decision, otherwise said decision will be final.
City Council shall affirm, reverse or modify said decision in its next three
regularly scheduled meetings.
      (5)   Injunctive relief. It shall be unlawful for any owner/operator to
violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this
regulation pursuant to R.C. § 3709.211. If an owner/operator has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this regulation, the city may petition
for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the owner/operator from
activities that would create further violations or compelling the owner/
operator to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
   (j)   Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this regulation are not
exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state
or local law and it is in the discretion of the city to seek cumulative
remedies.
(Ord. 2007-196, passed 10-10-2007; Ord. 2022-67, passed 3-7-2022)
§ 1482.10 DRAINAGE FOR HABITABLE CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   Residences with basements/crawl spaces or slab-type construction shall
be provided with an approved footer, with a minimum of four-inch, schedule 40
round perimeter drain tile at the level of the base of the footing. Drain tile
shall have a minimum of 30 inches of #57 washed gravel over top of drain tile.
   (b)   (1)   All buildings shall be equipped with gutters and downspouts.
Gutters and downspouts shall be tied into a storm sewer. The City Engineer, or
their duly authorized agent, may allow the gutters and downspouts to be piped
into an alternative location or discharged to the ground, provided at least one
of the following criteria is met:
         A.   The discharge point is at least 100 feet from any other
residences;
         B.   The topography of the property at the discharge point is such
that the discharged water would not likely move either to the discharging
residence or towards an adjacent residence during a significant storm event; or
         C.   The discharge point is into an open waterway or is determined in
the sole discretion of the City that such discharge will not likely cause
downstream residence flooding during a significant storm event.
      (2)   Any discharge to the ground must be at least five feet from the
residence. Approval by the City Engineer, or their duly authorized agent, must
be in writing and the resident must sign a “Disconnecting Downspouts from
Sewer” form and submit an appropriate permit fee as established in §
1424.11.
(Ord. 2000-193, passed 7-5-2000; Ord. 2005-152, passed 6-20-2005; Ord. 2006-
247, passed 11-6-2006; Ord. 2008-136, passed 6-2-2008; Ord. 2022-67, passed 3-
7-2022)
§ 1482.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1432.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1485: SMOKE DETECTORS
Section
   
1485.01   Required
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Automatic sprinkler systems, see
Ch. 1442
   False alarms, see §§
648.07,
648.08
   Fire extinguishing and alarm systems in rest and nursing homes, see R.C. §
3721.071
   Firefighting facilities required prior to issuance of building permits, see
§
1424.10
   Ohio Fire Code and BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, see
Ch. 1610
   Smoke detector systems for apartment buildings and condominiums, see R.C. §
3781.04
§ 1485.01 REQUIRED.
   As required by the current city adopted edition of the Residential Code of
Ohio as adopted by the State of Ohio Board of Building Standards.
(Ord. 1993-66, passed 5-3-1993)
CHAPTER 1486: SWIMMING POOLS
Section
   
1486.01   Definitions
   
1486.02   Compliance required
   
1486.03   Conformity to natural grade
   
1486.04   Drainage
   
1486.05   Pool interior surfaces and filtration
   
1486.06   Construction; permit required; fee
   
1486.07   Plans required
   
1486.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Drainage generally, see
Ch. 1482
   Municipal swimming pool, see
Ch. 1068
   Noise control, see
Ch. 634
   Swimming pool permit fees, see §
1424.11
§ 1486.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   ABOVE-GROUND SWIMMING POOL. One located above the surface of the
ground.
   (b)   IN-GROUND SWIMMING POOL. One located in an excavation in the ground.
   (c)   SWIMMING POOL. Any artificial water pool of steel, masonry, concrete,
aluminum or plastic construction located out-of-doors, which has a water
surface area of 300 square feet or more, or a depth at any point of more than
two feet, or both.
(Ord. 1969-204, passed 11-17-1969)
§ 1486.02 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   No permanent or temporary swimming pool which is not enclosed in a permanent
building or like structure shall be constructed or maintained in the city
unless and until the requirements and conditions of this chapter are complied
with.
(Ord. 1969-204, passed 11-17-1969)
§ 1486.03 CONFORMITY TO NATURAL GRADE.
   Every permanent in-ground swimming pool hereafter constructed must
substantially conform to the natural grade of the surrounding land, and no part
thereof, other than a diving board or similar equipment and the fence, shall be
higher than such grade.
(Ord. 1969-204, passed 11-17-1969)
§ 1486.04 DRAINAGE.
   Every pool shall be drained into a municipal storm sewer or other adequate
drain opening, approved by the Chief Building Official. All drain water must be
conducted to its proper discharge point by means of tightly sealed tile, pipe
or hose. Under no circumstances shall any water from the pool or from its use
be permitted to drain toward or onto any adjoining properties.
(Ord. 1969-204, passed 11-17-1969)
§ 1486.05 POOL INTERIOR SURFACES AND FILTRATION.
   (a)   All swimming pools shall have smooth interior surfaces that can be
readily kept clean. When in use, pools shall at all times be kept free of
leaves, debris, wood or any other material which might endanger the safety or
health of the users.
   (b)   All swimming pools having a capacity of 10,000 gallons of water or
more shall be equipped with a filtration unit of sufficient size and capacity,
and also a chlorination unit, to ensure healthful operation and maintenance of
the pool.
(Ord. 1969-204, passed 11-17-1969)
§ 1486.06 CONSTRUCTION; PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.
   No pool regulated by this chapter shall be hereafter constructed or
established unless a permit to do so is first obtained from the Chief Building
Official. A fee of $12.50 shall be charged for the issuance thereof.
(Ord. 1969-204, passed 11-17-1969; Ord. 1988-235, passed 1-3-1989)
§ 1486.07 PLANS REQUIRED.
   Any person, firm or corporation desiring to locate, construct or maintain
any pool regulated by this chapter shall first submit to the Chief Building
Official plans therefor, showing the size, depth and type of construction and a
drawing to scale showing the location of the barrier and gates and the location
of the pool with reference to any house or building situated on the pool lot
and on adjoining lots. If the plans and location of the pool conform to the
requirements of this chapter and all other regulations of the city, the Chief
Building Official shall issue a permit upon the payment of the fee.
(Ord. 1969-204, passed 11-17-1969)
§ 1486.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1432.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1488: UNDEVELOPED LAND SITE PLANS
Section
   
1488.01   Definitions
   
1488.02   Clearing or altering grade of undeveloped land; approval of Chief
Building Official required
   
1488.03   Contents of site plans
   
1488.04   Authority of Chief Building Official and City Engineer
   
1488.05   Appeal to Planning Commission
   
1488.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Building plans generally, see
Ch. 1428
   Chief Building Official, see §§
1420.01,
1420.02,
1420.021
   City Planning Commission, see
Ch. 1202
   Development plans for Industrial, Motorist Service and Office Park
Districts, see Zoning Code
   Review of building plans by Bureau of Fire Prevention, see §
1620.02
§ 1488.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   LARGE TREE. Any tree having a trunk diameter of six inches or more
when measured 24 inches above the ground.
   (b)   UNDEVELOPED LAND. Any lot or parcel which does not have a habitable
building constructed on that lot or parcel.
(Ord. 1990-32, passed 3-19-1990)
§ 1488.02 CLEARING OR ALTERING GRADE OF UNDEVELOPED LAND; APPROVAL OF CHIEF
BUILDING OFFICIAL REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall clear, clear-cut, devegetate, denude or otherwise
destroy trees, bushes and/or other vegetation on undeveloped land without first
receiving approval from the Chief Building Official.
   (b)   No person shall alter the grade of any undeveloped land without first
receiving approval from the City Engineer.
(Ord. 1990-32, passed 3-19-1990)
§ 1488.03 CONTENTS OF SITE PLANS.
   The owner or agent of undeveloped land shall submit to the Chief Building
Official and City Engineer a site plan for such undeveloped land containing the
following:
   (a)   Lot dimensions and a north arrow, existing contours at two-foot
intervals, existing watercourses and the base flood plain (the 100-year flood
hazard area), proposed alteration in grades and land contours, proposed
buildings and structures, including proposed driveways and/or parking lots, and
the location of existing large trees. All large trees scheduled for removal
shall be marked in red; and
   (b)   Every attempt to maintain large trees shall be undertaken.
(Ord. 1990-32, passed 3-19-1990)
§ 1488.04 AUTHORITY OF CHIEF BUILDING OFFICIAL AND CITY ENGINEER.
   The Chief Building Official and/or City Engineer may approve or reject a
site plan or submit the same to the Planning Commission for its review and
recommendations.
(Ord. 1990-32, passed 3-19-1990)
§ 1488.05 APPEAL TO PLANNING COMMISSION.
   The owner may appeal any decision of the Chief Building Official directly to
the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission may amend any decision of the
Chief Building Official.
(Ord. 1990-32, passed 3-19-1990)
§ 1488.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1432.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1489: RESIDENTIAL RENTAL OCCUPANCY PERMIT
Section
   
1489.01   Purpose and scope
   
1489.02   Rental unit occupancy permit required
   
1489.03   Maintenance responsibilities
   
1489.04   Rental property maintenance standards and required facilities
   
1489.05   Rental unit occupancy permit application requirements and fees
   
1489.06   Administration, enforcement and penalties
   
1489.07   Rules for the interpretation of terms and words used within this
chapter
   
1489.08   Definitions
§ 1489.01 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (a)   The purpose of this chapter is to establish general inspection
procedures and minimum maintenance standards necessary to ensure that all
residential rental units are safe, sanitary, free from fire and health hazards,
fit for human habitation and promote the public welfare. In addition, this
chapter establishes minimum standards governing the maintenance of all
residential rental units and premises in such condition as will not constitute
a blighting or deteriorating influence on neighborhoods or the general
community; establishes the particular responsibilities of the owners and
occupants of residential rental units pertaining to sanitation, repairs and
maintenance; establishes general standards for all single-family, two-family
and multi-family dwellings used for residential rental purposes; authorizes the
inspection of all residential rental units, including any single-family, two-
family or multi-family dwellings used for residential rental purposes;
establishes enforcement procedures; and establishes penalties for violating the
provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   The provisions of this chapter shall be considered to be supplemental
to all other provisions of the ordinances of the city relating to construction,
use and maintenance of buildings and premises. However, where any provision of
this chapter is more strict than any provision of the City Zoning Code and/or
the Building and Housing Code, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail
herein.
(Ord. 2011-111, passed 9-7-2011)
§ 1489.02 RENTAL UNIT OCCUPANCY PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   As of January 1, 2012, no owner, agent or person in charge of any
building or unit thereof shall rent or lease any part of said building or unit
thereof for residential occupancy unless said owner, agent or person in charge,
has been issued a current and valid rental unit occupancy permit by the Chief
Building Official for the city, as specified herein.
   (b)   The application for a rental unit occupancy permit for all existing
residential rental units in the city shall occur between January 1 and March
31, 2012. The subsequent renewal of a rental unit occupancy permit shall occur
every three years thereafter, between January 1 and March 31 of that year,
unless said permit is otherwise revoked or voided as provided for under the
relevant provisions of this chapter.
   (c)   The issuance of a residential rental unit occupancy permit for any new
rental unit, or to reactivate any revoked or voided permit, shall be made prior
to the occupancy of the rental unit in question, and said permit shall be
subsequently renewed in accordance with the schedule that is specified above.
(Ord. 2011-111, passed 9-7-2011)
§ 1489.03 MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (a)   The owner(s), agent(s) or person(s) in charge of every residential
rental unit or structure shall be responsible for the maintenance thereof in
good repair and safe condition in compliance with the requirements of this
chapter. The owner shall also be responsible for maintaining in a safe and
sanitary condition the shared or common areas of the premises.
   (b)   The occupant(s) of a residential rental unit or premises shall be
responsible for maintaining in a safe and sanitary condition that part of the
unit and premises which he or she occupies and controls. In addition, such
occupant shall be responsible for maintaining in a safe condition all equipment
and appliances which he or she owns.
(Ord. 2011-111, passed 9-7-2011)
§ 1489.04 RENTAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS AND REQUIRED FACILITIES.
   The following minimum facilities and maintenance standards shall be required
for all single-family, two-family and multi-family residential rental units, as
specified herein.
   (a)   General prohibitions. No building or structure shall be permitted to
exist in a structurally defective, unsafe or unsanitary condition, or without
provision for adequate and safe ingress/egress, or in a condition constituting
a potential fire hazard or other danger to human life or which in relation to
existing uses, immediate or in the vicinity, constitutes a hazard to the
safety, health, property or welfare of the occupant(s) or the public by reason
of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, abandonment, vandalism or
deterioration, or in any manner contrary to relevant zoning or building
ordinances of the city or otherwise constituting a public nuisance. In addition
to any requirements specified within this section of the codified ordinances,
all applicable regulations provided for within Chapter 1289, Prohibited Uses
and Property Conditions, of the city ordinances, shall apply and shall be
subject to enforcement.
   (b)   Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain
all light, ventilation, space, mechanical, electrical, plumbing and fire safety
conditions, equipment, facilities and fixtures in compliance with these
requirements and shall not permit the occupancy of any premises that do not
comply with the requirements of this chapter and provisions of this Rental Unit
Occupancy Code.
   (c)   Interior maintenance requirements for single-family, two-family and
multi-family units.
      (1)   Generally. The interior of any structure and any associated
equipment therein shall be maintained in a safe, structurally sound and
sanitary condition. Occupants shall keep that part of the structure which they
occupy or control in a safe and sanitary condition. Every owner of a structure
containing a residential rental unit shall maintain, in a safe and sanitary
condition, the shared or public areas of the structure.
      (2)   Prohibited unsafe conditions. The following components listed in
divisions (c)(2)A. through (c)(2)M. below, shall be inspected to determine
unsafe conditions and any deficiencies found shall be repaired or replaced so
as to comply with the Residential Code of Ohio or the Ohio Building Code as
required for existing buildings. However, any preexisting construction that was
legally in compliance with all relevant building codes at the time of its
construction shall be grandfathered unless otherwise required by the Building
and Housing Code of the city and/or unless said construction or condition is
determined by the Chief Building Official of the city to constitute an
immediate threat to the health, safety and welfare of the occupants or
neighbors of the residential rental unit in question.
         A.   Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained in
a safe, structurally sound condition and shall be capable of supporting imposed
loads.
         B.   Interior components.
            1.   Interior surfaces. All interior surfaces, including windows
and doors, shall be maintained in a safe, operable and sanitary condition.
Peeling, chipping, flaking or abraded paint shall be repaired, removed or
covered. Cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface
conditions shall be corrected.
            2.   Stairs and walking surfaces. Every stair, ramp, landing,
balcony, porch, deck or other walking surface shall be maintained in a safe
condition.
            3.   Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly
fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in a safe condition.
            4.   Interior doors. Every interior door shall be maintained in a
safe and operable condition as intended by the manufacturer of the attachment
hardware.
            5.   Duct systems. Duct systems shall be maintained free of
obstructions and shall be capable of performing the required function.
            6.   Mechanical appliances. All mechanical appliances, fireplaces,
solid fuel burning appliances, cooking appliances and water heating appliances
shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe working condition, and
shall be capable of performing the intended function.
            7.   Sanitary drainage system maintenance. Every plumbing stack,
vent, waste and sewer line shall function properly and be kept free from
obstructions, leaks and defects.
            8.   Other - dwelling unit identification. Each dwelling unit must
be legibly identified with the relevant address number.
         C.   Rubbish and/or garbage.
            1.   Accumulation of rubbish and/or garbage. All exterior property
and premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free from any
accumulation of rubbish and/or garbage.
            2.   Disposal of rubbish and/or garbage. Every occupant of a
structure containing a residential rental unit shall dispose of all rubbish
and/or garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such rubbish and/or
garbage in approved containers or approved disposal facility.
            3.   Rubbish and/or garbage storage facilities. The owner or
occupant of every occupied premise shall supply an approved leak-proof, covered
outside rubbish and/or garbage containers or storage facility for rubbish and/
or garbage, and the owner or occupant of the premises shall be responsible for
providing for the removal of rubbish and/or garbage. All rubbish and/or garbage
containers shall be in compliance with the requirements of the city’s Automated
Rubbish Removal Program.
         D.   Pest elimination; infestation. Any structure in which insects or
rodents are found shall be properly exterminated by approved processes that
will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions
shall be taken to prevent re-infestation. The owner shall be responsible to
keep all single-family and multi-family occupancies free from insect and rodent
infestation and pest elimination. The owner of any structure shall be
responsible for extermination within the structure prior to renting or leasing
the structure.
         E.   Required kitchen facilities. Every residential rental unit shall
be provided with at least one complete kitchen that includes approved cooking,
refrigeration and sink facilities. No such kitchen facility shall be placed
within any water closet compartment or within any bathroom. Communal kitchen
areas serving more than one residential rental unit are prohibited.
         F.   Clothes dryer exhaust requirements.
            1.   Clothes dryer exhaust systems shall be independent of all
other systems and shall be exhausted outside the structure in accordance with
the manufacturer’s instructions and shall be maintained free of obstructions.
            2.   Exception: listed and labeled condensing (ductless) clothes
dryers.
         G.   Occupancy requirements.
            1.   Privacy requirements. Residential rental units shall be
arranged to provide privacy and be separate from other adjoining spaces.
            2.   Minimum room widths. A habitable room, other than a kitchen,
shall not be less than seven feet in any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a
clear passageway of not less than three feet between countertops and appliances
or countertops and walls.
            3.   Bedroom and living room requirements. Every bedroom and living
room shall comply with the following requirements:
               a.   Room area. Every living room shall contain at least 120
square feet and every bedroom shall contain not less than 70 square feet of
habitable floor area if used for one occupant, and not less than 30 square feet
of habitable floor area per occupant if used by more than one occupant.
               b.   Access from bedrooms.
                  i.   Bedrooms shall not constitute the only means of access
to other bedrooms or habitable spaces and shall not serve as the only means of
egress from other habitable spaces.
                  ii.   Exception: units that contain fewer than two bedrooms.
               c.   Water closet accessibility. Every bedroom shall have access
to at least one water closet and one lavatory without passing through another
bedroom. Every bedroom in a dwelling unit shall have access to at least one
water closet and lavatory located on the same story as the bedroom or an
adjacent story.
               d.   Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens and non-habitable spaces
shall not be used for sleeping purposes.
               e.   Other requirements. Bedrooms shall comply with the
applicable provisions of this Code including, but not limited to, room area,
and room width requirements of this section; the plumbing facilities and water-
heating facilities requirements of division (c)(2)H. through (c)(2)J. hereof;
the heating facilities and electrical receptacle requirements of division(c)
(2)K. hereof; and the smoke detector and emergency escape requirements of
division (c)(2)M. hereof.
            4.   Food preparation. All spaces to be occupied for food
preparation purposes shall contain suitable space and equipment to store,
prepare and serve foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate
facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse,
including facilities for temporary storage.
         H.   Plumbing facilities and fixture requirements. The provisions of
this section shall govern the minimum plumbing systems, facilities and plumbing
fixtures to be provided.
            1.   Required facilities.
               a.   Dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall contain its own
bathtub or shower, lavatory, water closet and kitchen sink which shall be
maintained in a sanitary, safe working condition. The lavatory shall be placed
in the same room as the water closet or located in close proximity to the door
leading directly into the room in which such water closet is located.
               b.   Toilet rooms. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide
privacy and shall not constitute the only passageway to a hall or other space,
or to the exterior. A door and interior locking device shall be provided for
all toilet rooms and bathrooms. Every toilet room floor shall be maintained to
be a smooth, hard, nonabsorbent surface to permit such floor to be easily kept
in a safe and sanitary condition.
            2.   Plumbing systems and fixtures.
               a.   Generally. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly
installed and maintained in working order, and shall be kept free from
obstructions, leaks and defects and be capable of performing the function for
which such plumbing fixtures are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be
maintained in a safe, sanitary and functional condition.
               b.   Fixture clearances. Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate
clearances for usage and cleaning.
         I.   Water system. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking
fountain, water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to
either a public water system or to an approved private water system. All
kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be
supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the
Ohio Plumbing Code.
            1.   Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free from
contamination, and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located
above the flood-level rim of the fixture. The supply lines and fittings for
every plumbing fixture shall be installed so as to prevent backflow. Plumbing
fixture fittings shall provide backflow protection in accordance with ASME
A112.18.1.
            2.   Supply. The water supply system shall be installed and
maintained to provide a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and
appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable the
fixtures to function properly, safely and free from defects and leaks.
            3.   Water heating facilities.
               a.   Water heating facilities shall be properly installed,
maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at
every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility at a
temperature of not less than 110°F.
               b.   A gas-burning water heater shall not be located in any
bathroom, toilet room, bedroom or other occupied room normally kept closed,
unless adequate combustion air is provided. An approved combination temperature
and pressure-relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly
installed and maintained on water heaters.
         J.   Sanitary drainage system. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly
connected to either a public sewer system or to an approved private sewage
disposal system.
         K.   Mechanical and electrical requirements. The provisions of this
section shall govern the minimum mechanical and electrical facilities and
equipment to be provided.
            1.   Heating facilities required. Heating facilities shall be
provided in structures as required by this section.
            2.   Residential occupancies. Every dwelling unit shall be provided
with approved heating facilities capable of maintaining an average temperature
of 68°F in all habitable rooms, kitchens, bathrooms and water closet
compartments without forcing the facilities to operate in excess of their
design capacity. The inside temperature shall be measured in the approximate
center of each room, approximately three feet above the floor. Cooking
appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to meet the requirements
of this section.
            3.   Mechanical equipment.
               a.   Removal of combustion products.
                  i.   All fuel-burning equipment and appliances shall be
connected to an approved chimney or vent.
                  ii.   Exception: fuel-burning equipment and appliances which
are labeled for un-vented operation.
               b.   Clearances. All required clearances to combustible
materials shall be maintained.
               c.   Safety controls. All safety controls for fuel-burning
equipment shall be maintained in a safe and effective operating condition.
               d.   Combustion air. A supply of air for complete combustion of
the fuel and for ventilation of the space containing the fuel-burning equipment
shall be provided for the fuel-burning equipment.
               e.   Energy conservation devices. Devices intended to reduce
fuel consumption by attachment to a fuel-burning appliance, to the fuel supply
line thereto, or to the vent outlet or vent piping therefrom, shall not be
installed unless labeled for such purpose and the installation is specifically
approved as per the manufacturer’s installation instructions.
            4.   Electrical facilities required. Every residential rental unit
dwelling structure and secondary or appurtenant structure shall be provided
with approved electrical service, outlets and fixtures, which shall be
installed and maintained so as to be free of any potential source of ignition
of combustible material or any potential source of electrical hazard. Such
facilities shall be approved as being adequate to supply the requirements of
lighting, appliances and equipment of the structure concerned.
               a.   Electrical service. The size and usage of appliances and
equipment shall serve as a basis for determining the need for additional
facilities in accordance with NFPA 70. Each residential rental unit dwelling
shall be served by a three-wire, 120/240 volt, single-phase electrical service
having a rating of not less than 100 amperes.
               b.   Electrical system hazards. Where it is found that the
electrical system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the
structure by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient
receptacle and lighting outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration
or damage, or for similar reasons, the Code Official shall require the defects
to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.
               c.   Abatement of electrical hazards associated with fire and/or
water exposure.
                  i.   Scope of provisions. The provisions of this section
shall govern the repair and replacement of electrical systems and equipment.
                  ii.   Exposure to fire and/or water. Electrical switches,
receptacles and fixtures, including furnace, water heating, security system and
power distribution circuits, electrical distribution equipment, motor circuits,
power equipment, transformers, wire, cable, flexible cords, wiring devices,
ground fault circuit interrupters, surge protectors, molded case circuit
breakers, low voltage fuses, luminaries, ballasts, motors and electronic
control, signaling and communication equipment that have been exposed to fire
and/or water shall be replaced in accordance with the provision of the
Residential Code of Ohio or Ohio Building Code.
                  iii.   Exception. Electrical switches, receptacles and
fixtures that shall be allowed to be repaired where an inspection report from
the equipment manufacturer or approved manufacturer’s representative indicates
that the equipment has not sustained damage that requires replacement.
                  iv.   Receptacles. Every habitable space in a residential
rental unit dwelling shall contain at least two separate and remote receptacle
outlets. Every laundry area shall contain at least one grounded-type receptacle
or a receptacle with a ground fault circuit interrupter. Every bathroom shall
contain at least one receptacle outlet that provides ground fault circuit
interrupter protection. Every receptacle outlet located within six feet of a
source of water shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection.
         L.   Elevator and dumbwaiter requirements. All elevators and
dumbwaiters that provide service within residential rental unit structures
shall be maintained in compliance with the American Society of Mechanical
Engineers ASME: A17.1. The most current certificate of inspection shall be on
display at all times within the elevator or attached to the escalator or
dumbwaiter, or be available for public inspection in the office of the building
operator or be posted in a publicly conspicuous location approved by the code
official.
         M.   Fire safety. The provisions of this section shall govern the
minimum conditions and standards for fire safety relating to residential rental
dwelling structures and exterior premises, including fire safety facilities and
equipment to be provided.
            1.   Means of egress. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of
travel shall be provided from any point in a building or structure to the
public way. Means of egress shall comply with the Residential Code of Ohio or
the Ohio Fire Code, and where such multiple dwelling contains more than two
dwelling units above the first story, the Code Official may require such
additional means of egress as are, in his or her opinion, needed for the safety
of the occupants of the structure.
            2.   Aisles. The required width of aisles in accordance with the
Residential Code of Ohio or the Ohio Fire Code shall be unobstructed.
            3.   Locked doors. All means of egress doors shall be readily
openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for
keys, special knowledge or effort.
            4.   Emergency escape openings. Required emergency escape openings
shall be maintained in accordance with the code in effect at the time of
construction. Required emergency escape and rescue openings shall be
operational from the inside of the room without the use of keys or tools. Bars,
grilles, grates or similar devices are not permitted to be placed over
emergency escape and rescue openings.
            5.   Fire resistance ratings.
               a.   Fire-resistance-rated assemblies. The required fire-
resistance rating of the fire-resistance-rated walls, fire stops, shaft
enclosures, partitions and floors shall be maintained.
               b.   Opening protectives. Required opening protectives shall be
maintained in an operative condition. All fire and smokestop doors shall be
maintained in operable condition. Fire doors and smoke barrier doors shall not
be blocked or obstructed or otherwise made inoperable.
            6.   Fire protection systems.
               a.   Maintenance. All systems, devices and equipment to detect a
fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any combination
thereof shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times in accordance
with the Ohio Building Code, the Residential Code of Ohio and the Ohio Fire
Code.
               b.   Smoke alarms. Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms
shall be installed and maintained in Groups R-2 and R-3 occupancies regulated
by the Ohio Building Code and in dwelling structures regulated by the
Residential Code of Ohio regardless of occupant load at all of the following
locations:
                  i.   On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping
area in the immediate vicinity of bedrooms;
                  ii.   In each room used for sleeping purposes;
                  iii.   (A)   In each story within a residential rental
dwelling unit, including basements and cellars but not including crawl spaces
and uninhabitable attics. In residential rental dwellings or residential rental
dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door between the
adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for
the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full
story below the upper level.
                     (B)   Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be
installed in other groups in accordance with the Ohio Fire Code.
                  iv.   Power source.
                     (A)   In Groups R-2 and R-3 occupancies regulated by the
Ohio Building Code and in dwelling structures regulated by the Residential Code
of Ohio, single-station smoke alarms shall receive their primary power from the
building wiring provided that such wiring is served from a commercial source
and shall be equipped with a battery backup. Smoke alarms shall emit a signal
when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be permanent and without a
disconnecting switch other than as required for overcurrent protection.
                     (B)   Exception: smoke alarms are permitted to be solely
battery operated in buildings where no construction is taking place, buildings
that are not served from a commercial power source and in existing areas of
buildings undergoing alterations or repairs that do not result in the removal
of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an
attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for
building wiring without the removal of interior finishes.
                  v.   Interconnection.
                     (A)   Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be
installed per division (c)(2)M.6.a. hereof, the smoke alarms shall be
interconnected in such a manner that the activation of one alarm will activate
all of the alarms in the individual unit. The alarm shall be clearly audible in
all bedrooms over background noise levels with all intervening doors closed.
                     (B)   Exceptions.
                        (I)   Interconnecting is not required in buildings
which are not undergoing alterations, repairs or construction of any kind.
                        (II)   Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required
to be interconnected where alterations or repairs do not result in the removal
of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an
attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide for
interconnection without the removal of interior finishes.
(Ord. 2011-111, passed 9-7-2011)
§ 1489.05 RENTAL UNIT OCCUPANCY PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS AND FEES.
   (a)   Application form. Application for a rental unit occupancy permit shall
be made on forms supplied by the Chief Building Official for the city. Said
application shall be made for any existing rental unit in accordance with the
effective date of this chapter (see §
1489.02); and for any subsequently proposed rental unit(s) prior to the
occupancy or use of said unit(s); and for any change in the ownership or
occupancy of a rental unit in accordance with the provisions of this section. A
rental unit occupancy permit shall expire in accordance with the provisions of
§
1489.02, and no rental unit shall be utilized thereafter without re-application
for and approval of a rental unit occupancy permit in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. The information on said application shall include,
but not be limited to:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the owner(s) of the
property and any agent acting on behalf of the property owner;
      (2)   The street address, telephone number and name(s) of all persons
residing within the rental unit in question; and
      (3)   The date on which the property became, or would become, a rental
property.
   (b)   Application fees. The following fees shall be remitted to the city
along with the submittal of a completed application form.
 
Single-family dwelling $100
Two-family dwelling    $75 per rental unit
Multi-family dwelling  $160 for the first three dwelling units and $30 for
                       every dwelling unit over the first three
 
   (c)   Inspection required.
      (1)   An inspection of each rental unit shall be required in order to
establish compliance with the minimum maintenance and safety standards that are
specified herein. Said inspection shall be conducted in association with the
issuance of each new rental unit occupancy permit, unless exempted by the
provisions of this Code.
      (2)   At the city’s discretion, and for the convenience of both the
property owner and renter, inspections will be scheduled at change of occupancy
when feasible. However, at least one inspection in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter shall occur within three years of the date of the
receipt of the rental occupancy permit application, regardless of whether a
change in occupancy occurs during that period or not.
      (3)   All inspections shall be conducted by the city, unless an agreement
is otherwise approved by the City Council authorizing a private inspection
program for a specific premises. Any such private inspection agreement/program
shall require, at a minimum, the following.
         A.   State certified inspectors required. Inspections shall be
performed exclusively by persons holding current and valid State of Ohio
Building, Plumbing and Electrical Inspector certifications, and only persons
certified in the inspection of a particular system, shall be authorized to
inspect that system.
         B.   City forms and inspection timelines required. The results of all
inspections shall be clearly documented on city supplied and/or approved
inspection forms, and such inspections shall be in compliance with the
timelines and criteria specified within this chapter. Any violation of this
chapter that is disclosed in the course of the inspection of the premises in
question shall be brought into compliance in accordance with the timelines
established under the provisions of this chapter. Any unresolved violations
shall be reported to the Chief Building Official of the city so that
enforcement proceedings can be commenced.
         C.   Provision of completed inspection forms to the city. Copies of
all completed rental unit inspection forms, including any forms required by
this Code relating to changes in occupancy or ownership, shall be provided to
the City Building Department in a timely manner.
         D.   Provision for city verification of compliance. The city shall
have the authority and discretion to verify compliance with the terms of the
private inspection agreement through the conduction of onsite inspections and/
or through any other relevant means. City Council shall have the authority and
discretion to terminate any private agreement upon determination that the
provisions of either the chapter or the inspection agreement have been
violated.
         E.   Fee schedule for private inspection programs. A fee of $15 for
each individual rental unit that is included within any Council approved
private inspection program shall be provided to the city at the commencement of
each recurring two-year inspection cycle in order to cover the city’s
administrative costs associated with the private inspection program.
   (d)   Reinspection fee. The initial inspection and up to two re-inspections
are included in the application fee. However, if more than two re-inspections
are required in the enforcement of these regulations, each subsequent
inspection shall require a re-inspection fee of $40. Failure to pay any re-
inspection fee within 30 days of the date of the assessment of the fee, will
result in the imposition of an additional late charge of $10 per day per rental
unit for each day that elapses after the 30-day period. Failure to pay any re-
inspection fee and/or any late charge fees within 60 days of the date of the
assessment of the fee may result in the revocation of the rental unit occupancy
permit in question.
   (e)   Change in ownership. In the event that there is a change in the
ownership of record, the rental unit occupancy permit issued under the
provisions of this chapter to the former owner shall become null and void. A
new rental unit occupancy permit shall be applied for not more than 30 days
after such change in ownership has occurred. Such new rental unit occupancy
permit shall expire on the same date as the permit which it replaced, and no
fee shall be charged for said change nor shall an inspection of the premises be
required.
   (f)   Change in occupancy. In the event that there is a change in the nature
or extent of the occupancy of a rental unit from that indicated in the rental
unit occupancy permit, said rental unit occupancy permit shall become null and
void. No change in the nature or extent of occupancy shall be permitted unless
a new rental unit occupancy permit has been issued for said change in occupancy
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The new rental unit
occupancy permit shall expire on the same date as the permit it replaced and no
fee shall be charged. If no change in the nature or extent of the occupancy of
any rental unit is otherwise proposed, then no inspection shall be required.
However, if additional city inspections are required due to the proposed change
in the nature or extent of the occupancy of any rental unit then a new annual
permit shall be issued and the required fees shall be remitted in accordance
with divisions (b) and (c) above.
   (g)   Posting of permit. The owner, agent or person in charge of a building
or rental unit shall retain and furnish upon request a copy of the rental unit
occupancy permit to the tenant or lessee of the rental unit.
(Ord. 2011-111, passed 9-7-2011)
§ 1489.06 ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
   (a)   Inspections; authority of the Code Official. The Code Official is
hereby authorized to make or cause to be made inspections of all structures and
premises used for residential purposes, and of all secondary or accessory
structures, in accordance with the provisions of this Code.
   (b)   Right of entry. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Code
Official may enter, with the permission of the occupant, or at such times as
may be necessary in an emergency, any dwelling, building, structure or premises
in the city to perform any duty imposed on such official by this Code. If,
however, the occupant refuses permission to enter, no entry shall be made
without first obtaining a warrant.
   (c)   Inspection reports and procedures.
      (1)   Upon completion of an inspection, an inspection report will be
issued to the owner/agent and occupant of the rental property within three
weeks. Any violations enumerated in the inspection report shall be abated
within 30 days from the date of the inspection report, unless an extension is
otherwise approved by the Chief Building Official. The Chief Building Official
shall also be authorized to require immediate correction of a violation if it
is determined that an immanent threat to the health, safety or welfare of the
occupants and/or neighbors exists. A re-inspection shall be required to verify
that the violations have been corrected. It shall be the responsibility of the
property owner to contact the Chief Building Official to schedule the required
inspection.
      (2)   Failure to correct any violations within 30 days of the date of the
inspection report shall constitute a violation of this chapter. Upon request,
the Chief Building Official shall have the discretion to grant additional time
to correct the violations.
   (d)   Revocation of a permit. The Chief Building Official shall have the
authority to revoke any rental unit occupancy permit if it is determined that
any false information has been provided in connection with the issuance of such
permit, or if the building or rental unit thereof is found to be in
noncompliance with the requirements of this chapter, or if the owner, agent or
person in charge of a building or rental unit thereof refuses to comply with
any provision of this chapter.
   (e)   Emergency cases; order to vacate premises.
      (1)   Whenever the Chief Building Official, operating in the capacity of
the Code Official, determines that the condition of a structure or premises, or
any part thereof, constitutes an immediate hazard to human life or health, the
Chief Building Official shall declare that a case of emergency exists and shall
order immediate vacation of the structure or premises, or any part thereof.
      (2)   Whenever the Chief Building Official orders a structure or
premises, or any part thereof, to be vacated, said official shall cause to be
posted at every entrance to such structure or premises, or any part thereof, a
placard warning of the existence of such vacation order. No person shall remove
or deface such placard until the required repairs or demolition are completed,
and written authorization from the Chief Building Official shall be required to
remove such placard. No person shall enter or use any structure or premises or
part thereof that has been posted as prescribed herein, except for the purpose
of making the required repairs or demolition.
   (f)   Penalties and legal actions.
      (1)   Misdemeanor offense.
         A.   The owner, agent, person in charge or occupant of any residential
rental unit that is in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. Each separate violation shall
constitute a separate offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed to be
committed for each day during which the violation or noncompliance occurs or
continues.
         B.   Should any specific offense for which the owner, agent, person in
charge or occupant has been found guilty in any court of law be repeated within
a two-year period of the date of the conviction for such offense, such owner,
agent, person in charge or occupant shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree. Each separate violation shall constitute a separate offense, and
a separate offense shall be deemed to be committed for each day during which
the condition or noncompliance occurs or continues.
      (2)   Mandamus, injunction and abatements.
         A.   In addition to any other remedies provided under this chapter,
the Director of Law or Prosecutor/Director of Law may, upon violation of this
chapter having been brought to his or her attention, institute injunction,
mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate action.
         B.   The city shall reserve the right to enforce the provisions of
this chapter, separately or in any combination, against any owner, agent,
person in charge or occupant of any residential rental unit.
   (g)   Right of appeal. The owner, agent, person in charge or occupant of any
structure or premises shall have the right to appeal any order or written
notice issued by the Code Enforcement Official in accordance with §
1404.06 of the Building and Housing Code.
   (h)   Referral to city schools. The city shall refer all information
relating to the specific location, ownership and occupancy of each rental unit
within the city, including any modifications in such ownership and/or occupancy
that may subsequently occur, to the Superintendent of the City of Solon
Schools.
(Ord. 2011-111, passed 9-7-2011)
§ 1489.07 RULES FOR THE INTERPRETATION OF TERMS AND WORDS USED WITHIN THIS
CHAPTER.
   (a)   Interchangeability. Words stated in the present tense include the
future; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter;
the singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
   (b)   Terms defined within other Codes. Where terms are not specifically
defined within this Code but are defined in the Residential Code of Ohio, the
Ohio Building Code, the Ohio Fire Code or in City Zoning Ordinance, such terms
shall have meanings ascribed to them as stated within those codes.
   (c)   Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods
authorized within this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted
meanings such as the context implies.
   (d)   Parts. Whenever the words DWELLING UNIT, RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT,
PREMISES, BUILDING or STORY are stated in this Code, they shall be construed as
though they were followed by the words OR ANY PART THEREOF.
(Ord. 2011-111, passed 9-7-2011)
§ 1489.08 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   AGENT. Any individual, person, firm, partnership, corporation or
company acting on behalf of the property owner of a residential rental unit.
The term PERSON IN CHARGE shall be considered to be synonymous with the term
AGENT.
   (b)   APPROVED. Approval by the Code Official, pursuant to this Code, or
approved by any other person or board designated by the ordinances of the city
to give approval regarding the matter in question.
   (c)   BATHROOM. A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or
shower.
   (d)   BUILDING. A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for
shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels. When separated
by division walls from the ground up without openings, each portion of such
structure shall be deemed a separate building.
   (e)   CITY. The City of Solon, Ohio.
   (f)   CODE OFFICIAL. The official who is charged with the administration and
enforcement of this Code, or any duly authorized representative.
   (g)   DWELLING. A building, or portion thereof occupied by one family for
residential purposes as a single-family unit. In no case shall a tent, cabin,
recreational vehicle or other temporary or transient structure or facility be
considered a DWELLING.
   (h)   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY. A structure containing three or more dwelling
units, each having direct access to the outside, and/or independent access to a
common corridor providing access to the outside.
   (i)   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A building occupied or constructed to be
occupied exclusively for residential purposes by one family.
   (j)   DWELLING STRUCTURE. A building or structure, or a part thereof, that
is used or designed or intended to be used for residential purposes. DWELLING
STRUCTURE is synonymous with the term RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT STRUCTURE.
   (k)   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A structure containing two dwelling units, each
having direct access to the outside.
   (l)   DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one family including permanent provisions for living, sleeping,
eating, cooking and sanitation.
   (m)   EFFECTIVE DATE. The date at which time this chapter was initially
adopted, and any dates of amendments thereto, as adopted by City Council.
   (n)   EQUIPMENT SUPPORT. Those structural members or assemblies of members
or manufactured elements, including braces, frames, lugs, snuggers, hangers or
saddles, that transmit gravity load, lateral load and operating load between
the equipment and the structure.
   (o)   FAMILY. One or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or
not more than four persons not related by blood, marriage or adoption,
occupying a dwelling unit as a single-family unit.
   (p)   GARBAGE. The animal or vegetable waste resulting from handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
   (q)   HABITABLE ROOM. A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be
used for living, sleeping or eating purposes; excluding bathrooms, toilet
rooms, laundries, pantries, dressing rooms, storage spaces, foyers, hallways,
utility rooms, heater rooms, boiler rooms, basement recreation rooms and areas
used for kitchen purposes, the Code Official shall determine the portion of the
floor area used for kitchen purposes and such portion, so determined, shall not
constitute habitable floor area in determining the habitable floor area of a
dwelling unit. The term HABITABLE ROOM shall be synonymous with the words
HABITABLE SPACE.
   (r)   INFESTATION. The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or
premises of insects, rats, vermin or other pests.
   (s)   OPENABLE AREA. That part of a window, skylight or door which is
available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the
outdoors.
   (t)   OCCUPANT. Any person who holds a written or oral lease of, or who
actually occupies the whole or part of such building or land, either alone or
with others, on a permanent basis. A person visiting the primary registered
occupant(s) of a rental unit on a short term basis, and who otherwise holds
effective, legal and permanent occupancy elsewhere shall not be considered to
constitute an occupant of the property. However, any such person(s) that
utilize the address of the rental unit in question in order to access city or
community services that are otherwise reserved exclusively to the residents of
the city shall be considered to be, and must qualify as, an occupant of the
premises.
   (u)   OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or
premises which is offered for occupancy.
   (v)   OWNER. Any person, legal entity or otherwise who holds fee simple
title to the property. The person, legal entity or otherwise who is shown on
the records of the Cuyahoga County Recorder to be the owner of the particular
property shall be presumed to be the owner in control of that property;
including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or
administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of
real property by a court.
   (w)   PEST ELIMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents or
other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making
inaccessible materials that serves as their food or water; by other approved
pest elimination methods.
   (x)   PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way,
including any structures thereon.
   (y)   PUBLIC WAY. Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially
unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or
otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.
   (z)   RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT. A dwelling unit that is occupied by persons
who are not the owners of that unit, or any currently unoccupied space that is
designed or intended to be occupied by persons who are not the owners of the
unit. If the unit is owned by a corporation or partnership and the occupier is
less than 50% owner of the unit this Code shall apply.
   (aa)   RUBBISH. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal,
coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials.
   (bb)   USE. Any purpose for which a lot, building or other structure or a
tract of land may be designated, arranged, intended, maintained or occupied; or
any activity, occupation, business or operation carried on or intended to be
carried on in a building, or other structure or on a tract of land.
   (cc)   TOILET ROOM. A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a
bathtub or shower.
   (dd)   WORKMANLIKE. Executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb,
level, square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work.
(Ord. 2011-111, passed 9-7-2011)
TITLE EIGHT - HOUSING
            Chap.
1496. Trailers
CHAPTER 1496: TRAILERS
Section
   
1496.01   Habitation; parking on private property near toilet facilities
required
   
1496.02   Limitation on number of trailers on parcels
   
1496.03   Limitation on period of habitation
   
1496.04   Placement or occupation; permit required; fee
   
1496.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Commercial and heavy vehicles, see
Ch. 440,
Ch. 442
   Prohibited uses and property conditions, see Zoning Code
   Manufactured homes in flood hazard areas, see §
1462.04(d)
   Occupying manufactured homes while in motion, see §
440.08
§ 1496.01 HABITATION; PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY NEAR TOILET FACILITIES
REQUIRED.
   No person shall occupy any house trailer within this city as a place of
habitation, nor, being the owner or in control of a house trailer, permit it to
be so occupied, unless such trailer is parked upon privately owned real estate
within 100 feet of a dwelling containing a lavatory, bathtub and toilet, all
supplied with running water, to which each occupant of the trailer shall have
free and unrestricted access.
(Ord. 1944-37, passed 12-29-1944)
§ 1496.02 LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF TRAILERS ON PARCELS.
   No person, being the owner or in control of any parcel of land within this
city, shall permit more than one house trailer at a time to be used as a place
of habitation thereon.
(Ord. 1944-37, passed 12-29-1944)
§ 1496.03 LIMITATION ON PERIOD OF HABITATION.
   No person shall occupy any house trailer within this city as a place of
habitation for more than 42 days, whether consecutive or not, in any calendar
year, nor being the owner or in control of a house trailer, permit it to be so
occupied in violation of this section, except that this period can be extended
for a period of two weeks, and for additional periods of two weeks thereafter,
upon application to the Chief Building Official and for good cause shown.
(Ord. 1976-202, passed 12-20-1976)
§ 1496.04 PLACEMENT OR OCCUPATION; PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.
   No house trailer shall be placed or occupied within this city unless a
permit to do so is first obtained from the Chief Building Official. The
application for such permit shall be accompanied by a fee of $25 and shall
state specifically the nature of the emergency which necessitates the placement
or occupancy of the trailer. Every application for a two-week extension in the
habitation period as set forth in this chapter shall be accompanied by an
additional $10 fee.
(Ord. 1976-202, passed 12-20-1976)
§ 1496.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1432.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
PART SIXTEEN - FIRE PREVENTION CODE
            Chap.
1610.   Ohio Fire Code and BOCA National Fire Prevention Code
            Chap.
1620.   Bureau of Fire Prevention
            Chap.
1630.   Blasting and Explosives
            Chap.
1640.   Environmental Disasters
            Chap.
1650.   Fire Hydrants
            Chap.
1660.   Miscellaneous Regulations
CHAPTER 1610: OHIO FIRE CODE AND BOCA NATIONAL FIRE PREVENTION CODE
Section
   
1610.01   Short title
   
1610.02   Adoption by reference
   
1610.03   Purpose
   
1610.04   Application
   
1610.05   Conflict of laws
   
1610.06   Enforcement
   
1610.07   Definitions
   
1610.08   Inspections
   
1610.09   Permit fees
   
1610.10   Modifications
   
1610.11   Appeals
   
1610.12   New materials, processes or occupancies
   
1610.13   Separability
   
1610.99   General Code penalty; equitable remedies
   CROSS REFERENCES
   False alarms, see §§
648.07,
648.08
   Fire extinguishing and alarm systems in rest and nursing homes, see R.C. §
3721.071
   Fireworks, see §
672.10
   Inspection of public buildings for fire safety, see R.C. § 3737.14
   Ohio Fire Code, see R.C. §§ 3737.82 et seq.
   Self-service filling stations, see R.C. § 3741.14
   Smoke detectors, see §
1485.01
§ 1610.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This Part Sixteen of these Codified Ordinances shall be known and may be
cited as the “Fire Prevention Code of the City of Solon.” References throughout
this Part Sixteen to “this Fire Prevention Code” shall be deemed to mean Part
Sixteen of these Codified Ordinances, including the standards adopted by
reference in §
1610.02.
(Ord. 1988-192, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 1610.02 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   (a)   Pursuant to R.C. § 731.231, there is hereby adopted by the city the
2011 edition of the Ohio Fire Code (OFC), as adopted by the Ohio Department of
Commerce, Division of State Fire Marshal, and as published in Division 1301:
7 of the Ohio Administrative Code (O.A.C.) as may be modified and/or amended
thereafter.
(Ord. 1998-233, passed 12-7-1998)
   (b)   A complete copy of such Codes shall be kept on file in the office of
the Clerk of Council, the office of the Fire Chief and the County Law Library.
The Clerk of Council shall provide copies of applicable sections for
distribution to the public at cost.
(Ord. 1998-233, passed 12-7-1998)
§ 1610.03 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Fire Prevention Code is to prescribe minimum standards
and regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire
or explosion.
(Ord. 1988-192, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 1610.04 APPLICATION.
   This Fire Prevention Code applies to the use of all lands and properties
within the city and such other lands or properties owned by the city which are
situated outside the corporate limits thereof.
(Ord. 1988-192, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 1610.05 CONFLICT OF LAWS.
   (a)   The Ohio Building Code shall supersede and govern any order, standard,
rule or regulation of the Ohio Fire Code or the Division of State Fire Marshal,
Department of Commerce, in all cases where such orders, standards, rules or
regulations are in conflict with the Ohio Building Code, except that rules
adopted and orders issued by the Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3743
prevail in the event of a conflict.
(R.C. § 3781.11(B))
   (b)   In all other cases of conflict between the Ohio Fire Code and any
other city ordinance or technical code adopted thereby, the more restrictive
provision shall govern.
(Ord. 1988-192, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 1610.06 ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   This Fire Prevention Code shall be enforced by the Director of Public
Safety, who may further delegate enforcement hereunder to the Fire Chief. If so
delegated, the Fire Chief shall be the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention
for the purposes of this Code. See
Chapter 238 of these Codified Ordinances.
   (b)   The Fire Chief may detail such members of the Fire Department to the
Fire Prevention Bureau as shall from time to time be necessary. In the event
that an inspection requires technical knowledge which is not possessed by
anyone currently in the employment of the city, the Director of Public Safety
is authorized to employ the temporary professional services of a qualified
person.
   (c)   The Fire Safety Inspector, as defined in §
1610.07(c), upon examination or inspection, shall issue citations when he or
she finds conditions as specified in R.C. § 3737.41 which are especially
dangerous to the safety of persons, buildings, premises or property, and shall
make any necessary remedial orders in connection therewith. Citation
enforcement may be by use of the procedures established by R.C. § 3737.42 for
hearing on the citation or R.C. § 3737.44 for injunctive relief or a temporary
restraining order and oral order for vacation of the building or premises.
   (d)   The Fire Safety Inspector, upon reasonable belief and after inspection
or investigation, shall, with reasonable promptness, issue a citation to the
responsible person for violation of this Fire Prevention Code or any order
issued by the Ohio Fire Marshal. The citation shall fix a reasonable time for
abatement of the violation, and a copy may be furnished to the Ohio Fire
Marshal. Each citation issued under this division (d) shall be prominently
posted by the responsible person, as prescribed by the Ohio Fire Code, at or
near each place a violation referred to in the citation occurs.
   (e)   Upon request of the Fire Safety Inspector, the Director of Law of the
city shall institute and prosecute any necessary action or proceeding to
enforce this Fire Prevention Code or R.C. Chapter 3737.
(Ord. 1988-192, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 1610.07 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Fire Prevention Code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
   (a)   APPROVED. As applied to materials, types of construction, appliances,
procedures, transportation or occupancy, means approved by the Bureau of Fire
Prevention as a result of investigations and tests conducted by it, or by
reason of accepted principles or tests made by the National Fire Protection
Association; Building Officials and Code Administrators International,
Incorporated; Underwriters’ Laboratories, Incorporated; the Factory Mutual
System; the National Fire Codes; or the American National Standards Institute.
   (b)   FIRE PREVENTION CODE.  
Chapters 1610,
1620,
1630,
1640,
1650 and
1660 of these Codified Ordinances, including the Ohio Fire Code, as adopted in
§
1610.02.
   (c)   FIRE SAFETY INSPECTOR. A person certified under R.C. § 3737.34.
(Ord. 1989-77, passed 4-17-1989)
§ 1610.08 INSPECTIONS.
   No person who is not a certified Fire Safety Inspector shall act as such or
hold himself or herself out to be such unless, prior to commencing any
inspection function, he or she discloses the purpose for which he or she is
making such inspection and the fact that he or she is not employed by any state
or local fire service or agency, and that he or she is not acting in an
official capacity for any governmental subdivision or agency.
(R.C. § 3737.64) (Ord. 1988-192, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 1610.09 PERMIT FEES.
   For each permit issued in compliance with this Fire Prevention Code, a $10
fee shall be charged to and collected from the applicant.
(Ord. 1989-72, passed 4-17-1989)
§ 1610.10 MODIFICATIONS.
   The Fire Chief shall have the power to modify any provision of this Fire
Prevention Code, upon application in writing by an owner or lessee, or his or
her duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of the Code, provided that the spirit of the
Code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The
particulars of such modification, when granted or allowed, and the decision of
the Fire Chief thereon, shall be entered upon the records of the Fire
Department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant.
(Ord. 1988-192, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 1610.11 APPEALS.
   Whenever the Fire Chief shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a
permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of this Fire
Prevention Code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the Code
have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from
the decision of the Fire Chief to the Director of Public Safety within 30 days
from the date of the decision appealed. If the Director shall refuse to
overrule the Fire Chief, the applicant may appeal to Council within 60 days
from the date of the decision appealed.
(Ord. 1988-192, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 1610.12 NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES OR OCCUPANCIES.
   The Chief Building Official, the Fire Chief and the Director of Public
Safety shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving notice
of public hearing with an opportunity for all affected persons to be heard, any
new materials, processes or occupancies which shall require permits in addition
to those now enumerated in this Fire Prevention Code.
(Ord. 1988-192, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 1610.13 SEPARABILITY.
   All sections, divisions, parts and provisions of this chapter and the Ohio
Fire Code, as adopted herein, are hereby declared to be independent sections,
divisions, parts and provisions, and the holding of any section, division, part
or provision thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause
shall not affect or render invalid any other section, division, part or
provision thereof.
(Ord. 1988-192, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 1610.99 GENERAL CODE PENALTY; EQUITABLE REMEDIES.
   (a)   Criminal penalties; equitable remedies.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly violate any provision of this Fire
Prevention Code or any order issued pursuant thereto. A person who commits such
violation is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not
more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than six months, or both, for each
offense.
      (2)   No person shall fail to comply with the fire prevention measures or
fire protection activities prescribed in this Fire Prevention Code, or fail to
obtain a permit or license for the various uses or activities as required by
such Code, or fail to comply with the application and plan submission and
processing requirements, including payment of the fees designated therefor. A
person who commits any such violation is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree and shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 60
days, or both, for each offense.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (a)(1) and (a)(2) hereof,
any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Fire Prevention
Code, or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with
any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed
statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any
certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been
taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified
by Council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed
herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance,
respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and shall be
fined not more than $250 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both, for each
offense.
      (4)   The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse
the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required
to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. When
not otherwise specified, each day that prohibited conditions are maintained
shall constitute a separate offense.
      (5)   The Director of Law shall, immediately upon a violation of this
Code having been called to his or her attention, institute injunction,
mandamus, abatement or other appropriate action to prevent, enjoin, abate or
remove anything in violation of this Code. This duty shall be in addition to
his or her duty to prosecute for any violation of this Code.
      (6)   The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent
the enforced removal of prohibited conditions or prevent the city from seeking
civil penalties as provided for in division (b) hereof.
   (b)   Civil penalties.
      (1)   Any person who has received a citation for a violation of the Ohio
Fire Code or any order issued pursuant to it, and such violation is
specifically determined not to be of a serious nature, may be assessed a civil
penalty of not more than $1,000 for each such violation.
      (2)   Any person who fails to correct a violation for which a citation
has been issued, within the period permitted for its correction, may be
assessed a civil penalty of not more than $1,000 for each day during which such
failure or violation continues.
      (3)   Any person who violates any of the posting requirements prescribed
by §
1610.06(d) shall be assessed a civil penalty of not more than $1,000 for each
violation.
      (4)   Due consideration to the appropriateness of the penalty with
respect to the gravity of the violation, the good faith of the person being
charged and the history of previous violations shall be given whenever a
penalty is assessed under this division (b).
      (5)   For the purposes of this division (b), a serious violation shall be
considered to exist if there is a substantial probability that an occurrence
causing death or serious physical harm to persons could result from a condition
which exists, or from one or more practices, means, methods, operations or
processes which have been adopted or are in use, unless the person did not and
could not, with the exercise of reasonable diligence, know of the presence of
the violation.
      (6)   Civil penalties imposed under this division (b) shall be paid to
the Director of Finance for deposit into the General Fund. Such penalties may
be recovered in a civil action in the name of the municipality brought in the
Court of Common Pleas.
(Ord. 1988-192, passed 10-3-1988)
Statutory reference:
   Civil penalty for violations, see R.C. § 3737.51(B) - (H))
CHAPTER 1620: BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION
Section
   
1620.01   Establishment and duties
   
1620.02   Blueprint and plan specification approval
   
1620.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Fire Department, see
Ch. 242
   Fire hydrants, see §§
660.11,
1454.06,
Ch. 1650, §
1660.01
   Fire Marshal; fire safety, see R.C. Ch. 3737
   Ohio Fire Code and BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, see
Ch. 1610
   Overtime, see §
260.05
   Powers and duties of Fire Marshal; employees; bureaus created, see R.C. §
3737.22
   Smoke detectors, see §
1485.01
§ 1620.01 ESTABLISHMENT AND DUTIES.
   (a)   A Bureau of Fire Prevention in the Fire Department of the city is
hereby established, which Bureau shall be operated under the supervision of the
Fire Chief. The Fire Chief shall appoint a member of the Fire Department as
Inspector for the Bureau of Fire Prevention. Such appointment shall be made on
the basis of his or her qualifications and completion of state requirements for
a Certified Fire Safety Inspector. The person in charge of the Bureau shall be
referred to and known as the Officer in charge of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention.
   (b)   (1)   It shall be the duty of the Bureau to enforce all laws and
ordinances covering the following:
         A.   The prevention of fires;
         B.   The storage and use of explosives and flammables;
         C.   The installation and maintenance of automatic and other private
fire alarm systems and fire extinguishing equipment;
         D.   The maintenance and regulation of fire exits;
         E.   The maintenance of protection and the elimination of fire and
safety hazards in buildings and structures, including those under construction;
         F.   The means and adequacy of exit in case of fire from all places in
which persons work, live or congregate for any purpose from time to time,
including, but not limited to, the following occupancies: manufacturing,
educational, business, mercantile, transient, nontransient, institutional,
hospitals, churches, places of assembly, amphitheaters and storage;
         G.   The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of
fires; and
         H.   Education of the populace by fire prevention programs.
      (2)   The Bureau shall have such other powers and perform such other
duties as are set forth in other sections of this Code and other ordinances,
and as may be conferred and imposed from time to time by law. This delegation
of duty shall not relieve any other department, officer or employee of the city
of any power or duty conferred upon it or him or her by law or ordinance.
   (c)   The Fire Chief, the Officer in charge and Inspectors of the Bureau of
Fire Prevention may at any reasonable hour enter any building, premises or
vehicle within the city for the purpose of examining the same as authorized by
this Code or by the statutes of the state, provided that permission to enter is
obtained from the occupant, or, in the case of unoccupied property, from the
owner thereof or his or her agent. If such permission is refused or is
otherwise unobtainable, a search warrant shall be obtained before such entry or
inspection is made, except in the case of an existing emergency, in which case
entry may be made at any time and no search warrant is necessary. No person
shall refuse to permit such emergency entry or inspection, nor shall any person
hinder, obstruct, resist or abuse any person making or attempting to make such
inspection.
   (d)   The Bureau shall survey each industrial, manufacturing, business,
mercantile, educational and institutional occupancy, and each place of
assembly, hotel, motel, apartment, storage area and special occupancy, and may
survey multi-family houses and such other buildings or dwellings within the
city, and shall specify suitable fire and/or smoke detecting devices or
extinguishing appliances which shall be provided in or near boiler rooms,
kitchens of restaurants, clubs and like establishments, storage rooms
containing considerable combustible material, rooms in which hazardous
manufacturing processes are carried out, repair garages and other places of a
generally hazardous nature. Such devices or appliances may consist of automatic
fire alarm systems, fixed or portable fire extinguishers of a type suitable for
the probable class of fire, suitable approved fire blankets, manual or
automatic covers or other special fire extinguishing systems. In special
hazardous processes or storage, appliances of more than one type or special
systems may be required.
   (e)   (1)   Pursuant to R.C. § 3737.27, the Officer in charge of the Bureau
shall cause an investigation of all fires, bombings and explosions, examine
witnesses, compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books and
papers, and do and perform all other acts necessary to the effective discharge
of such duties.
      (2)   The Officer in charge of the Bureau or his or her representative
may administer oaths and enter, for the purpose of examination, any building,
premises or vehicle which, in his or her opinion, is in danger from fire or
explosion, and he or she shall report his or her proceedings to the legislative
authority at such times as are required.
      (3)   Failure of any person, firm or corporation to comply with any order
of the Fire Chief or his or her representative under the provisions of this
section shall constitute an unlawful act and subject such person, firm or
corporation to the penalties provided for in §
1610.99.
   (f)   A report of the Bureau shall be made annually and transmitted to the
Chief Executive Officer of the city. The report shall contain all proceedings
under this Code with such statistics as the Fire Chief may wish to include
therein. The Fire Chief shall also recommend any amendments to the Code which,
in his or her judgment, shall be desirable.
(Ord. 1988-192, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 1620.02 BLUEPRINT AND PLAN SPECIFICATION APPROVAL.
   (a)   All blueprints and plans received by the Building Department of the
city shall be submitted for review to the Bureau of Fire Prevention. When such
submitted plans have been found to conform to the provisions of the Fire
Prevention Code, such blueprints and plans shall be stamped: “Approved for Fire
Regulations Only.” When such blueprints and plans are submitted which do not
conform with such Code, a list of all violations, with their corresponding Code
section numbers, shall be written or attached to the submitted blueprints and
plans. The owner of such blueprints and plans, or his or her representative,
shall subsequently submit revised blueprints and plans, addenda or other data
to show evidence of compliance with the applicable provisions of such Code. In
the event such data are not received within a reasonable period of time, not to
exceed 30 days, the Officer in charge of the Bureau shall notify the Building
Department of the city that such blueprints and plans are not approved by the
Bureau.
   (b)   The construction, erection and alteration of any nature whatsoever of
all structures, with the exception of single- and two-family dwellings, shall
be approved by the Bureau prior to the issuance of any permits for remodeling
or new construction of any nature.
   (c)   All fire prevention equipment shall conform to required plans which
have been approved by the Bureau. When such equipment is contrary to approved
plans, the owner or contractor shall be notified in what respect such equipment
does not conform to the approved plans, and the owner or contractor shall be
given a specific period of time in which to conform to such plans. Occupancy of
such structures or any portion thereof shall not be permitted until such
equipment conforms in all respects to the approved plans.
(Ord. 1988-192, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 1620.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1610.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1630: BLASTING AND EXPLOSIVES
Section
   
1630.01   Definitions
   
1630.02   Purpose and scope; general provisions
   
1630.03   Office of City Seismologist established; appointment
   
1630.04   Permit and Seismologist deposit fee required
   
1630.05   Application for temporary permit or license
   
1630.06   Allowable limits standards
   
1630.07   Log required
   
1630.08   Hours of blasting
   
1630.09   Insurance protection
   
1630.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Dry cleaning and dyeing, see R.C. Ch. 3739
   Explosives; fire prevention, see R.C. Ch. 3743
   Gasoline, oils and paint, see R.C. Ch. 3741
   Petroleum liquids and gases, see R.C. §§ 3737.17 et seq.
   Transporting explosives, see §
440.04
   Weapons and explosives, see
Ch. 672
§ 1630.01 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, EXPLOSIVE DEVICE and DANGEROUS ORDNANCE have the
same meanings set forth in §
672.01 of the General Offenses Code.
(Ord. 1988-192, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 1630.02 PURPOSE AND SCOPE; GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Purpose and scope.
      (1)   It is the purpose of this chapter to provide minimum standards for
safety to life, limb and property, for the general public welfare, and for safe
practices in the use of explosive devices or dangerous ordnance for blasting,
mining and quarrying purposes in the construction industry and related
operations, including drilling and preparation for blasting.
      (2)   These rules and regulations shall apply to every construction
project, including demolition, maintenance and repair work where explosives are
used for blasting purposes, mining and quarrying, and landfills, and compliance
with the requirements herein contained shall be mandatory on all such projects.
   (b)   General provisions.
      (1)   Every person using explosive devices within the city shall comply
with the regulations herein established, and, in addition, with the provisions
of applicable state and federal laws in the use of such explosives, including
their storage, transportation and safety practices. All such persons shall use
every reasonable precaution to provide for the safety of all employees on the
job and such other persons who may be regularly entitled to be upon or near the
location where explosive devices or dangerous ordnance is being employed, as
well as to provide for the safety of the general public. Every employee shall
observe the provisions hereof, and no person shall use explosive devices or
dangerous ordnance for blasting purposes in a manner contrary to the provisions
of this chapter.
      (2)   Upon application to the Director of Public Safety and upon payment
of the fees specified in this section, a license or temporary permit shall be
issued to qualified applicants to acquire, possess, carry or use any explosive
device or dangerous ordnance for the following purposes:
         A.   Contractors, wreckers, quarrymen, mine operators, landfill
operators and other persons regularly employing explosive devices or dangerous
ordnance in the course of a legitimate business, with respect to explosive
devices or dangerous ordnance acquired, possessed, carried or used in the
course of such business;
         B.   Scientists, engineers and instructors, with respect to explosive
devices or dangerous ordnance acquired, possessed, carried or used in the
course of bona fide research or instruction;
         C.   Financial institutions and armored car company guards; and
         D.   In the discretion of the Director of Public Safety or his or her
duly authorized delegate, with respect to explosive devices or dangerous
ordnance lawfully acquired, possessed, carried or used for a legitimate
research, scientific, educational, industrial or other proper purpose.
Application for a license or temporary permit under this section shall be in
writing under oath to the Director of Public Safety.
(Ord. 1988-192, passed 10-3-1988)
      (3)   A temporary permit expires within 30 days from its issuance. The
application fee is $10.
(Ord. 1989-71, passed 4-17-1989)
      (4)   A license expires one year from its issuance. The application fee
is $50.
(Ord. 1988-192, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 1630.03 OFFICE OF CITY SEISMOLOGIST ESTABLISHED; APPOINTMENT.
   (a)   There is hereby established the office of City Seismologist. No
person, firm or corporation shall detonate explosives within the corporate
limits without arranging for the presence of and having present the City
Seismologist or his or her authorized representative at each and every blast,
to record the same as hereinafter more fully provided.
   (b)   The City Seismologist shall record the following data:
      (1)   Identification of instrument used;
      (2)   Name of observer;
      (3)   Name of interpreter;
      (4)   Distance of recording station from area of detonation;
      (5)   Recording station or location in structure;
      (6)   Maximum amplitudes for all components measured;
      (7)   Frequency of ground motion in cycles per second, if applicable; and
      (8)   Maximum particle velocity for all components measured.
   (c)   Written notice of the exact time and place of the use of explosives
shall be given to both the Director of Public Safety and the City Seismologist.
At least 48 hours shall be required before such explosion shall be detonated.
It shall be the duty of the City Seismologist to attend all such detonations on
the date and at the time and place, when requested, if at all possible, and to
notify the permittee or licensee of any alternative date and time in the event
the same is necessary to be rescheduled. The City Seismologist shall issue
written reports on each and every blasting event to the Director of Public
Safety and comment upon compliance with regulations and standards herein
established. The City Seismologist shall have such other duties and
responsibilities as shall be assigned to him or her by the Director of Public
Safety, and he or she shall be paid from the per diem deposit fee herein
required. The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and directed to cause
payment to be made to the City Seismologist from the deposit upon the
presentation of invoices therefor, chargeable to the respective deposit to
which the invoice is applicable and upon the approval of such invoices by the
Director of Public Safety.
(Ord. 1988-192, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 1630.04 PERMIT AND SEISMOLOGIST DEPOSIT FEE REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person, firm or corporation acting as a contractor or blaster shall
use and detonate explosives unless he or she is in possession of a valid
temporary permit or license to use explosives or dangerous ordnance for
blasting purposes and unless the requirements of this section have been
observed and every reasonable precaution, including compliance with the Ohio
Revised Code, is taken to prevent accidents, damage to property or unreasonable
disturbance. The blaster, the owner, the lessee, a contractor and a sub-
contractor whose work involves the use of explosives or dangerous ordnance
shall comply with these rules and regulations, and none shall be saved harmless
herefrom because of the errors of the other.
   (b)   The city temporary permit or license shall be obtained from the Safety
Director and shall be issued at least 48 hours in advance of the commencement
of blasting operations. In addition, a deposit fee at a per diem rate of $450
shall be paid before issuance of the city temporary permit or license. Such
deposit fee shall be used to pay for the services of the hereinafter appointed
City Seismologist. Any part of such deposit fee unexpended in payments of
services of the City Seismologist shall be refunded to the permittee or
licensee. Prior to the issuance of any permit or license, the applicant shall
file a “Notice of Intention to Blast” with the Safety Director at least seven
days prior to the commencement of such operations; however, no permit shall be
issued at this time.
   (c)   The Safety Director shall have the authority to require a deposit fee
in excess of $450 when it appears that extraordinary expenses may be incurred.
Postponement of a blast for good cause, approved by the Director of Public
Safety, shall not require an additional permit.
(Ord. 1988-192, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 1630.05 APPLICATION FOR TEMPORARY PERMIT OR LICENSE.
   (a)   The application for a license or temporary permit shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   The name, age, address, occupation and business address of the
applicant, if he or she is a natural person, or the name, address and principal
place of business of the applicant, if the applicant is a corporation;
      (2)   A description of the dangerous ordnance for which a permit is
requested;
      (3)   A description of the place or places where, and the manner in
which, the dangerous ordnance is to be kept, carried and used;
      (4)   A statement of the purpose for which the dangerous ordnance is to
be acquired, possessed, carried or used; and
      (5)   Such other information as the Safety Director may require in giving
effect to this section.
   (b)   Upon investigation, the Safety Director shall issue a license or
temporary permit only if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The applicant is not otherwise prohibited by law from acquiring,
having, carrying or using dangerous ordnance;
      (2)   The applicant is age 18 or over, if he or she is a natural person
and if the application is for explosives only;
      (3)   It appears that the applicant has sufficient competence to safely
acquire, possess, carry or use the dangerous ordnance, and that proper
precautions will be taken to protect the security of the dangerous ordnance and
insure the safety of persons and property; and
      (4)   It appears that the dangerous ordnance will be lawfully acquired,
possessed, carried and used by the applicant for a legitimate purpose.
(Ord. 1988-192, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 1630.06 ALLOWABLE LIMITS STANDARDS.
   (a)   Blasting operations shall be so conducted that ground vibrations,
measured at the nearest structure or building, do not exceed a peak particle
velocity of two inches per second or its equivalent on any of the three
mutually perpendicular planes of motion, i.e., vertical, longitudinal or
transverse, and so that air blast overpressures do not exceed 130 dB peak
linear. No blasting operation will be permitted within 150 feet of any
dwelling, building, school, church, theater or any structure which the Director
of Public Safety or City Seismologist may deem vulnerable to damage by such
vibrations. Such measurement from the nearest structure or building, as
described above, shall not apply to quarries or to the blasting of contractor-
owned structures or buildings, whether owned or leased, or high tension lines
and their supporting towers and appurtenances.
   (b)   Blasting operations conducted within the allowable limits of ground
motion and particle velocity contained in this section must be nondamaging to
structures.
   (c)   A record of the seismic wave pattern shall be kept by the City
Seismologist for a minimum of three years after project completion, and the
same shall be filed in the permanent records of the city.
   (d)   No blasting operations shall be permitted unless the City Seismologist
is present.
   (e)   When the characteristics or environment of any specific blasting event
have been determined to be extraordinarily hazardous by the City Seismologist
and Director of Public Safety, additional safety precautions may be lawfully
required. The permittee shall be advised of the nature of such extraordinary
hazard and instructed as to what specific additional safety standards are
required.
(Ord. 1988-192, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 1630.07 LOG REQUIRED.
   (a)   A record of each explosive event shall be kept by the contractor or
blaster upon forms furnished by the city. A copy of such record shall be filed
with the Safety Director and shall include the following:
      (1)   Name of company;
      (2)   Blast location;
      (3)   Date and time of blast;
      (4)   Number of holes, diameter of holes, depth of holes, spacings and
burdens, delay intervals, total weight of explosives, maximum weight of
explosives fired per day;
      (5)   Distance and direction to nearest structure neither owned nor
leased by person, firm or corporation conducting blasting, except high tension
lines and their supporting towers and appurtenances;
      (6)   Name and signature of firm or individual conducting blasting; and
      (7)   Weather conditions.
   (b)   Such log shall be filed with the Safety Director or City Seismologist
within 24 hours after each blasting event, or prior to the next explosive event
if the same occurs prior to the expiration of 24 hours.
(Ord. 1988-192, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 1630.08 HOURS OF BLASTING.
   No blast operations shall be conducted within the corporate limits, except
on weekdays which are not otherwise legal holidays, or Sundays, and only then
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. However, in the event the City
Seismologist and the Safety Director agree that an emergency situation exists,
such hours and times of blasting may be specifically varied to counteract such
emergency.
(Ord. 1988-192, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 1630.09 INSURANCE PROTECTION.
   Any person, firm or corporation who or which desires to conduct blasting
operations within the corporate limits shall post with the Director of Public
Safety an effective certificate of public liability insurance with an
accredited company authorized to do business in the state in the amount of at
least $500,000, which policy shall protect such person, firm or corporation,
the city, its inhabitants and the general public from any and all claims,
damages and demands arising from each blasting operation. Such certificate of
insurance must be approved in form by the Director of Law.
(Ord. 1988-192, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 1630.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   See §
1610.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
   (b)   In the event any permittee or licensee violates the safety standards
as herein established on three or more occasions, as reported by the City
Seismologist, the Director of Public Safety shall have the authority to refuse
to issue any future permits to such permittee or licensee and to pursue
injunctive remedies, if necessary, in order to correct continuing violations of
such standards.
(Ord. 1988-192, passed 10-3-1988)
CHAPTER 1640: ENVIRONMENTAL DISASTERS
Section
   
1640.01   Purpose and scope
   
1640.02   Definitions
   
1640.03   Liability
   
1640.04   Services of other governmental bodies or parties
   
1640.05   Records; procedure for recovery
   
1640.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Disposal of flammable, combustible or explosive materials, see §
1660.03
   Explosives; fire prevention, see R.C. Ch. 3743
   Flammable and combustible above-ground storage tanks, see §
1660.10
   Gasoline, oils and paint, see R.C. Ch. 3741
   Hazardous and solid wastes, see R.C. Ch. 3734
   Petroleum liquids and gases, see R.C. §§ 3737.17 et seq.
   Transporting explosives, see §
440.04
   Underground Storage Tank (UST) Fund, see §
234.13
   Weapons and explosives, see
Ch. 672
§ 1640.01 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for compensation to the city for
costs incurred in investigating, mitigating, minimizing, removing or abating
unauthorized spills, releases or discharges of materials into or upon the
environment within the territorial jurisdiction or responsibility of the city,
which spills, releases or discharges require emergency action to protect the
public health or safety or the environment.
(Ord. 1989-282, passed 11-6-1989)
§ 1640.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   COMMON CARRIER BY MOTOR VEHICLE. The same meaning as in R.C. § 4923.02
(A), as appropriate.
   (b)   CONTRACT CARRIER BY MOTOR VEHICLE. The same meaning as in R.C. §
4923.02(A), as appropriate.
   (c)   COSTS. Shall include, but not be limited to, all direct and incidental
costs, including personnel costs, incurred by or on behalf of the city in
connection with the investigation, mitigation, minimization, removal or
abatement of an unauthorized spill, release or discharge, in the following
respects:
      (1)   Operating any vehicle, apparatus or equipment used in connection
with any such incident;
      (2)   Sanitizing, cleaning and/or repairing any vehicle, apparatus,
equipment or apparel used in connection with any such incident;
      (3)   Testing any spilled, released or discharged material, or any
vehicle, apparatus, equipment or apparel used in connection with any such
incident;
      (4)   Storing any spilled, released or discharged material;
      (5)   Disposing of any spilled, released or discharged material, or any
vehicle, apparatus, equipment, apparel or goods rendered unusable as a result
of any such incident;
      (6)   Replacing any vehicle, apparatus, equipment, apparel or goods lost
or rendered unusable as a result of any such incident; and
      (7)   Any costs incurred by any private party or governmental body, or
subdivision thereof, whose assistance is requested by the city in the event of
an unauthorized spill, release or discharge, and who submits a written invoice
to the city setting forth its costs incurred in responding to the incident.
   (d)   MATERIAL. The same meaning as in R.C. § 3745.13, and any regulations
promulgated or matters decided thereunder, as appropriate.
   (e)   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any automobile, truck, tractor, trailer, semi-trailer,
motorbus or any other self-propelled vehicle not operated or driven on fixed
tracks.
   (f)   PRIVATE MOTOR CARRIER. The same meaning as in R.C. § 4923.02.
   (g)   RAILROAD. The same meaning as in R.C. § 4907.02.
   (h)   UNAUTHORIZED SPILL, RELEASE OR DISCHARGE. The same meaning as in R.C.
Chapter 3745, and any regulations promulgated or matters decided thereunder,
and shall include, but not be limited to, any spilling, leaking, pumping,
pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, releasing, injecting, escaping,
leaching, dumping or disposing of any material into or upon the environment,
which may endanger the public health or safety or the environment. The term
does not include any spill, release or discharge that is in compliance with
R.C. Chapter 1509, 3704, 3734 or 6111, and rules adopted thereunder, or the
terms and conditions of a current and valid permit or license.
(Ord. 1989-282, passed 11-6-1989)
§ 1640.03 LIABILITY.
   (a)   Any person or corporation responsible for causing or allowing an
unauthorized spill, release or discharge of material into or upon the
environment is liable to the city for disaster services rendered and all
incidental and related costs. The costs shall be paid by the person or entity
responsible for causing or allowing the unauthorized spill, release or
discharge of materials into or upon the environment that requires emergency
action to protect the public health or safety or the environment.
   (b)   If an unauthorized spill, release or discharge occurs from a motor
vehicle or train being operated by, or on behalf of, a common carrier by motor
vehicle, contract carrier by motor vehicle, private motor carrier or railroad,
a claim or civil action shall be submitted to or brought against, as
appropriate, and the costs of the emergency action shall be recovered from, the
motor carrier or railroad, regardless of whether the motor carrier or railroad
was responsible for causing or allowing the unauthorized spill, release or
discharge to occur.
   (c)   Costs recoverable under this chapter shall accrue commencing with the
first notification to the city of an incident involving, or which may involve,
or subsequently proves to involve, an unauthorized spill, release or discharge.
(Ord. 1989-282, passed 11-6-1989)
§ 1640.04 SERVICES OF OTHER GOVERNMENTAL BODIES OR PARTIES.
   (a)   The Fire Chief, or his or her designated officers or firefighters,
shall have the authority to request the assistance of any other governmental
body, or agency or division thereof, in the event of an unauthorized spill,
release or discharge at a location within the territorial jurisdiction or
responsibility of the city.
   (b)   The Fire Chief, or his or her designated officers or firefighters,
shall have the authority to request the assistance of any expert, consultant or
contractor in the event of any unauthorized spill, release or discharge at a
location within the territorial jurisdiction or responsibility of the city.
(Ord. 1989-282, passed 11-6-1989)
§ 1640.05 RECORDS; PROCEDURE FOR RECOVERY.
   (a)   The Fire Chief, or his or her designated representative, shall keep a
record of the city’s costs for investigating, mitigating, minimizing, removing
or abating the unauthorized spill, release or discharge, including any
incidental costs. A schedule of charges used to determine such costs shall be
kept on file in the Fire Department and made available for inspection by the
public during normal working hours. The schedule shall be revised, as
necessary, to reflect increases and decreases in the value of items listed.
   (b)   Not less than 30 days before bringing civil action for the recovery of
costs pursuant to this section and R.C. § 3745.13, the Director of Law shall
submit to the responsible party a written itemized claim for the total
certified costs incurred by the city and a written notice that, unless the
amount is paid to the city within 30 days after the date of mailing of the
claim and notice, the Director of Law shall bring a civil action for that
amount.
(Ord. 1989-282, passed 11-6-1989)
§ 1640.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1610.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1650: FIRE HYDRANTS
Section
   
1650.01   Use of hydrants and valves
   
1650.02   Public fire hydrants
   
1650.03   Private fire hydrants
   
1650.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Access to fire hydrants, see §§
1454.06,
1660.01
   Obstructing fire hydrants, see §
660.11
§ 1650.01 USE OF HYDRANTS AND VALVES.
   (a)   Tampering; unauthorized use. No person, except at a fire or other
emergency or as authorized herein, shall remove the cover or cap from, or turn
on or off, any fire hydrant, public or private water valve or stopcock used for
fire protection in the city.
   (b)   Authorized use; individual and blanket permits; fees. No person shall
make a connection from any fire hydrant in the city to take water therefrom for
private use, unless such person has first applied for and obtained from the
Fire Chief a fire hydrant permit, the fee for which shall be $25. A blanket
fire hydrant permit may be issued authorizing the use of all fire hydrants,
regardless of number, the termini of which shall be fixed by the Fire Chief and
specified in the permit. The fee for such a permit shall be $50. In addition to
the permit fees, the applicant shall pay the City of Cleveland for all water
used from any hydrant.
   (c)   Permits; deposits for damages; return of deposit. A deposit of $250
for a single fire hydrant permit, and a deposit of $300 for a blanket fire
hydrant permit, shall accompany each application, which respective deposits
shall be applied toward the payment of any damage suffered by the city or
payment of any claims made against the city, by anyone, due to the use of any
fire hydrant by the applicant or his or her representatives, agents or
servants. In the absence of any damages or claims, $35 shall be retained by the
city for the permit and the remaining deposit shall be returned to the
applicant who submitted it.
   (d)   Water receipt and duration statement required. Upon the issuance of a
fire hydrant permit or blanket fire hydrant permit, it shall be the duty of the
permittee to immediately, and before making any connection to or using any
hydrant in any way, present the permit to the Division of Water of the City of
Cleveland and obtain a receipt showing payment for the water estimated to be
used by virtue of his or her permit. The receipt shall then be presented to the
Fire Chief, together with a written statement by the permittee as to the period
of time during which the hydrants set forth in the permit shall be used. All
the foregoing provisions shall be complied with prior to making any connection
to or using any hydrant.
   (e)   Effective period of permits. All fire hydrant permits issued pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter shall expire upon completion of the work
contemplated and in connection with which such permit was obtained, but in no
event shall any permit remain in force and effect for a period of more than 60
days.
   (f)   Conditions of issuance. All fire hydrant permits shall be issued
subject to the express condition that the permittee shall indemnify and save
the city harmless from all loss or damage that may be occasioned by the lack of
care, skill or attention of the permittee, or anyone in his or her employ, in
the making of a connection or in the use of the fire hydrant. The permittee
shall, if any damage is caused to any fire hydrant or water main of the city in
the use thereof, promptly and fully reimburse the city for the full cost and
expense of the repairs necessary beyond the amount of his or her deposit, if
such is inadequate.
   (g)   Use of reducing couplings, valves and hydrant keys. All hydrants used
for any purpose shall have reducing couplings attached to the nozzles of the
fire hydrants with an independent valve for regulating the supply. The main
valve of the hydrant shall be opened full at the beginning of work each day and
remain open until the stoppage of work at night. The hydrant shall be operated
only by a proper hydrant key.
   (h)   Completion of use; inspection and report. Upon completion of the use
of a fire hydrant, the permittee shall notify the Fire Chief, who shall
promptly inspect each fire hydrant used and make a report to the Director of
Safety of the condition and repairs he or she shall find necessary. No further
fire hydrant permits shall be issued to any permittee when any repairs are
necessary, until the city shall have been reimbursed for the full costs
involved.
   (i)   Penalty. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree and shall be fined not more than
$750 or imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both, for each offense.
(Ord. 1988-192, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 1650.02 PUBLIC FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (a)   This section is intended to ensure an adequate water supply and
facilities for firefighting purposes.
   (b)   An adequate water supply for firefighting purposes shall be available
for all buildings, structures and portions thereof. Such water supply shall be
provided from city water or private water supply mains.
   (c)   All buildings and structures shall be so located that no portion
thereof is more than 300 feet from at least one readily accessible public or
private fire department hydrant. Such distance shall be measured along streets,
roadways or driveways and shall be in accordance with §
1650.03. Hydrants located around buildings shall be spaced so as not to be more
than 300 feet apart.
   (d)   All dwellings, houses or other minor buildings or structures shall be
located so that no portion thereof is more than 300 feet from a readily
accessible public or private fire hydrant. Such distance shall be measured
along streets, roadways or driveways and shall be in accordance with §
1650.03.
(Ord. 1988-192, passed 10-3-1988)
   (e)   Alternatively, dwellings, houses or other minor buildings or
structures on lots in excess of the minimum lot requirements for the zoning
district in which they are located may be located more than 300 feet from a
readily accessible public or private fire hydrant if an alternative standpipe
or fire suppression system is installed throughout the structure and/or the
structure is provided with a roadway or driveway capable of supporting the
weight of a 25-ton truck without side or overhead obstructions and is approved
by the Fire Chief.
(Ord. 1996-76, passed 4-15-1996)
§ 1650.03 PRIVATE FIRE HYDRANTS.
   Private fire hydrants shall be located, installed and maintained in
accordance with the following.
   (a)   Private fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with applicable
rules and regulations of §
1650.02 and in accordance with nationally recognized good practices.
   (b)   All private fire hydrants shall have an approved shut-off valve
installed in the fire hydrant lead not more than 100 feet from the fire
hydrant. Such shut-off valve shall be accessible at all times.
   (c)   No private fire hydrant shall be installed closer than two feet or
more than five feet from a street, roadway or driveway conforming with §
1660.01.
   (d)   All private fire hydrants shall be maintained in proper working order
by the owner.
   (e)   An inspection and flow test shall be conducted by the owner as
prescribed by the Fire Chief, and reports of testing shall be forwarded to the
Fire Department.
   (f)   All private fire hydrants shall be accessible at all times for
firefighting purposes.
   (g)   For average conditions, hydrants shall be placed 50 feet from the
building protected, as specified by the authority having jurisdiction.
   (h)   Hydrants shall be set plumb with outlets a minimum of 18 inches above
the adjoining finished grade.
(Ord. 1988-192, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 1650.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1610.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1660: MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
Section
   
1660.01   Access streets, roadways and driveways
   
1660.02   Fire lanes on private property devoted to public use
   
1660.03   Disposal of flammable, combustible or explosive materials
   
1660.04   Use of heat-producing grills
   
1660.05   Exhaust systems; restaurant cooking equipment
   
1660.06   Posting arson laws
   
1660.07   Setting fires which spread
   
1660.08   Responsibilities upon discovery of unfriendly fires
   
1660.09   Sale and use of fire equipment; standards; service and repair of
equipment
   
1660.095   Key boxes on commercial buildings
   
1660.10   Flammable and combustible above-ground storage tanks
   
1660.11   Electric vehicle charging stations (EVCS)
   
1660.99   Penalty
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Dry cleaning and dyeing, see R.C. Ch. 3739
   Explosives; fire prevention, see R.C. Ch. 3743
   Gasoline, oils and paint, see R.C. Ch. 3741
   Obstruction of fire hydrants, see §
660.11
   Petroleum liquids and gases, see R.C. §§ 3737.17 et seq.
   Power to regulate against fires, see R.C. § 737.27, Ch. 3737
   Right to examine buildings, see R.C. § 3737.14
   Smoke detectors, see §
1485.01
   State Fire Marshal, see R.C. Ch. 3737
§ 1660.01 ACCESS STREETS, ROADWAYS AND DRIVEWAYS.
   Access streets, roadways and driveways, where required by §§
1650.02 and
1650.03, shall conform to the following.
   (a)   The width shall be sufficient to permit easy passage of any Fire
Department apparatus and in no case shall the width be less than 20 feet.
   (b)   The surface shall be reinforced and shall be of sufficient strength
and type to adequately support any fire apparatus under any weather conditions.
   (c)   The curve radii and grade elevations shall be such as to permit any
Fire Department apparatus to negotiate curves and grades under any weather
conditions.
(Ord. 1988-192, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 1660.02 FIRE LANES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY DEVOTED TO PUBLIC USE.
   (a)   The signs used and the marking of established fire lanes on private
property devoted to public or private use shall be approved by the Fire Chief
and the Police Chief.
   (b)   The Fire Chief is authorized to establish fire lanes on any parcel of
land in the city upon finding that, from the use of the property, it can
reasonably be expected that the public will assemble in sufficient numbers, and
that if not controlled, motor vehicles will interfere with the operation of
firefighting equipment and/or with the ingress into and egress from the
building in the event of a fire.
   (c)   The width of fire lanes shall be determined by the Fire Department,
according to what is deemed necessary to permit ingress and egress for
firefighting equipment and the operation thereof. Such fire lanes shall be
appropriately marked by approved signs.
   (d)   Whenever a fire lane has been so designated, written notice thereof
shall be given to the owner, occupant or person in charge of the premises.
   (e)   Parking of unattended motor vehicles or otherwise obstructing fire
lanes is prohibited at all times.
   (f)   Any motor vehicle which has not been moved as directed by a member of
the Fire Department or the Police Department may be towed and impounded, and
the cost of such towing and impoundment shall be paid before the release of
such motor vehicle.
   (g)   Attended motor vehicles found standing or parked in fire lanes shall
be immediately moved upon the direction of any member of the Fire Department or
the Police Department.
(Ord. 1988-192, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 1660.03 DISPOSAL OF FLAMMABLE, COMBUSTIBLE OR EXPLOSIVE MATERIALS.
   No person shall deposit or permit to drain into a city or private sewer,
either directly or indirectly, an explosive or flammable or combustive liquid,
waste product or other substance which may produce explosive or flammable
gases.
(Ord. 1989-74, passed 4-17-1989)
§ 1660.04 USE OF HEAT-PRODUCING GRILLS.
   No person shall kindle or maintain a fire, to be used for the preparation of
food or for any other purpose, in any type of outdoor or portable grill in any
apartment, condominium, townhouse, or on or below any apartment house,
condominium, townhouse or balcony, or within 20 feet of any structure housing
more than one family.
(Ord. 1989-74, passed 4-17-1989)
§ 1660.05 EXHAUST SYSTEMS; RESTAURANT COOKING EQUIPMENT.
   (a)   Exhaust systems provided for restaurant cooking equipment shall be
maintained in a manner such as not to create a hazardous condition.
   (b)   Hoods, grease removal devices, fans, ducts and other devices shall be
inspected periodically and cleaned as needed to remove grease and deposits or
residues.
(Ord. 1989-74, passed 4-17-1989)
§ 1660.06 POSTING ARSON LAWS.
   The owner, operator or lessee of any transient residential building shall
post the provisions of R.C. §§ 2909.02 and 2909.03 in a conspicuous place in
each room occupied by guests in such building. The owner, operator or lessee of
any nontransient residential building, institution, school or place of assembly
shall post the provisions of such sections in conspicuous places upon such
premises. No person shall fail to comply with this section.
(R.C. § 3737.61) (Ord. 1988-192, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 1660.07 SETTING FIRES WHICH SPREAD.
   (a)   Definitions. The following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them herein:
      (1)   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, organization, association,
agency firm, estate, or corporation and any other legal or commercial entity.
      (2)   RESPONSIBLE ADULT. An individual 18 years or older who is not under
the influence of drugs or alcohol or suffering from any other disability which
would impair his or her ability to properly supervise a fire.
      (3)   UNCONTROLLED. As used under this section, shall mean any outdoor
fire that is out of control, which is not burning within the confines of
cleared firebreaks, or that cannot be suppressed or extinguished with the
resources or ordinary tools commonly available to the responsible adult and/or
requires the response of the Fire Department. The uncontrolled state of an
outdoor fire may result from any intentional, negligent, or accidental
circumstance.
      (4)   UNATTENDED. As used under this section shall mean the neglect of
any outdoor fire by a lack of supervision, abandonment by a responsible party,
or failure to use reasonable and proper fire management precautions. Any
failure to completely and fully extinguish all flames, embers, coals, sparks,
or hot spots such that they cannot reignite shall be considered neglect and be
unattended as defined herein.
   (b)   No person shall ignite, cause to be ignited, permit to be ignited or
maintain any open fires except as permitted by regulations promulgated by the
Ohio Fire Code, or any other sections of this Code.
      (1)   No fire shall be allowed to burn unattended without a responsible
adult being present at all times and without readily-available fire-
extinguishing apparatus.
      (2)   Fires burning out of control. No person shall ignite, cause to be
ignited, permit to be ignited or maintain any open fire, nor shall any person
authorize others to do so on land owned or controlled by him, in such a manner
as to allow such fire to burn out of control so as to require response of fire
apparatus and/or personnel.
      (3)   No person shall release to the atmosphere any object that is on
fire and not in the control of any responsible adult. This ban is specifically
to include novelty "hot air devices" commonly known as "Wishlanterns", "Chinese
Lanterns", "Kong Ming Lanterns", "Sky Lanterns", or any other similar device
which is set on fire and released to the atmosphere, allowing the burning
object to drift uncontrollably.
(Ord. 1988-192, passed 10-3-1988; Ord. 2015-15, passed 2-18-2015)
§ 1660.08 RESPONSIBILITIES UPON DISCOVERY OF UNFRIENDLY FIRES.
   (a)   The owner, operator or lessee, an employee of any owner, operator or
lessee, an occupant, and any person in direct control of any building regulated
under the Ohio Building Code, upon the discovery of an unfriendly fire or upon
receiving information that there is an unfriendly fire on the premises, shall
immediately and with all reasonable dispatch and diligence call or otherwise
notify the Fire Department concerning the fire and shall spread an alarm
immediately to all occupants of the building.
   (b)   For the purposes of this section, UNFRIENDLY FIRE means a fire of a
destructive nature as distinguished from a controlled fire intended for a
beneficial purpose.
   (c)   No person shall fail to comply with this section.
(R.C. § 3737.63) (Ord. 1988-192, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 1660.09 SALE AND USE OF FIRE EQUIPMENT; STANDARDS; SERVICE AND REPAIR OF
EQUIPMENT.
   (a)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, or use any fire protection or
firefighting equipment that does not meet the minimum standards established by
the Ohio Fire Marshal in the Ohio Fire Code.
   (b)   Except for public and private mobile fire trucks, no person shall
service, test, repair or install for profit any fire protection or firefighting
equipment without a certificate issued by the Ohio Fire Marshal.
(R.C. § 3737.65) (Ord. 1988-192, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 1660.095 KEY BOXES ON COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS.
   (a)   The following buildings within the city, regardless of use or
occupancy, shall have a key box of a U.L. type approved by the Fire Chief, or
his or her duly authorized designee, and shall be installed at a location
approved by the Fire Chief, or his or her designee:
      (1)   Any mercantile, commercial, industrial or business occupancy;
      (2)   Any apartment building or condominium with a main entrance door or
doors and/or a common hallway or hallways to suites;
      (3)   Any place of assembly or education;
      (4)   Any high hazard occupancy, as determined by the Fire Chief, or his
or her duly authorized designee;
      (5)   Any occupancy with a fire suppression or fire alarm system (not to
include single-family residences); and
      (6)   Any location where the Fire Chief, or his or her duly authorized
designee, deems it necessary.
   (b)   The Fire Chief, or his or her duly authorized designee, may require
multiple key boxes for any building and/or property deemed too large or complex
to be adequately served by one key box. The Fire Chief, or his or her duly
authorized designee, will determine the required number of boxes and their
location.
   (c)   The contents of the key box shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
      (1)   Keys to locked points of ingress, whether on the interior or
exterior of the building;
      (2)   Fire alarm system key;
      (3)   Keys to locked mechanical, equipment, electrical or elevator
control rooms;
      (4)   Keys to other areas as directed by the Fire Chief, or his or her
duly authorized designee; and
      (5)   A lot map of the building or other documentation as may be
requested by the Fire Chief, of his or her duly authorized designee.
   (d)   Compliance with divisions (a), (b) and (c) of this section are
required prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit under any other chapter
of the City Codified Ordinances.
   (e)   Compliance with divisions (a), (b) and (c) of this section for
existing buildings is required within one calendar year from the effective date
of this section, unless otherwise agreed to by the Fire Chief.
(Ord. 2004-99, passed 5-3-2004)
§ 1660.10 FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE ABOVE-GROUND STORAGE TANKS.
   (a)   A permit is required to install, alter, place temporarily out of
service, remove, abandon or otherwise dispose of a flammable or combustible
fuel tank or any line or dispensing device connector thereto. Permits shall be
obtained from the city’s Fire Chief or his or her designee. An annual
inspection shall be required after any such installation.
   (b)   Tanks shall be installed in accordance with the Ohio Fire Code, the
National Fire Protection Association Codes and the Ohio Administration Code.
   (c)   The maximum allowable individual capacity is limited to 12,000
gallons.
   (d)   The placement, design and landscape screening of above-ground storage
tanks shall be subject to review by the Planning Commission and the City
Council.
(Ord. 2007-197, passed 8-20-2007; Ord. 2014-220, passed 10-20-2014)
§ 1660.11 ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS (EVCS).
   (a)   Definition. Electric Vehicle Charging Stations (EVCS) for the purpose
of this section, EVCS are defined as Level-2 (208-240 volt AC current) or
Level-3 (400-900 volt DC current fast charger).
   (b)   Electric Vehicle Charging Stations (EVCS) installed on public or
private property, which falls within the scope of the Ohio Building Code, shall
adhere to the following general requirements:
      (1)   Each EVCS shall have wheel stops installed in front of the unit and
bollards installed in accordance with the Ohio Fire Code, Section 312;
      (2)   Each EVCS shall have an emergency electrical disconnect (shut-off)
switch installed outside in an approved location that is easily identifiable
and readily accessible to patrons and first responders. The switch shall not be
less than 20-feet or more than 100-feet from the EVCS unit. A sign stating
“Emergency Electrical Vehicle Charging Station Shut-Off” shall be posted above
electrical disconnect (shutoff) switch.
(Ord. 2023-125, passed 5-15-2023)
§ 1660.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1610.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Editor’s note:
   The Codified Ordinances of Solon comprises all ordinances and resolutions of
a general and permanent nature. The provisions of such general and permanent
ordinances and resolutions are set forth in full in the Codified Ordinances.
   References must be made frequently to many special ordinances and
resolutions, particularly those relating to property, such as easements,
vacations, dedications, plat approvals, purchases, sales, leases and the like.
In the following Tables A through I, all such ordinances and resolutions are
listed. These tables list ordinances and resolutions chronologically by subject
and include both a citation to and a brief description of each ordinance and
resolution.
   Table
            
TABLE A.   FRANCHISES
            
TABLE B.   EASEMENTS
            
TABLE C.   VACATING OF STREETS AND ALLEYS
            
TABLE D.   DEDICATION AND PLAT APPROVAL
            
TABLE E.   ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL OF REAL PROPERTY
            
TABLE F.   LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY
            
TABLE G.   STREET GRADE LEVELS AND CHANGE OF STREET NAME
            
TABLE H.   ANNEXATION AND DETACHMENT OF TERRITORY
            
TABLE I.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
TABLE A: FRANCHISES
Ord./Res. No. Date Description
Ord./Res. No. Date       Description
Res. 1964-88  6-15-1964  To City of Cleveland, for water service.
1967-88       6-5-1967   To Cleveland Electric Illuminating Co., for street
                         lighting service for six years.
1969-202      10-6-1969  To Ohio Edison Co., for street lighting for ten years.
1969-203      10-6-1969  To Ohio Edison Co., for traffic signs and lights for
                         ten years.
1971-192      10-18-1971 To Cleveland Electric Illuminating Co., for street
                         lighting service for six years and six months.
                         To Ohio Edison Co., for electric service to
1972-8        1-17-1972  residential customers and secondary light and power
                         customers, and fixing prices of the same.
                         Amends Ord. 1971-192, extending contract with
1977-128      6-20-1977  Cleveland Electric Illuminating Co., for street
                         lighting services, for four years.
1978-156      7-5-1978   To Cleveland Electric Illuminating Co., for street
                         lighting services, for ten years.
1979-96       5-7-1979   To Ohio Edison Co., for street lighting service for
                         ten years.
Res. 1981-92  7-20-1981  Authorizes C.A.T.V. franchise agreement with Matrix-
                         Cablevision Entertainment Services, Inc.
                         Consents to transfer of control of Solon C.A.T.V.
                         Development Co. and franchise issued by Council to
Res. 1986-36  5-7-1986   Matrix Enterprises, Inc., First Carolina
                         Communications, Inc., and their respective related
                         entities.
Res. 1987-95  6-15-1987  Transfers C.A.T.V. franchise from Solon C.A.T.V.
                         Development Co. to Cablevision of the Midwest, Inc.
1989-308      2-19-1990  To Ohio Edison Co., for street lighting service for
                         ten years.
Res. 1992-218 12-7-1992  Transfers franchise from Cablevision of the Midwest,
                         Inc., to V-Cable, L.P.
1995-240      11-20-1995 Approves rates for basic cable television service by
                         Cablevision of the Midwest, Inc.
                         Extending the nonexclusive franchise granted to
1996-160      8-5-1996   Cablevision Systems, Inc., to construct, operate and
                         maintain a cable television system.
1997-237      11-3-1997  Approves cable television rates effective April 1,
                         1997, and May 1, 1997.
                         Authorizes cable television franchise renewal
1999-15       4-19-1999  agreement with Cablevision of the Midwest, Inc., for
                         ten years.
                         Disapproves maximum permitted basic tier cable
1999-179      9-21-1999  television rate proposed by Cablevision; approves
                         actual basic tier cable television rate, effective
                         January 1, 1999.
Res. 2000-18  1-18-2000  Extends street lighting contract with Ohio Edison Co.,
                         dba the Illuminating Company, for five years.
                         Denies request for transfer of cable television
2000-186      7-12-2000  franchise from Cablevision of the Midwest, Inc., to
                         Adelphia.
2000-233      9-5-2000   Authorizes transfer of cable television franchise from
                         Cablevision of the Midwest, Inc., to Adelphia.
                         Disapproves maximum permitted basic tier cable
2001-248      10-15-2001 television rate proposed by Cablevision; approves
                         corrected maximum permitted basic tier rate, effective
                         January 1, 2001.
2005-154      6-20-2005  Approves assignment of the franchise and the cable
                         system from Adelphia to Time Warner NY Cable LLC.
                        
 
TABLE B: EASEMENTS
Ord./Res. No. Date Description
Ord./    Date Description
Res. No.
Res.     6-1- Accepts easement from Solon Development Co., in Fox Hollow Drive, Arlesford
1964-80  1964 Drive, East and West, and Nimrod, East and West, for sewer and water
              purposes.
Res.     7-   Accepts easement from Suburban Quality Development Co., for water mains in
1964-115 20-  Jaclyn Drive, in Bainbridge Park Subdivision No. 3.
         1964
Res.     8-
1964-130 17-  Accepts easement for storm sewer from A. L. and A. M. Scheiner.
         1964
Res.     11-  Accepts easement from Solon Development for sewer and water purposes in Fox
1964-161 2-   Hill Drive, Charmwood Oval, Warwickshire Lane and Oatley Park Drive.
         1964
Res.     1-   Accepts easement from Edgemoor Realty Corp., for water purposes in Greenridge
1965-7   18-  Street.
         1965
Res.     6-   Accepts easement from Bainbridge Land Co. for water purposes in Creek Side
1965-97  21-  Trail.
         1965
Res.     10-  Accepts easement from Ledge Hill Co., for water purposes in Ledge Hill and
1965-159 4-   Rockford Drives, and Stony Brook Lane.
         1965
Res.     1-   Accepts easement from Cadillac Land Co., for water purposes in Huntington and
1966-8   17-  Woodbury Drives.
         1966
Res.     3-7- Accepts easement from Federated Homes, Inc., for water purposes in Carriage
1966-40  1966 Park Drive, Hansom Drive, Wagon Wheel Drive, Buckboard Lane, Coachman Lane,
              Tandem Court and Overland Lane.
Res.     3-   Accepts easement from S. & M. of Ohio, Inc., for water purposes in Janet
1966-46  21-  Boulevard, Farm Drive, Elm Hill Drive and Gemini Court in Cannon Estates
         1966 Subdivision.
Res.     5-2- Reserves right to use Rodgers Drive in Sherbrook Park Subdivision No. 2 as an
1966-76  1966 easement for utilities purposes, in connection with the vacation of Rodgers
              Drive.
Res.     5-2- Accepts easement from Bainbridge Land Co., for water purposes in Windy Hill
1966-80  1966 Drive in Creekside Estates Subdivision.
Res.     5-2- Accepts easement from Windy Hill Co., for water purposes in Windy Hill and
1966-81  1966 Windy Willow Drives in Windy Hill Subdivision.
Res.     5-   Accepts easement from Mannu-Vacik Builders, Inc., for water purposes in
1966-85  16-  Parkside Trail in Cannon-West Subdivision.
         1966
Res.     5-   Accepts easement from S. & M. of Ohio, Inc., for water purposes in Elm Hill
1966-86  16-  and Meadowland Drives in Cannon Estates Subdivision No. 2.
         1966
Res.     8-   Accepts easement from Scar-Mar Co., for water purposes in Hall Street in
1966-175 23-  Scar-Mar Subdivision.
         1966
1966-182 9-6- Appropriating easements for sanitary sewers on 28 acres of land from S. L.
         1966 and S. L. Mendelson.
         9-   Appropriating easements for sanitary sewers on property from R. E. and E. M.
1966-195 19-  Smiley in the vicinity of Rodgers Drive.
         1966
Res.     10-  Authorizes agreement with Cleveland Metropolitan Park District for sanitary
1966-208 17-  sewer easement in South Chagrin Reservation.
         1966
Res.     1-   Accepts utility easement from Forest Park Land Co. and Snider Building Corp.,
1967-203 15-  for water and sewer purposes in Forest Park Subdivision.
         1968
Res.     3-4- Authorizes contract with Cleveland Electric Illuminating Co. for easement for
1967-186 1968 electric transmission line on Central Sewage Plant property.
Res.     9-3- Accepts easement from Creek Side, Inc., for water mains in Creek Side Trail
1968-171 1968 and Limberlost Trail.
Res.     9-   Grants easement to Cleveland Electric Illuminating Co., on property leased by
1968-186 16-  the American Automatic Vending Corporation.
         1968
Res.     4-   Accepts sanitary sewer easement from Cleveland Metropolitan Park District for
1969-94  21-  Holly Hill Subdivision.
         1969
Res.     5-   Accepts sanitary sewer easement from H. O’Neill for Pepperwood Park Estates
1970-86  18-  Subdivision.
         1970
Res.     9-8- Grants easement to Buckeye Pipe Line Co., for relocation of pipeline adjacent
1970-138 1970 to Erie Lackawanna R.R.
Res.     5-   Grants easement to Buckeye Pipe Line Co., for construction of pipeline
1971-12  17-  adjacent to Erie Lackawanna R.R.
         1971
Res.     4-5- Approving plat changing drainage easement in Davis Industrial Subdivision.
1971-74  1971
Res.     4-   Accepts easement from Cleveland Metropolitan Park District for sanitary sewer
1971-87  19-  serving Holly Hill Subdivision.
         1971
Res.     2-7- Accepts easement from Cleveland Metropolitan Park District for installation
1972-18  1972 of a water pump station in the vicinity of Cannon Road.
Res.     10-  Accepts easement from Colonial Forest Estates, Inc., for water mains in Fox
1972-165 2-   Run in Colonial Forest Estates Subdivision.
         1972
Res.     11-  Grants temporary easement to Cuyahoga County for culvert, headwall, channel
1972-201 20-  and slopes on east side of Cochran Road.
         1972
Res.     2-5- Accepts easement for sanitary sewer in Rain Tree Park.
1973-6   1973
Res.     5-   Accepts sanitary sewer, water main and walk easements from Solon Development
1973-85  21-  Co.
         1973
         5-
1974-76  20-  Vacates all public utilities easements in Davis Parkway.
         1974
Res.     10-  Accepts easement from Transcon Builders, Inc., for water mains in Cheswick I
1974-173 7-   Subdivision.
         1974
1975-20  2-3- Accepts and dedicates utility easements in Hunt Club Subdivisions Nos. 2A, 3
         1975 and 3A.
Res.     4-   Accepts easements from Transcon Builders, Inc., for storm sewer main in
1975-67  21-  Cheswick Subdivisions I and II.
         1975
Res.     5-   Accepts grant of easement for storm sewer on property of C. S. Steininger
1976-99  17-  northerly of and adjacent to the northerly line of Erie-Lackawanna Railway
         1976 Co.
Res.     8-2- Accepts easements from Transcon Builders, Inc., for construction of water
1976-147 1976 lines in locations other than roadways in Cheswick II Subdivision.
Res.     12-
1976-222 20-  Accepts grant of easement for storm sewers on property of W. King.
         1976
Res.     5-   Accepts easements from S. & M. of Ohio, Inc., for water mains in Cannon
1977-102 23-  Estates Subdivisions II and III.
         1977
Res.     6-6- Accepts easement from Rolero Co., for relocation and installation of sewers.
1977-103 1977
Res.     7-   Accepts easement from Solon Development Co., for water main in Liberty Hills
1977-143 13-  Multi-Family, Phase II Subdivision.
         1977
         7-   Accepts easement from Colonial Forest Estates, Inc., for water main in
1977-144 13-  Colonial Forest Estates Subdivision V.
         1977
Res.     9-   Accepts easements from Rolero, Inc., for water mains in Davis Industrial
1977-195 19-  Subdivision Block A.
         1977
         11-  Reserves easement rights for utilities in connection with the vacation of Old
1977-216 7-   Harper Road between Bainbridge Road and the Erie R.R. tracks.
         1977
         11-  Accepts easement for water main from Metro Development Co., for Fairfield
1977-218 21-  Estates Subdivision.
         1977
Res.     5-   Accepts easement for sanitary sewer from Cleveland Metropolitan Park
1978-57  22-  District.
         1978
Res.     5-
1978-59  22-  Accepts easement for storm sewer from Cleveland Metropolitan Park District.
         1978
Res.     8-7- Accepts easement from Ray Fogg Building Methods, Inc., for maintenance of
1978-186 1978 storm sewer.
Res.     11-  Accepts easement for water main on property in the vicinity of Cromwell
1978-231 6-   Drive, from Solon Development Co.
         1978
Res.     11-  Accepts easement from Brainard Estates Co., for water service to Brainard
1978-237 6-   Garden Estates Subdivision.
         1978
Res.     12-  Accepts easement for water main from Solon Development Co., on property in
1978-246 4-   the vicinity of Cromwell Drive.
         1978
Res.     12-  Accepts easement for water main from Transcon Builders, Inc., for Clandon
1978-266 18-  Park Subdivision.
         1978
         8-   Vacates easements for sewer purposes across lands of Liberty Hills
1979-172 20-  Subdivision No. 3.
         1979
Res.     8-   Accepts grant of easement for storm and sanitary sewers across property of
1979-173 20-  Solon Development Co.
         1979
Res.     8-   Accepts grant of easement for sanitary sewer force main across property of
1979-174 20-  Solon Development Co.
         1979
Res.     5-   Accepts easements from Friezar, Inc., A., C. E. and J. W. Krejci, and C. J.
1980-75  19-  and K. M. Desantis, for replacement of two box culverts on SOM Center and
         1980 Aurora Roads.
Res.     7-7- Accepts easement from Solon Park Apartments, Inc.
1980-105 1980
Res.     10-  Accepts easement for water, electric and telephone utilities for Metro Court
1980-146 6-   Estates Subdivision.
         1980
Res.     10-  Authorizes agreement between Cleveland Metroparks, N. Buckantz and the city
1980-147 6-   for installation of utilities in and vehicular access to Metro Court Estates
         1980 Subdivision.
Res.     6-1- Accepts easement from E. C. Balliette for storm sewer at 30725 Aurora Road.
1981-71  1981
Res.     6-   Accepts easement from J. Dukich for storm sewer purposes, in the vicinity of
1981-79  22-  Aurora and Liberty Roads.
         1981
Res.     7-   Accepts easement from Libuda Machine & Tool Co., for storm sewer purposes, at
1981-98  20-  30925 Aurora Road.
         1981
         9-   Accepts easement for sanitary sewer from Board of Trustees of the Ohio
Res.     21-  District Council, Inc., of the Assemblies of God, across Cannon Road frontage
1981-121 1981 of Permanent Parcel 951-11-12 of Original Solon Township Lot No. 15, Tract
              No. 1.
Res.     12-  Accepts easement from A. J. and J. A. Gambatese, for storm sewer construction
1981-147 7-   on property adjacent to Meadowdale Drive.
         1981
Res.     4-5- Accepts easement from H. G. and A. H. Arslanian for storm sewer purposes, in
1982-43  1982 the vicinity of Blackberry Circle.
Res.     4-5- Accepts easement from J. and J. Pachi for storm sewer purposes, in the
1982-44  1982 vicinity of Blackberry Circle.
Res.     6-   Accepts grant of easement from Nomis Development Corp., for storm sewer
1982-73  21-  purposes in Sublot 14 of Oakview Estates Subdivision.
         1982
Res.     8-   Accepts easement from Nomis Development Corp., for storm sewer purposes in
1982-107 16-  Sublots 49, 50 and 60 of Oakview Estates Subdivision.
         1982
Res.     9-   Accepts underground easement deeds from Ambina Development Co., I. J. Chelm,
1982-131 20-  et al., Scar-Mar Co., L. Davis, Sun Life Assurance Co. of Canada, Pruzan Co.
         1982 of Illinois, Inc., and Jarva, Inc., in connection with Cochran Road Project.
Res.     10-  Accepts storm sewer easement from Solon Associates Co., for storm sewer
1982-139 18-  purposes, in vicinity of Liberty Road.
         1982
Res.     10-  Accepts underground easement deeds from Crawford Fitting Co. and BCD Land
1982-140 18-  Partners, Ltd., in connection with Cochran Road Project.
         1982
Res.     11-  Accepts easement for water main purposes from Pioneer Memorial Church, on
1982-151 15-  property near Brushwood and Kendall Drives.
         1982
Res.     12-  Authorizes easement agreement with Technicare Corp., for ingress and egress
1982-159 20-  to its facility on Beaver Meadow Parkway.
         1982
Res.     12-  Authorizes acquisition of easement with Austin Powder Co., on property owned
1982-165 20-  by Austin Powder in the Village of Glenwillow, for water line extension.
         1982
Res.     3-
1983-40  21-  Accepts storm sewer easement from St. John Byzantine Catholic Church.
         1983
Res.     6-6- Accepts various easements from Forest City Enterprises, pertaining to SOM
1983-85  1983 Hills Subdivision.
Res.     8-
1983-116 15-  Approving plat of sewer easement relocation for Rolero, Inc.
         1983
Res.     9-6- Accepts easement for access road and utilities to the waste water treatment
1983-123 1983 plant, across property of E.C. Svec and D.R. Divers.
Res.     1-   Accepts standard easement from Sherbrook Gardens Condominium Association,
1984-2   16-  Inc., for water purposes.
         1984
Res.     3-   Authorizes settlement agreement with Ledgehill Homeowners Association, et
1984-29  19-  al., and grants an easement to Ledgehill Estates Homeowners Association,
         1984 Inc., on property between Farm and Haverhill Drives.
Res.     5-7- Accepts easement from J. Glick for a road and utilities, on property in the
1984-66  1984 vicinity of South Side Park Drive.
Res.     6-4- Accepts easement from the 5741 Company for installation of water main on
1984-84  1984 Graystone Drive.
Res.     6-
1984-100 18-  Accepts easement for sanitary sewer purposes from Ambina Development Co.
         1984
         7-   Accepts easement for storm sewer purposes from R.U. Nobel, in the vicinity of
1984-111 12-  SOM Center Road and Sherbrook Park Drive.
         1984
Res.     8-6- Accepts standard easement for a water main from Ralph Victor Construction,
1984-123 1984 Inc.
Res.     12-  Accepts easement from Solon Office Campus Joint Venture, for storm sewer
1984-163 3-   purposes.
         1984
         12-
1984-185 3-   Accepts storm sewer easement from BGBH Partnership.
         1984
Res.     4-   Accepts standard easement from Dinallo & Wittrup Associates, in vicinity of
1985-53  15-  Shadowbrook Drive, for water main purposes.
         1985
Res.     9-3- Accepts grant of easement from P. and B. Kondrat, in the vicinity of Miles
1985-145 1985 Avenue and SOM Center Road, for sanitary sewer purposes.
Res.     10-  Accepts standard easement from J & E Builders, in the vicinity of Cromwell
1985-167 7-   Drive, for water main purposes.
         1985
Res.     10-
1985-175 21-  Accepts two storm sewer easements from Chestnut Homes, Inc.
         1985
Res.     1-6- Accepts easement from Solon Development Co., for water main purposes, in
1986-1   1986 Liberty Hills Subdivision - Phase 3-A.
Res.     1-
1987-013 19-  Accepts standard easement from Solon Development Co. for water main purposes.
         1987
Res.     1-
1987-014 19-  Accepts sanitary sewer easement from P. and A. Springer.
         1987
Res.     2-2- Accepts standard easement from Arthur Road Development Co., for water main
1987-25  1987 purposes.
Res.     2-2- Accepts standard easement from Connecticut Reserve Co., for water main
1987-26  1987 purposes.
Res.     2-2- Accepts easement from Kennemetal, Inc., for an access road and utilities in
1987-30  1987 connection with Beaver Meadow Parkway relocation.
Res.     3-   Grants standard easement to City of Cleveland, on Beaver Meadow Parkway, for
1987-64  30-  water main purposes.
         1987
Res.     5-4- Accepts standard easement from J & E Builders for water main purposes.
1987-93  1987
Res.     6-
1987-123 15-  Accepts standard easement for water main purposes in Windrush Subdivision.
         1987
Res.     7-6- Authorizes contract with Cleveland Electric Illuminating Co. for further
1987-133 1987 utility line and easement relocation for Beaver Meadow Parkway.
Res.     8-
1987-174 17-  Accepts two sanitary sewer easements from Dinallo & Wittrup Homes, Inc.
         1987
Res.     9-8- Accepts pole line easement from Technicare Corp.
1987-193 1987
Res.     11-  Accepts grant of easement from Solon Investments Properties Limited
1987-235 16-  Partnership and Squires Tavern, Inc., for water main purposes.
         1987
Res.     12-  Accepts release of water main and sanitary sewer easements, in Sublot 60 in
1987-260 21-  SOM Hills Re-Subdivision No. 2.
         1987
Res.     4-   Authorizes standard easement, in vicinity of Spring Grove Drive, for water
1988-56  18-  main purposes.
         1988
Res.     6-6- Accepts easement from D.R. and M. Jezek, in the vicinity of Bainbridge Road,
1988-5   1988 for drainage purposes.
1988-78  8-1- Reserves easement for storm sewer purposes in Longley Avenue, in connection
         1988 with the vacation of Erie Street and Longley Avenue.
Res.     8-2- Amends Res. 1987-93, and accepts standard easement from J.A. Ratner, Trustee,
1988-136 1988 for water main purposes.
Res.     9-6- Accepts standard easement from Stouffer Corporation, for water purposes.
1988-159 1988
Res.     9-6- Accepts standard easement from A. Labaj, for water purposes.
1988-160 1988
Res.     9-6- Accepts standard easement from William B. Hirsch-R. H. Development, for water
1988-161 1988 purposes.
Res.     10-  Consents to transfer of easement from Buckeye Pipeline Co., L.P., to WTG-
1988-118 3-   Central, Inc., across city property, for optic fiber cable installation.
         1988
Res.     6-5- Accepts two easements, from F.B. and M.C. Costanzo and from A. and K.
1989-127 1989 Samonte, both in the vicinity of Miles Avenue and SOM Center Road, for
              sanitary sewer purposes.
Res.     2-5- Authorizes acceptance of various easements from Cleveland Electric
1990-28  1990 Illuminating Co., in connection with Northeast Wastewater Treatment Plant
              abandonment project.
Res.     9-4- Accepts standard easement from Solon Associates Co. for water main purposes.
1990-215 1990
Res.     9-4- Accepts standard easement from Cleveland Electric Illuminating Co. and
1990-216 1990 Guaranty Trust Co. of New York, in the vicinity of Bruce Industrial Parkway,
              for water main purposes.
Res.     11-  Accepts standard easement for the installation of a water main (Solon
1990-265 19-  Commons).
         1990
Res.     11-
1990-270 19-  Accepts various easements for the Solon Road Relief Storm Sewer Project.
         1990
Res.     1-7- Accepts a permanent and temporary easement from the Warner & Swasey Co. in
1991-2   1991 connection with the Solon Road Relief Storm Sewer Project.
Res.     3-4- Accepts easement for installation and maintenance of a water main (The Allen
1991-35  1991 Group).
Res.     3-4- Accepts two standard easements for installation and maintenance of a water
1991-36  1991 main.
Res.     5-6- Accepts an easement from the Neptune Lake Assn.
1991-76  1991
Res.     5-   Accepts various easements in connection with the Solon Road widening project
1991-95  20-  and authorizing payment therefor.
         1991
Res.     8-5- Accepts an easement for the installation and maintenance of sewers from Elmer
1991-153 1991 J. and Carole R. Halberg.
Res.     9-3- Accepts an easement for installation and maintenance of storm sewers.
1991-176 1991
Res.     9-   Accepts various easements in connection with the Cochran/Harper Road widening
1991-186 16-  project.
         1991
Res.     12-  Accepts various easements in connection with the Cochran/Harper Road widening
1991-252 30-  project.
         1991
Res.     2-3- Accepts an easement in connection with the Solon Road widening project.
1992-25  1992
Res.     6-1- Accepts an easement from L.A. Vitantonio for installation and maintenance of
1992-98  1992 sanitary sewers.
Res.     6-1- Accepts an easement from Solon Associates Co., an Ohio partnership.
1992-99  1992
Res.     6-   Accepts an easement from Solon Estates, Inc., for installation and
1992-108 29-  maintenance of sanitary sewers.
         1992
Res.     7-6- Accepts various easements in connection with the Cochran/Harper Road widening
1992-112 1992 project.
Res.     7-6- Authorizes easement agreement with Ohio Bell Telephone Co. for the
1992-113 1992 installation and maintenance an above-ground telephone equipment cabinet.
Res.     8-
1992-143 17-  Authorizes standard easement to the City of Cleveland for a water main vault.
         1992
Res.     8-   Accepts an easement from B.L., J.R. and T.M. Quinn for drainage and storm
1992-154 31-  sewer purposes.
         1992
Res.     11-
1992-168 2-   Authorizes easement to Cleveland Electric Illuminating Co.
         1992
Res.     12-  Accepts three easements in connection with the Meadow Lane water line
1992-216 7-   project.
         1992
Res.     12-  Accepts an assignment of easement from Cambridge Park Associates for storm
1992-217 7-   sewer purposes.
         1992
Res.     12-  Accepts an assignment of easement from Solon Associates Co., an Ohio
1992-210 21-  partnership, for sanitary and storm sewer purposes.
         1992
Res.     2-   Accepts standard easement from Solon-Chagrin Estates, Inc., for water main
1993-15  15-  purposes.
         1993
Res.     3-1- Authorizes easement agreement with Matrix Essentials, Inc., for communication
1993-24  1993 cables.
Res.     4-   Accepts an easement from the Pepperwood Lane Homeowners Association in
1993-46  19-  connection with the Pepperwood Lift Station.
         1993
Res.     5-3- Accepts standard easement from Wellingford Estates for water main purposes.
1993-65  1993
Res.     5-   Accepts standard easement for installation and maintenance of a water main
1993-74  17-  for circulation purposes (the Preserve, Phase 2-A).
         1993
Res.     8-2- Accepts an easement from Dinallo and Wittrup Homes, Inc., for sanitary sewer
1993-120 1993 and force main appurtenance purposes.
Res.     8-
1993-138 16-  Accepts an easement from B. Lutz for sanitary sewer purposes.
         1993
Res.     10-  Accepts an easement from NNS Station Street Ltd. for the Solon Road widening
1993-180 4-   project.
         1993
Res.     2-7- Accepts an easement from Aurora Road Realty for water main.
1994-17  1994
Res.     3-7- Accepts an easement from Wellingford Estates Subdivision for a water main.
1994-27  1994
Res.     7-
1994-108 18-  Accepts an easement from J. and C. Grabner for storm sewers.
         1994
Res.     8-1- Authorizes easement with J.A. Pirro for sanitary sewers.
1994-122 1994
Res.     4-3- Accepts standard easement from Miles Development Corp. for installation and
1995-75  1995 maintenance of a water main.
Res.     4-
1995-79  17-  Accepts easement from J. Turner for sanitary sewer.
         1995
Res.     6-5- Accepts standard easement from D & L Land Co. for installation and
1995-110 1995 maintenance of a water main for circulation purposes (Timber Trails
              Subdivision).
Res.     6-5- Accepts standard easement from C.L. Gemma for installation and maintenance of
1995-111 1995 a water main.
Res.     6-
1995-129 19-  Accepts easement from J. Turner for sanitary sewer.
         1995
Res.     7-   Accepts easements from Board Associates for construction and maintenance of
1995-140 17-  highway utilities.
         1995
Res.     7-   Authorizes acceptance of easements from Miles Development Corp. for sanitary
1995-142 17-  sewer and drainage system.
         1995
Res.     8-   Accepts easement from Betsy Investments Co. for installation and maintenance
1995-179 21-  of sanitary sewers.
         1995
Res.     9-   Accepts easement from DiSanto Enterprises, Inc., for installation and
1995-185 18-  maintenance of storm sewer (Brainard Estates II Subdivision).
         1995
Res.     11-
1995-219 6-   Accepts an easement from DiSanto Enterprises, Inc., for storm sewer.
         1995
Res.     11-  Accepts easement from Nolos, Inc., for installation and maintenance of storm
1995-238 20-  and sanitary sewers (Southside Park V).
         1995
Res.     1-   Accepts easement from Dinallo & Wittrup Homes, Inc., for installation and
1996-5   15-  maintenance of a pump station.
         1996
Res.     1-   Accepts easement from Glenallen Apartments, for installation and maintenance
1996-10  15-  of a storm sewer.
         1996
Res.     2-5- Accepts standard easement from Miles Development Corp. for installation and
1996-24  1996 maintenance of a water main for circulation purposes (Forest Hills
              Subdivision).
Res.     2-   Accepts standard easement from Solon-Chagrin Estates, Inc., for installation
1996-29  21-  and maintenance of a water main (Chagrin Highlands No. 2, Phase 2
         1996 Subdivision).
Res.     2-   Accepts sanitary sewer easement from Dinallo & Wittrup Homes, Inc., for the
1996-32  21-  North Park Subdivision.
         1996
Res.     2-   Accepts standard easement from Kayell Development Co. for installation and
1996-34  21-  maintenance of a water main.
         1996
Res.     3-4- Accepts easement from BGBH Partnership for installation and maintenance of a
1996-59  1996 traffic signal.
Res.     5-   Accepts an acknowledgment and agreement of encroachment of easement for sewer
1996-100 20-  line from E.S. and N.C. Schikowski.
         1996
Res.     6-3- Accepts standard easement from Betsy Investments Co. for installation and
1996-115 1996 maintenance of a water main.
Res.     8-5- Accepts standard easement from Miles Development Corp. and J. and D. Ania for
1996-161 1996 installation and maintenance of a water main for circulation purposes (Forest
              Hills Subdivision).
Res.     10-  Authorizes easement from C.A. Pawlek for the installation and maintenance of
1996-173 21-  storm sewers.
         1996
Res.     10-
1996-208 21-  Authorizes easement agreement with Matrix Essentials, Inc.
         1996
Res.     11-  Authorizes granting of an easement to Ameritech Corp., to erect an above-
1996-218 4-   ground telephone equipment cabinet.
         1996
Res.     4-   Accepts standard easement from DiSanto Properties, Ltd., et al., for the
1997-83  23-  installation and maintenance of a water main for circulation purposes
         1997 (Ayleshire Subdivision).
Res.     4-   Authorizes easement agreement with Arthur Road Development Co. for the
1997-84  23-  construction and maintenance of storm and sanitary sewers.
         1997
Res.     5-   Accepts assignment of easement from Dinallo & Wittrup Homes, Inc., for
1997-107 19-  sanitary sewer purposes.
         1997
Res.     6-   Accepts standard easement from the Homes of Emerald Ridge, Inc., for the
1997-130 16-  installation and maintenance of a water main for water service purposes.
         1997
Res.     6-   Appropriating a temporary construction easement located at 6619 SOM Center
1997-132 16-  Road, in the absence of an agreement with the owners.
         1997
Res.     7-   Authorizes transfer of an easement from Dinallo & Wittrup Homes, Inc., in
1997-147 21-  North Park Subdivision for sewer purposes.
         1997
Res.     10-  Authorizes easement agreement with C.A. Smigelski for installation and
1997-180 6-   maintenance of storm sewers.
         1997
Res.     10-  Authorizes gas lease and easement agreement with NEO Cuyahoga, LLC, for the
1997-216 20-  Solon Landfill.
         1997
Res.     10-
1997-218 20-  Authorizes easement agreement with Organic Waste Technologies, Inc.
         1997
Res.     11-
1997-229 17-  Accepts an easement from J.C. and E.B. Sima for storm sewer purposes.
         1997
Res.     11-
1997-230 17-  Accepts an easement from E.A. and G.M. Hill for storm sewer purposes.
         1997
Res.     11-  Accepts standard easement from D-G Realty Investments for the installation
1997-251 17-  and maintenance of a water main, for circulation purposes only.
         1997
Res.     4-6- Grants power line easement to the Cleveland Electric Illuminating Co. (CEI),
1998-80  1998 for Kruse Drive/Solon Road.
Res.     9-   Accepts assignment of easement rights from Granite Development Partners,
1998-175 24-  L.P., for sanitary sewer and force main purposes as part of the Thornbury
         1998 Subdivision.
Res.     12-  Accepts permanent and temporary easements from SOM Hillcrest, Ltd., for
1998-222 7-   roadway purposes.
         1998
Res.     12-  Accepts an easement from J. Comella and S. Greer, Trustees, for the
1998-234 7-   installation and maintenance of a storm sewer.
         1998
Res.     12-  Accepts right-of-way easements from BP Exploration & Oil, Inc., for roadway
1998-242 21-  purposes.
         1998
Res.     12-
1998-244 21-  Amends Res. 1998-234.
         1998
Res.     4-5- Removes perpetual access easement area within Permanent Parcel No. 955-24-
1999-51  1999 002.
Res.     5-3- Authorizes consent and agreement and corrective memorandum to gas lease and
1999-67  1999 easement agreement with NEO Cuyahoga, LLC, for the Solon Landfill.
Res.     6-7- Accepts permanent and temporary easements from the Ohio Bell Telephone Co.,
1999-95  1999 for roadway purposes.
Res.     6-7- Authorizes agreement with Jerpbak Bayless Co. for acquisition of permanent
1999-96  1999 and temporary roadway easements.
Res.     6-   Accepts permanent and temporary easements from Franklin Row Limited
1999-120 21-  Partnership, for roadway purposes.
         1999
         7-   Appropriating easements located at 6150 SOM Center Road, for roadway
1999-139 19-  purposes.
         1999
         7-   Appropriating a temporary easement and a roadway easement located at 6200 SOM
1999-140 19-  Center Road, for roadway purposes.
         1999
         7-   Appropriating permanent and temporary easements located at 6165 SOM Center
1999-146 19-  Road, for roadway purposes.
         1999
Res.     8-   Accepts standard easement from Franklin Park Limited, for the installation
1999-165 16-  and maintenance of a water main, for water supply services.
         1999
Res.     9-
1999-172 21-  Grants an easement to Course 43 Ltd., for right-of-way purposes.
         1999
Res.     11-  Grants right-of-way easements on certain city-owned property to the State of
1999-213 1-   Ohio, Department of Transportation, for roadway purposes.
         1999
Res.     12-
1999-241 6-   Accepts an easement from P. and G.B. Gioitta, for storm sewer purposes.
         1999
Res.     4-3- Accepts standard easements from Course 43 Ltd., for the installation and
2000-71  2000 maintenance of a water main, for water supply services.
Res.     5-1- Accepts an easement from M.J. Lubachivsky, for sanitary sewer purposes.
2000-104 2000
Res.     5-   Authorizes agreement with Solon Road Limited Partnership for the acquisition
2000-115 15-  of permanent and temporary easements, for roadway purposes.
         2000
Res.     5-   Authorizes agreement with Solon Office Campus Condominiums for the acquision
2000-116 15-  of permanent and temporary easements, for roadway purposes.
         2000
Res.     6-5- Accepts an easement from D. Baudo, for roadway purposes.
2000-145 2000
Res.     6-5- Accepts an easement from A.H. Krasowski, for roadway purposes.
2000-146 2000
Res.     6-   Accepts an easement from D.M. and M.M. Yates, for storm sewer and drainage
2000-163 19-  purposes.
         2000
Res.     7-5- Accepts an easement agreement to grant a permanent easement on Dorset Lane to
2000-189 2000 Granite Development Partners, L.P., for utility purposes.
Res.     7-5- Accepts standard easements from Course 43 Ltd., for the installation and
2000-190 2000 maintenance of a water main, for water supply services.
Res.     7-5- Accepts an easement from C. Haydocy, for roadway purposes.
2000-191 2000
Res.     7-5- Accepts permanent and temporary easements from K. and C.M. Inniss, for storm
2000-192 2000 sewer purposes.
Res.     8-   Authorizes agreement with Apple American Limited Partnership of Ohio for the
2000-224 21-  acquisition of permanent and temporary easements, for roadway purposes.
         2000
Res.     8-
2000-225 21-  Authorizes nonexclusive easement with Virginia Holding Corp.
         2000
Res.     9-
2000-254 18-  Authorizes release of utility easements with Solon Associates Co.
         2000
Res.     9-
2000-255 18-  Authorizes execution of sewer easements with Solon Associates Co.
         2000
Res.     10-
2000-273 2-   Repeals Res. 2000-254.
         2000
Res.     10-
2000-274 2-   Accepts an easement fom Cortom, LLC, for roadway purposes.
         2000
Res.     10-
2000-275 2-   Accepts an easement from R.A. Spadaro, for sanitary sewer purposes.
         2000
Res.     10-  Accepts temporary and permanent easements from Mount Olive Cemetery Assn.,
2000-276 2-   for sanitary sewer purposes.
         2000
Res.     10-  Accepts standard easement from Course 43 Ltd., for the installation and
2000-277 2-   maintenance of a water main, for water supply services.
         2000
Res.     10-  Accepts an easement from the Cleveland Electric Illuminating Co., for
2000-290 16-  emergency access between the Hunt Club and Liberty Hill Subdivisions.
         2000
Res.     10-
2000-291 16-  Accepts an easement from Zircoa, Inc., for roadway purposes.
         2000
Res.     11-
2000-304 6-   Accepts an easement from C.T. and K.L. Draper, for sanitary sewer purposes.
         2000
Res.     11-
2000-305 6-   Accepts an easement from Jack O. Ford, for sanitary sewer purposes.
         2000
Res.     11-  Accepts an easement from J.D. and C.A. Grabner, for sanitary and storm sewer
2000-306 6-   purposes.
         2000
Res.     4-2- Accepts easements from Michael A. Nero, Lilia and Rodis F. Sietins, James L.
2001-19  2001 and Merwonne Childers, Richard A. and Darla G. Wagner, and Won Ae Reu, for
              the Aurora Road/Liberty Road Intersection Improvement Project.
Res.     2-5- Accepts a standard easement from Course 43 Ltd., for the installation and
2001-33  2001 maintenance of a water main for the Sycamore Estates Subdivision Phase 2A.
Res.     2-5- Accepts a standard easement from Course 43 Ltd., for the installation and
2001-34  2001 maintenance of a water main for the Sycamore Estates Subdivision Phase 2B.
Res.     2-5- Accepts a standard easement from Course 43 Ltd., for the installation and
2001-35  2001 maintenance of a water main for the Sycamore Estates Subdivision Phase 2C.
Res.     3-   Accepts a contract for permanent and temporary easements from the Highland
2001-83  19-  Loch Homeowners Association, for storm sewer purposes on Block B in the
         2001 Highland Loch Subdivision.
Res.     4-2- Accepts a contract for an easement from EHM Associates Limited Partnership
2001-95  2001 and Art Vandelet, for storm sewer purposes in connection with the Camp
              Industrial Park Culvert Project.
              Accepts easements from St. John Byzantine Catholic Church and Biaggio and
Res.     5-7- Patricia Belluardo, for roadway purposes; accepts easement from the Highlands
2001-120 2001 Loch Homeowners Association for storm sewer and drainage purposes on Block B
              of the Highland Loch Subdivision.
Res.     6-4- Authorizes licenses agreement with Norfolk Southern Railway Company for a
2001-119 2001 sanitary sewer crossing at the intersection of Cannon Road and Brainard Road
              necessary for the Aurora West Sewer Project.
Res.     6-4- Accepts a contract for a permanent easement from Solon Associates, LLC, for
2001-153 2001 drainage and storm sewer purposes in connection with the Camp Industrial Park
              Culvert Project.
Res.     6-   Accepts vacation and dedication easements from Course 43 Ltd., to relocate a
2001-166 18-  drainage channel in the Signature of Solon Subdivision.
         2001
Res.     7-2- Accepts a contract for a temporary construction easement from Robert P.
2001-176 2001 Mladineo, located at 5305 Brainard Road in connection with the Aurora West
              Sewer Project.
Res.     7-2- Accepts a contract for a roadway easement from Bonnie T. Lane, located at
2001-177 2001 36000 Aurora Road in connection with the Aurora/Liberty Intersection
              Improvement Project.
Res.     7-   Accepts an easement from Duke-Weeks Realty Corporation, for the installation
2001-186 16-  and maintenance of electrical and telephone lines on Harper Road.
         2001
Res.     11-  Accepts a contract for a construction easement from Fernando and Josefina
2001-270 19-  Fernandez, located at 32900 Aspen Glen in connection with the Aspen Glen
         2001 Sewer Project.
         1-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a grant of conservation easement with
2002-4   23-  Tinkers Creek Land Conservancy.
         2002
Res.     2-4- Executing a grant of conservation easement and the assignment of preserve
2002-27  2002 management agreement and partial release for the North Branch Preserve.
Res.     2-   Accepting the standard easement for the installation and maintenance of a
2002-47  20-  water main from Hawthorn Woods Limited (Emerald Ridge Parkway).
         2002
Res.     3-   Granting a water meter vault easement to the City of Cleveland Water
2002-67  18-  Department for the Community Center Project.
         2002
Res.     4-1- Accepting a memorandum of gift and utility easement from Landerhaven Country
2002-79  2002 Club Estates, Ltd.
Res.     4-1- Agreement for a temporary and permanent sanitary sewer easement on PP# 952-
2002-89  2002 16-058 Aspen Glen Drive.
Res.     8-5- Granting an easement to the Ohio Bell Telephone Company on PP# 954-16-057 SOM
2002-178 2002 Center Road.
         9-   Amending Ord. 2002-4 to supplement the agreement with the Tinkers Creek Land
2002-208 18-  Conservancy for a conservation easement on city-owned property.
         2002
Res.     9-   Accepting a permanent and temporary storm sewer easement from the Solon Board
2002-209 18-  of Education (PP# 952-09-002 Cannon Road).
         2002
Res.     11-  Accepting a landscape easement from Greystone Group - Solon, Ltd. at the
2002-250 4-   northwest corner of SOM Center Road and Bainbridge Road (PP# 952-21-021).
         2002
Res.     1-   Granting a water meter vault easement to the City of Cleveland Water
2003-10  22-  Department for the Fire Station 3 Project.
         2003
Res.     1-   Authorizing a right of entry and public pathway easement agreement with the
2003-11  22-  Solon Board of Education (the Preserve Pathway).
         2003
Res.     12-  Accepting a contract for permanent and temporary drainage and storm sewer
2003-288 1-   easements from Michael W. Stanik III on PP# 955-28-015 Liberty Road for the
         2003 Aurora/Liberty Detention Basin Project.
Res.     1-   Accepting a contract for temporary and permanent drainage and storm sewer
2004-12  20-  easements from Eric and Lorene Friess at 36824 Aurora Road for the Aurora/
         2004 Liberty Detention Basin Project.
Res.     3-   Accepting an easement for maintenance of a sediment and erosion control
2004-65  29-  device on 34540 Sherbrook Park Drive.
         2004
Res.     7-
2004-164 19-  Establishing various easements on city-owned property.
         2004
Res.     9-   Declaring the intent to appropriate easement interests in certain property
2004-194 20-  for the Aurora East Sewer Project.
         2004
Res.     9-   Accepting a contract for a storm sewer and drainage easement at 6578
2004-206 20-  Creekside Trail for the Creekside Detention Basin Project.
         2004
         4-   Accepting the standard easement for the installation and maintenance of a
2005-92  18-  water main from Morningstar Realty Co., Inc. (Emerald Ridge Parkway).
         2005
         5-   Authorizing a reciprocal parking easement agreement on city-owned property at
2005-118 16-  6320 SOM Center Road with SGRO Development Enterprises.
         2005
2005-80  6-6- Accepting a permanent utility easement from Ultimate Wash of Solon Inc.,
         2005 within the vacated portion of Old Aurora Road (PP# 954-29-038).
2005-81  6-6- Accepting a permanent utility easement and bike path from W.L.G.C.V. Ltd.,
         2005 within the vacated portion of Old Aurora Road (PP# 954-29-017).
         9-   Accepting a contract for a storm sewer and drainage easement on PP# 955-22-
2005-209 19-  011 Creekside Trail in connection with the Creekside Detention Basin Project.
         2005
         12-  Accepting a standard easement for the installation and maintenance of a water
2005-287 19-  main for circulation purposes only from FC Willowbroook Inc., (PP# 956-31-001
         2005 Sycamore Estates Subdivision).
2006-26  2-6- Accepting various contracts for purchase of rights-of-way and easements in
         2006 connection with the Aurora East Sewer/Pettibone Reconstruction Projects.
         2-   Accepting a permanent easement from the Cleveland Electric Illuminating
2006-35  21-  Company for access to the Creekside Detention Basin (PP#s 955-18-020, 955-19-
         2006 002 and 955-23-001).
         5-1- Authorizes an easement agreement and a temporary construction easement with
2006-94  2006 the Board of Park Commissioners of the Cleveland Metropolitan Park District
              in connection with the Metropolitan Lift Station Project.
         5-   Accepting contracts for drainage easements and purchase of right-of-way in
2006-111 15-  connection with the Aurora East Sewer/Pettibone Reconstruction Projects.
         2006
         7-   Granting an easement to the Cleveland Electric Illuminating Company for
2006-176 17-  relocated electrical poles in connection with the Beaver Meadow Parkway
         2006 Culvert Replacement Project (PP# 953-22-001).
2006-191 8-7- Accepting a contract for a drainage easement on PP# 954-25-008 in connection
         2006 with the Pettibone Reconstruction Project.
         8-   Accepting a standard easement for the installation and maintenance of a water
2006-211 21-  main for the purpose of supplying water service to PP# 951-04-007, 28340
         2006 Miles Road.
Res.     2-   Declaring the intent to appropriate easements for the Bunker Hill Storm Sewer
2007-29  21-  Project.
         2007
         2-   Accepting a sanitary sewer easement from the Cleveland Electric Illuminating
2007-36  21-  Company (PP# 953-27-004).
         2007
         4-   Accepting a cancellation of an easement granted to Sgro Development
2007-78  16-  Enterprises for parking purposes.
         2007
         5-7- Accepting a contract for a storm sewer and drainage easement on PP# 955-07-
2007-112 2007 041, 6162 Penfield Lane, in connection with the Bunker Hill Storm Sewer
              Improvement Project.
2007-123 5-7- Accepting a contract for a drainage easement on PP# 956-17-010 in connection
         2007 with the Pettibone Reconstruction Project.
         6-   Establishing various easements on city-owned property (On PP#s 952-21-022,
2007-162 18-  952-21-027, 952-21-028 and 954-29-001):
         2007
            PP# 952-21-022, permanent easement for roadway purposes.
            PP# 952-21-027, permanent easement for roadway purposes.
            PP# 954-29-001, permanent easement for roadway purposes.
            PP# 952-21-022, temporary easement for construction purposes.
            PP# 952-21-027, temporary easement for construction purposes.
            PP# 952-21-028, temporary easement for construction purposes.
            PP# 954-29-001, temporary easement for construction purposes.
         1-   Accepting a contract for a drainage easement on PP# 954-19-003 in connection
2008-16  22-  with the Pettibone Reconstruction Project.
         2008
         4-7- Authorizing an exclusive easement agreement with AT&T for the purpose of
2008-82  2008 installing additional equipment requiring an amendment to an existing
              easement located at the corner of Arthur Road and Fox Hill Drive.
         4-7- Accepting a standard easement for the installation and maintenance of a water
2008-83  2008 main for the purpose of supplying water service from Carrington Court
              Apartments LTD.
2008-102 5-5- Authorizing an access drive easement agreement with Automotive Realty, LLC.
         2008
         6-2- Authorizing a grant of conservation easement for an approximate 14.3 acre
2008-126 2008 parcel of land located adjacent to the South Chagrin Reservation of the
              Cleveland Metropolitan Park District.
         6-   Accepting a permanent easement from Granite Development Partners for access
2008-164 16-  to the Creekside Detention Basin, PP# 955-31-002.
         2008
         1-5- Accepting a storm sewer easement for property located at 36500 Pepper Drive,
2009-05  2009 in connection with the Pepperwood Storm Sewer Improvement Project. (Rescinded
              by Ord. 2010-202, passed 8-16-2010)
2009-06  1-5- Accepting a storm sewer easement for property located at 36600 Pepper Drive,
         2009 in connection with the Pepperwood Storm Sewer Improvement Project.
2009-33  2-2- Accepting a storm sewer easement on PP# 952-42-009, located at 34505 Bridle
         2009 Trail Drive in connection with the Miles Road Storm Sewer Improvements.
         2-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement for easement transfers with
2009-46  17-  Kennametal, Inc. and Tameran, Inc.
         2009
         2-   Accepting a storm sewer easement for property located at 36550 Pepper Drive,
2009-47  17-  in connection with the Pepperwood Storm Sewer Improvement Project.
         2009
2009-56  3-2- Accepting a storm sewer and drainage easement located at 34400 Country View
         2009 Lane in connection with the Miles Road Storm Sewer Improvements.
2009-115 5-4- Accepting a storm sewer and drainage easement located at 36660 Blackberry
         2009 Circle in connection with the Pepperwood Storm Sewer Improvement Project.
         5-   Accepting a roadway easement on PP# 954-01-130 with Sathe Realty, LLC in
2009-131 18-  connection with the Solon Road Sidewalk Improvement Project.
         2009
         5-   Accepting a roadway easement on PP#s 954-01-006 and 954-01-007 with KP
2009-132 18-  Investment in connection with the Solon Road Sidewalk Improvement Project.
         2009
         6-   Accepting a roadway easement on PP# 954-01-005 with Zeta Realty, LLC in
2009-152 15-  connection with the Solon Road Sidewalk Improvement Project.
         2009
         8-3- Accepting a contract for a storm sewer easement on PP# 953-31-005 with 30400
2009-193 2009 Solon, LLC and ARM Holding V, Ltd. in connection with the Solon Road Sidewalk
              Improvement Project.
2009-196 8-3- Appropriating a storm sewer easement owned by Edward Skok, PP#952-32-025, for
         2009 the Pepperwood Storm Sewer Project.
         8-   Appropriating a storm sewer easement owned by Ruth Klotzman, PP# 952-32-055,
2009-201 17-  for the Pepperwood Storm Sewer Project.
         2009
         9-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute various construction easements necessary for
2009-242 21-  the Cuyahoga County Bainbridge Road Reconstruction Project.
         2009
         10-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract for a storm sewer and drainage
2009-248 5-   easement with Ruth Ann Klotzman.
         2009
         11-  Accepting a contract for a permanent storm sewer and drainage easement for
2009-263 2-   property located at 5220 Ramblewood Court.
         2009
         1-   Accepting a contract for a storm sewer and drainage easement located at 36650
2010-25  19-  Pepper Drive in connection with the Pepperwood Subdivision Storm Sewer
         2010 Improvements.
         1-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute the necessary easements for the Miles/Harper
2010-30  19-  Intersection Improvement Project.
         2010
              Authorizing the Mayor to enter into the environmental covenant with the
         3-   Western Reserve Land Conservancy for the purpose of establishing a 3.847-acre
2010-41  15-  environmental easement as part of the wetland mitigation required for the
         2010 North Huntington Detention Basin Expansion Project. (Rescinded by Ord. 2010-
              90, passed 4-19-2010, then re-instated by Ord. 2010-106, passed 5-3-2010.)
         4-
2010-90  19-  Rescinding Ord. 2010-41; reinstated by Ord. 2010-106.
         2010
2010-106 5-3- Reinstating Ord. 2010-41.
         2010
         8-   Accepting a contract for a tornado siren easement on PP# 955-18-005 located
2010-201 16-  at 38500 Pettibone Road from William and Catherine Lawyer.
         2010
         8-
2010-202 16-  Rescinding Ord. 2009-05.
         2010
         8-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a revised contract and amended permanent
2010-203 16-  easement agreement for a perforated tile drainage system for property located
         2010 at 36500 Pepper Drive, in connection with the Pepperwood Storm Sewer
              Improvement Project.
         9-   Amending Exhibit B of Ord. 2010-203 which approved a revised contract and
2010-213 13-  permanent easement agreement with Ralph E. Stewart for property located at
         2010 36500 Pepper Drive, in connection with the Pepperwood Storm Sewer Improvement
              Project.
         9-   Accepting a contract for a permanent sanitary sewer easement for property
2010-214 13-  located at 35105 Quartermane Circle, in connection with the Sherbrook Aerial
         2010 Sewer Improvements.
2011-39  3-7- Accepting a permanent easement for sanitary sewer purposes from the Signature
         2011 of Solon Master Association.
         7-   Accepting a highway easement on PP# 953-28-003 for right-of-way from Carter-
2011-136 18-  Cochran LLC in connection with the Cochran/Carter Intersection Improvement
         2011 Project.
         7-   Accepting a highway easement on PP# 953-28-007 for right-of-way from Cortom
2011-137 18-  LLC in connection with the Cochran/Carter Intersection Improvement Project.
         2011
         7-   Accepting a highway easement on PP# 953-11-002 for right-of-way from Swagelok
2011-138 18-  Company, f.k.a. Crawford Fitting Company in connection with the Cochran/
         2011 Carter Intersection Improvement Project.
         7-   Accepting a temporary easement on PP# 953-11-002 for right-of-way from
2011-139 18-  Swagelok Company, f.k.a. Crawford Fitting Company in connection with the
         2011 Cochran/Carter Intersection Improvement Project.
         11-
2011-217 7-   Executing a permanent easement agreement with Colton Enterprises.
         2011
         12-  Accepting a contract for a storm sewer easement and right-of-way on PP# 956-
2011-250 19-  06-016 from the Cleveland Electric Illuminating Company in connection with
         2011 the Preserve Wetland Restoration Project, Phase 3.
         1-
2012-17  17-  Rescinding Ord. 2011-250.
         2012
         1-   Accepting a contract for a revised storm sewer easement and right-of-way on
2012-18  17-  PP# 956-06-016 from the Cleveland Electric Illuminating Company in connection
         2012 with the Preserve Wetland Restoration Project, Phase 3.
         8-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an amended driveway easement agreement
2012-214 20-  with Katherine A. Nock and Frank J. Yaroshak III.
         2012
         9-   Accepting a contract/storm sewer and drainage easement located at 35690 Solon
2012-241 19-  Road, in connection with the Pepperwood Storm Sewer Improvement Project,
         2012 Phase II.
         9-   Accepting a contract/storm sewer and drainage easement located at 36000
2012-242 19-  Pepper Drive, in connection with the Pepperwood Storm Sewer Improvement
         2012 Project, Phase II.
         10-  Authorizing the City Engineer and/or his or her authorized representative to
2012-256 15-  enter into license agreements to allow for expanded uses of city-owned
         2012 utility easements.
         10-  Accepting a storm sewer easement located at 36150 Pepper Drive, in connection
2014-213 6-   with the Pepperwood Storm Sewer Improvement Project, Phase IIA.
         2014
         3-   Accepting a maintenance easement located at 27735 Cannon Road, in connection
2015-40  16-  with the Brainard Road culvert replacement project.
         2015
2015-76  4-6- Accepting a maintenance easement for property located at 5490 Brainard Road,
         2015 in connection with the Brainard Road culvert replacement project.
         6-   Accepting a maintenance easement for property located at 5490 Brainard Road,
2015-139 15-  in connection with the Brainard Road culvert replacement project.
         2015
         9-   Accepting temporary right-of-way easements on PP# 954-29-017 from W.A.P.H.P.
2016-160 19-  LTD., an Ohio Limited Liability Company in connection with the SOM/Aurora
         2016 Intersection Improvement Project.
         10-  Accepting a temporary right-of-way easement on PP# 954-03-018 from NBKG
2016-171 17-  Limited Liability Company in connection with the SOM/Aurora Intersection
         2016 Improvement Project.
         10-  Purchase agreement for a temporary work easement over real property located
2016-178 17-  at 33630-33670 Aurora Road (PP# 954-03-021) for the SOM Center Road and
         2016 Aurora Road Intersection Improvements Project.
         10-  Purchase agreement for temporary work easements over real property located at
2016-180 17-  33840 Aurora Road (PP# 954-03-024) for the SOM Center Road and Aurora Road
         2016 Intersection Improvements Project.
         3-   Purchase of a perpetual and irrevocable sanitary and storm sewer easement
2017-58  20-  with Britania Enterprises, LLC.
         2017
         5-
2017-94  15-  Rescinding Ordinance No. 2017-58.
         2017
         5-   Purchase of a perpetual and irrevocable sanitary and storm sewer easement
2017-95  15-  with Britania Enterprises, LLC.
         2017
         3-5- Accepting a perpetual and irrevocable storm sewer installation and
2018-55  2018 maintenance easement located at 34890 Sherwood Drive in connection with the
              Sherwood Drive culvert replacement project.
         8-6- Vacating a sewer easement and accepting a perpetual and irrevocable sanitary
2018-176 2018 sewer and storm sewer installation and maintenance easement located at 34900
              Bridle Trail Lane.
         8-   Accepting a perpetual and irrevocable culvert installation and maintenance
2019-160 19-  easement for PP# 951-44-043, in connection with the Miles Road Culvert C12
         2019 replacement project.
         2-   Accepting a standard easement for the installation and maintenance of a water
2020-29  18-  main for the purpose of supplying water service for Carrington Court
         2020 Apartments Ltd.
         6-1- Accepting the dedication of a 10 foot right-of-way easement from the Chabad
2020-105 2020 Jewish Center of Solon, 5570 Harper Road in connection with lot consolidation
              of PP#s 951-28-003, 951-28-016 and 951-28-018.
         8-   Accepting the dedication of right-of-way from Wolis, Inc. in connection with
2020-155 17-  the approved lot consolidation of PP#s 952-21-009, 952-21-048, 952-21-050 and
         2020 952-21- 052 located at 6221 SOM Center Road.
         11-  Granting an easement to Dominion East Ohio Gas for the replacement and
2020-192 16-  relocation of a regulator station on Solon Road.
         2020
         10-  Granting an easement on Solon Road (PP# 952-18-005) to Dominion East Ohio Gas
2021-216 18-  for the replacement and relocation of a regulator station.
         2021
         5-   Accepting the donation of perpetual easements for storm sewer and drainage
2022-124 16-  maintenance purposes located at 5930 Liberty Road.
         2022
         12-  Accepting a perpetual and irrevocable culvert installation and maintenance
2022-254 19-  easement for property located at 31850 Miles Road in connection with the
         2022 Miles Road Culvert C13 Replacement Project with the Village of Orange.
         5-   Accepting a perpetual and irrevocable 30-foot recreational trail easement for
2023-140 15-  property located at 34165 Aurora Road.
         2023
         6-   Approving the limited access and temporary easements and permanent right-of-
2023-153 20-  way acquisition for the City of Solon property for the US 422 and Harper Road
         2023 interchange project.
2023-176 8-7- Accepting the dedication of approximately 13 feet of right-of-way easement
         2023 from Mac’s Convenience Stores, LCC (Circle K).
2023-187 8-7- Approving the release of premises from easement of permanent parcel No. 953-
         2023 07-003 from Kamena LLC.
2023-188 8-7- Accepting an easement for highway purposes located at 29601 Solon Road from
         2023 Kamena LLC.
         8-   Accepting a perpetual and irrevocable installation, usage and maintenance
2023-197 23-  easement for property located at 6384 SOM Center Road to be used to service
         2023 the Regional Transit Authority (RTA) commuter bus service.
         9-   Accepting a contract for a permanent easement for storm sewer and drainage
2023-208 18-  maintenance purposes for 6262 Cochran Road.
         2023
         9-   Accepting a contract for a permanent easement for storm sewer and drainage
2023-209 18-  maintenance purposes for 29500 Solon Road.
         2023
         9-   Authorizing the Mayor to accept the sanitary forcemain easement from Solon
2023-217 18-  Community Living.
         2023
         9-   Authorizing the Mayor to grant the sanitary and storm sewer easements from
2023-218 18-  Solon Community Living.
         2023
         11-  Accepting a perpetual and irrevocable storm sewer installation and
2023–236-   maintenance easement for property located at 33450 Miles Road.
         2023
         9-   Authorizing the Mayor or his designee to enter into a release of easement
2024-163 16-  agreement for a water main at 6150 SOM Center Road.
         2024
         3-   Authorizing an easement to the Cleveland Electric Illuminating Company for
2025-68  17-  the installation of a subtransmission line and distribution line on city
         2025 property located at 6600 Cochran Road (PP# 953-15-001).
         4-   Accepting a perpetual and irrevocable storm sewer installation and
2025-85  11-  maintenance easement for property located at 28480 Aurora Road.
         2025
         11-  Accepting a perpetual and irrevocable storm sewer installation and
2025-214 17-  maintenance easement for property located at 6030 Penfield Lane (PP# 955-03-
         2025 092), in connection with the Solon to Chagrin Falls Trail Project.
         12-  Accepting an easement from Carrington Court Residential, LLC for operating,
2025-231 15-  maintaining, repairing and replacing storm drainage facilities, and
         2025 appurtenances, in, under, across and through PP# 954-35-036 and 954-35-037.
         12-  Authorizing an easement agreement with the Cleveland Electric Illuminating
2025-238 15-  Company for the installation of an additional electricity power line and
         2025 transformer next to the maintenance building at the Solon Community Park.
             
 
TABLE C: VACATING OF STREETS AND ALLEYS
Ord./Res. No. Date Description
Ord./Res. No. Date       Description
Res. 1966-76  5-2-1966   Rodgers Drive in Sherbrook Pk. Subdivision No. 2,
                         subject to a utility easement.
1974-76       5-20-1974  Davis Parkway in its entirety.
1975-140      9-15-1975  Sharon Drive in Sharon Acres Subdivision No. 1.
1975-158      10-6-1975  Ormond Road from Cressmont Avenue westerly to its
                         terminus.
1977-76       8-15-1977  Old Harper Road between Bainbridge Road and the Erie
                         R.R. tracks.
1977-216      11-7-1977  Repeals Ord. 1977-76. Vacates Old Harper Road between
                         Bainbridge Road and the Erie R.R. tracks.
1983-124      9-6-1983   Beaver Meadow Parkway.
1984-63B      8-6-1984   Courtland Drive adjacent to Sublots 63 through 92.
1984-63A      2-4-1985   Portion of Courtland Drive.
1984-132      10-15-1984 Jaclyn Drive between Jaclyn Drive and K-Mart property.
Res. 1986-121 8-4-1986   Portion of Carter Street.
1987-246      2-1-1988   Old Harper Road from U.S. 422 to Bainbridge Road.
1988-78       8-1-1988   Erie Street and Longley Avenue.
1990-106      6-18-1990  Hillenbrand Drive.
Res. 1992-82  9-21-1992  Portion of Ormond Road.
1992-161      11-2-1992  Portion of Kenton Road.
Res. 1993-2   3-15-1993  Portion of Old Aurora Road.
Res. 1993-50  6-21-1993  Park Lane.
Res. 1993-176 12-6-1993  Portion of Brookland Avenue.
Res. 1994-88  7-18-1994  Portion of Thornapple Drive and Appleview Way.
Res. 1994-200 2-6-1995   Buehl Avenue.
1995-262      2-5-1996   Portion of Ormond Road, between Crofton and Cressmont.
Res. 1996-237 1-6-1997   Warwick Road.
Res. 1996-244 1-22-1997  Middlebury Drive.
                         Old Aurora Road between Aurora Road and the
2005-79       6-7-2005   Consolidated Railway Corporation railroad tracks, with
                         the exception of the portion on PP# 954-29-018.
2006-206      8-21-2006  Portion of Ivyside Avenue and a portion of Highlawn
                         Avenue.
2006-234      10-16-2006 Orchard Road between SOM Center Road and Solon
                         Boulevard.
2006-255      10-16-2006 Sanitary sewer easement on PP#s 951-04-007 and 951-04-
                         018, located at Miles Road and Brainard Road.
                         Certain 20-foot drive located at 33175 and 33245
2011-223      11-21-2011 Aurora Road in Solon Allotment Company’s Subdivision
                         No. 1.
2020-103      6-1-2020   Madison Lane.
2023-139      5-15-2023  Old Aurora Road, known as 34165 Aurora Road.
                        
 
TABLE D: DEDICATION AND PLAT APPROVAL
Ord./Res. No. Date Description
Ord./
Res.  Date Description
No.
1964- 2-   Approving preliminary plat of Hunt Club Meadows Subdivision, subject to
23    17-  certain conditions.
      1964
1964- 3-2- Approving preliminary plat of Greenfield Village Subdivision, subject to
22    1964 certain conditions.
Res.  4-6-
1964- 1964 Approving preliminary plat of Bainbridge Park Subdivision No. 3.
55
Res.  5-4-
1964- 1964 Approving preliminary plat of Spring Lakes Colony Subdivision No. 4.
67
Res.  7-6-
1964- 1964 Approving preliminary plat of Mannu-Vacik Subdivision.
90
1964- 7-   Accepting final plat of Bainbridge Park Subdivision No. 3, and accepting
116   20-  dedication of Jaclyn Drive shown thereon, subject to certain conditions.
      1964
1964- 9-8- Accepting final plat of Parkwood Estates Subdivision, Block A, subject to
138   1964 certain conditions.
Res.  10-
1964- 5-   Approving preliminary plat of Timberlane North Subdivision.
133   1964
1964- 10-  Accepting final plat of Bainbridge Land Company’s Timberlane North
152   19-  Subdivision No. 1.
      1964
1964- 11-  Accepting final plat of North Hill Estates Subdivision No. 2, subject to
157   2-   certain conditions.
      1964
Res.  12-
1964- 21-  Approving preliminary plat of Creek Side Estates Subdivision.
175   1964
1965- 2-1- Accepting dedication of a portion of Glenallen Avenue, from Baldwin Road
15    1965 to Orchard Road.
Res.  2-1- Approving preliminary plat of the resubdivision of Sublots Nos. 1231 to
1965- 1965 1242 in Solon Allotment Company’s Subdivision No. 2.
17
Res.  2-1-
1965- 1965 Approving preliminary plat of Edgemoor Avenue Subdivision.
18
Res.  2-
1965- 15-  Approving preliminary plat of Hillview Estates Subdivision.
25    1965
Res.  3-
1965- 15-  Approving preliminary plat of Huntington Subdivision.
40    1965
Res.  4-5-
1965- 1965 Approving preliminary plat of Sandy Estates Subdivision.
47
Res.  4-5-
1965- 1965 Approving preliminary plat of Ledge Hill Subdivision.
48
Res.  5-
1965- 17-  Approving preliminary plat of Flying Meadows Subdivision.
75    1965
Res.  5-
1965- 17-  Approving preliminary plat of Forest Glen Subdivision.
79    1965
Res.  5-   Approving final plats of Hunt Club Meadows Subdivisions Nos. 1 and 2 for
1965- 27-  record purposes only.
83    1965
Res.  5-   Approving final plat of Forest Glen Avenue Re-Subdivision for record
1965- 27-  purposes only.
84    1965
Res.  8-2- Approving final plat of Creek Side Estates Subdivision for record purposes
1965- 1965 only.
119
Res.  8-   Approving final plat of Greenridge Subdivision No. 3 for record purposes
1965- 16-  only.
122   1965
Res.  9-   Approving preliminary plat of Carriage Park Subdivision, subject to
1965- 20-  certain conditions.
143   1965
Res.  12-
1965- 6-   Approving preliminary plat of Windy Hill Subdivision.
192   1965
Res.  12-
1965- 6-   Approving preliminary plat of Brushwood Subdivision.
193   1965
Res.  12-
1965- 6-   Approving preliminary plat of Springwood Subdivision.
194   1965
Res.  12-
1965- 20-  Approving preliminary plat of Cannon West Subdivision.
205   1965
1965- 12-
207   20-  Accepting dedication of streets in Hunt Club Meadows Subdivision No. 1.
      1965
1965- 12-
208   20-  Accepting dedication of streets in Hunt Club Meadows Subdivision No. 2.
      1965
Res.  2-7- Approving revised preliminary plat of Block J, Hunt Club Meadows
1966- 1966 Subdivision No. 3.
18
Res.  2-7- Approving preliminary plat of resubdivision of certain lots on Duneden
1966- 1966 Avenue in Solon Allotment Company’s Subdivision No. 2.
19
1966- 3-7- Accepting final plat of Solon Industrial Parkway and accepting dedication
22    1966 thereof, subject to certain conditions.
Res.  4-4-
1966- 1966 Approving preliminary plat of Cannon Estates Subdivision No. 2.
2
Res.  4-   Approving preliminary plat of resubdivision of Duneden Avenue in Solon
1966- 18-  Allotment Company’s Subdivision No. 2.
66    1966
Res.  5-   Approving plat of resubdivision of Duneden Avenue, in Solon Allotment
1966- 16-  Company’s Subdivision No. 2, for record purposes only.
87    1966
Res.  6-6-
1966- 1966 Approving preliminary plat of Harnden Subdivision.
98
Res.  6-
1966- 20-  Approving preliminary plat of Forest Park Subdivision.
97    1966
Res.  8-
1966- 15-  Approving preliminary plat of Arbordale Subdivision.
127   1966
1966- 8-   Approving final plat of Creek Side Estates Subdivision and accepting
173   23-  dedication of Creek Side Trail therein.
      1966
Res.  8-
1966- 23-  Approving final plat of Brushwood Subdivision for record purposes only.
174   1966
Res.  8-   Approving final plat of Carriage Park Subdivision for record purposes
1966- 23-  only.
176   1966
Res.  1-
1966- 16-  Approving preliminary plat of Cannon Estates Subdivision No. 3.
235   1967
1967- 1-   Approving final plat of Cannon West Subdivision and accepting dedication
11    16-  of Park Side Trail therein, subject to certain conditions.
      1967
1967- 6-   Approving final plat of Scar-Mar Subdivision and accepting dedication of
94    19-  Hall Street therein, subject to certain conditions.
      1967
Res.  6-
1967- 19-  Approving Copley Avenue Re-Subdivision.
102   1967
Res.  6-
1967- 19-  Approving preliminary plat of Spring Lake Colony Subdivision No. 4.
103   1967
1967- 7-   Approving final plat of Carriage Park Subdivision, subject to certain
95    17-  conditions.
      1967
1967- 8-   Approving final plat of Windy Hill Subdivision, subject to certain
137   21-  conditions.
      1967
1967- 9-   Approving final plat of Brushwood Subdivision, subject to certain
138   18-  conditions.
      1967
Res.  7-8-
1968- 1968 Approving preliminary plat of Creek Side Trail Estates Subdivision.
140
1968- 9-3- Approving final plat of Huntington Subdivision, subject to certain
164   1968 conditions.
1969- 2-   Approving final plat of Forest Park Subdivision No. 10, subject to certain
18    17-  conditions.
      1969
1969- 7-
136   14-  Accepting dedication of Camp Industrial Road.
      1969
1969- 9-8- Accepting and confirming dedication of Willow Street.
139   1969
1969- 9-   Approving dedication plat of Carter Street and accepting dedication of
175   22-  said street.
      1969
Res.  2-2-
1970- 1970 Approving preliminary plat of Pepperwood Park Estates.
18
Res.  5-4-
1970- 1970 Approving preliminary plat of Holly Hill Subdivision.
83
1970- 9-   Approving final plat of Brainard Garden Investment Company Subdivision,
148   21-  subject to certain conditions.
      1970
1970- 10-  Approving final plat of Creekside Estates Subdivision and accepting
162   19-  dedication of Creekside Trail Extension and Limberlost Trail therein,
      1970 subject to certain conditions.
1970- 12-  Accepting dedication of Duneden Avenue and portions of Orchard and Inwood
195   28-  Roads in Solon Allotment Company’s Subdivision No. 2.
      1970
1971- 1-
3     18-  Amends Ord. 1970-148.
      1971
Res.  2-   Approving preliminary plat of Holly Hill Subdivision, subject to certain
1971- 15-  conditions.
37    1971
1971- 3-1- Amends Ord. 1970-148.
54    1971
Res.  4-5-
1971- 1971 Approving plat changing drainage easement in Davis Industrial Subdivision.
74
1971- 10-  Accepting dedication of portions of Neptune Drive and Woodall Road,
198   18-  subject to certain conditions.
      1971
1971- 12-  Approving dedication plat of Naiman Parkway Extension in Raintree
214   6-   Subdivision, subject to certain conditions.
      1971
1972- 12-  Accepting dedication of portions of Arbordale and Brookland Roads and
80    18-  Copley Avenue in Solon Allotment Company’s Subdivision No. 2, subject to
      1972 certain conditions.
Res.  9-
1972- 18-  Approving preliminary plat of Colonial Forest Estates Subdivision.
156   1972
Res.  11-
1972- 20-  Approving preliminary plat of Ledge Hill Subdivision No. 2.
197   1972
Res.  11-  Approving preliminary plat of Woodhaven Estates Subdivision, subject to
1972- 20-  certain conditions.
198   1972
1973- 5-7- Approving final plat of Woodhaven Estates Subdivision and accepting
63    1973 dedication of Tracy Lane, subject to certain conditions.
Res.  5-7-
1973- 1973 Approving preliminary plat of Hunt Club Meadow Subdivision No. 3A.
64
1973- 5-   Accepting dedication of Hudson Boulevard within certain termini in Solon
82    21-  Allotment Company’s Subdivision No. 2.
      1973
Res.  8-6-
1973- 1973 Approving preliminary plat of Cheswick Subdivision.
117
1973- 1-7- Approving final plat of Colonial Forest Estates Subdivision No. 1, subject
176   1974 to certain conditions.
1974- 2-4- Approving dedication plat and accepting dedication of Davis Parkway,
11    1974 subject to certain conditions.
Res.  6-
1974- 17-  Approving preliminary plat of Cheswick Subdivision II.
77    1974
1974- 9-7- Approving final plat of Holly Hill Subdivision.
92    1976
1975- 2-3- Approving final plat of Hunt Club Subdivisions Nos. 2A, 3 and 3A.
20    1975
1975- 3-3- Approving final plat of Colonial Forest Estates Subdivision No. 2, subject
31    1975 to certain conditions.
1975- 4-
68    21-  Repeals Ord. 1964-138.
      1975
1975- 5-5- Approving final dedication plat of Ambina Industrial Park Subdivision, and
71    1975 accepting dedication of Ambina Drive.
1975- 6-2- Approving final dedication plat of Beaver Meadow Parkway.
88    1975
1975- 9-
140   15-  Approving vacation plat of Sharon Drive in Sharon Acres Subdivision No. 1.
      1975
Res.  2-2-
1976- 1976 Approving preliminary plat of Liberty Bainbridge Subdivision.
21
Res.  9-7-
1976- 1976 Approving preliminary plat of Springside Estates Subdivision, Phase I.
163
Res.  9-
1976- 20-  Approving preliminary plat of Cannon Estates Subdivision No. 2.
53    1976
Res.  9-
1976- 20-  Approving preliminary plat of Cannon Estates Subdivision No. 3.
168   1976
Res.  9-   Approving final plat of Liberty-Bainbridge Subdivision, for record
1976- 20-  purposes only.
170   1976
Res.  9-
1976- 20-  Approving preliminary plat of Ciulla Subdivision.
172   1976
1976- 10-
174   4-   Approving final plat of Colonial Forest No. 3 Estates Subdivision.
      1976
Res.  10-
1976- 18-  Approving preliminary plat of Springside Estates Subdivision No. 2.
181   1976
1976- 3-7- Approving final plat of Cheswick Subdivision No. 1.
217   1977
Res.  1-   Approving final plat of Liberty Hills Subdivision No. 3, for record
1977- 17-  purposes only.
11    1977
Res.  2-   Approving preliminary plat of SOM Hills Subdivision, subject to certain
1977- 21-  conditions.
26    1977
1977- 4-4- Accepting dedication of Davis Industrial Parkway.
53    1977
Res.  4-4-
1977- 1977 Approving preliminary plat of Farm Hills Estates Subdivision.
57
Res.  4-4-
1977- 1977 Approving preliminary plat of Colonial Forest Subdivision No. 5.
59
Res.  4-
1977- 18-  Approving preliminary plat of Harper Ridge Subdivision.
67    1977
Res.  4-   Approving preliminary plat of Bienias Property Subdivision, provided that
1977- 18-  the property be subdivided and sold to adjacent landowners.
68    1977
Res.  5-2-
1977- 1977 Approving preliminary plat of Carriage Park Subdivision No. 2.
49
Res.  5-2-
1977- 1977 Approving preliminary plat of Fairfield Estates Subdivision.
58
Res.  6-6-
1977- 1977 Approving final plat of SOM Hills Subdivision, for record purposes only.
105
Res.  6-6-
1977- 1977 Approving preliminary plat of Pepperwood Park Estates Subdivision.
106
Res.  8-
1977- 15-  Approving preliminary plat of Arthur Meadows Subdivision.
165   1977
Res.  8-
1977- 15-  Approving preliminary plat of Brainard Estates Subdivision.
166   1977
1977- 10-  Approving final plat of Cromwell Drive extension, for record purposes
198   3-   only.
      1977
1977- 10-  Approving final plat of Arthur Meadows Subdivision, for record purposes
201   3-   only.
      1977
Res.  10-
1977- 17-  Approving preliminary plat of Meadow Estates Subdivision No. 1.
199   1977
1977- 11-  Approving final plat of Liberty Hill Subdivision No. 1, subject to certain
196   7-   conditions.
      1977
Res.  11-  Approving preliminary plat of South Side Park Subdivision, subject to
1977- 21-  certain conditions.
200   1977
Res.  2-6- Approving final plat of Cannon Estates Subdivisions Nos. 2 and 3, for
1978- 1978 record purposes only.
16
Res.  3-6-
1978- 1978 Approving preliminary plat of Oakview Estates Subdivision.
17
Res.  4-   Approving final plat of Oakview Estates Subdivision, for record purposes
1978- 17-  only.
80    1978
Res.  5-
1978- 22-  Approving preliminary plat of Clandon Park Subdivision.
84    1978
Res.  5-
1978- 22-  Approving preliminary plat of Colonial Forest Estates Subdivision No. 6.
90    1978
Res.  5-
1978- 22-  Approving preliminary plat of Spring Lakes Colony No. 5 Subdivision.
91    1978
Res.  5-   Approving final plat of South Side Park Subdivision, for record purposes
1978- 22-  only.
108   1978
Res.  8-   Approving final plat of Meadow Estates Subdivision, for record purposes
1978- 21-  only.
184   1978
Res.  8-
1978- 21-  Approving preliminary plat of Harper Ridge No. 2 Subdivision.
194   1978
Res.  9-5-
1978- 1978 Accepting dedication plat for Bruce Industrial Parkway.
203
Res.  9-   Approving final plat of Clandon Park Subdivision, for record purposes
1978- 18-  only.
195   1978
1976- 11-
218   6-   Approving final plat of Ledgehill Subdivision No. 2.
      1978
Res.  1-
1978- 15-  Approving final plat of Cheswick II Subdivision.
202   1979
Res.  3-5-
1978- 1979 Approving final plat of Liberty Hills Subdivision Phase II.
239
Res.  3-5-
1979- 1979 Approving final plat of Arthur Meadows Subdivision.
27
Res.  3-5-
1979- 1979 Approving final plat of Cromwell Drive - Phase I.
28
Res.  5-7- Approving preliminary plat of Somerset Subdivision, subject to certain
1978- 1979 conditions.
267
Res.  5-
1979- 21-  Approving preliminary plat of Churchill Downs Subdivision.
23    1979
Res.  7-   Approving final plat of Summerset Estates Subdivision, for record purposes
1979- 16-  only.
153   1979
Res.  9-
1979- 17-  Approving preliminary plat of Metro Court Estates Subdivision.
189   1979
Res.  10-  Approving final plat of Churchill Downs Subdivision, for record purposes
1979- 1-   only.
206   1979
Res.  10-  Approving final plat of Cromwell Drive extension, for record purposes
1979- 15-  only.
21    1979
1980- 2-4- Accepting dedication of Harper Ridge Subdivision Phase I, Unit 1, subject
2     1980 to certain conditions.
Res.  3-   Accepting dedication of Colonial Forest Subdivision Phase V, subject to
1980- 31-  certain conditions.
48    1980
Res.  5-5- Approving final plat of Pepperwood Park Estates Subdivision, with the
1980- 1980 exception of sidewalks therein.
53
Res.  5-   Approving final plat of Metro Court Estates Subdivision, for record
1980- 19-  purposes only.
78    1980
Res.  11-  Approving final plat of Spring Lakes Colony Subdivision No. 5, for record
1980- 17-  purposes only.
154   1980
Res.  2-
1981- 15-  Approving final plat of Springside II Subdivision.
82    1982
Res.  3-
1982- 15-  Approving final plat of Liberty Bainbridge Subdivision.
22    1982
Res.  7-
1982- 19-  Approving final plat of Colonial Forest IV Subdivision.
100   1982
Res.  8-
1982- 16-  Approving final plat of Springside I Subdivision.
37    1982
Res.  8-
1982- 16-  Approving final plat of Cannon Estates I Subdivision.
103   1982
Res.  9-   Approving final plat of Farm Hills Estates Subdivision, ratifying the
1982- 20-  prior recording thereof.
128   1982
Res.  9-   Approving final plat of Carriage Park II Subdivision, for record purposes
1982- 20-  only.
129   1982
Res.  9-
1982- 20-  Approving final plat of Ledge Hill I Subdivision.
130   1982
1982- 10-
133   4-   Accepting vacation plat of Harper Ridge Subdivision, Unit 1, Phase 2.
      1982
Res.  10-  Approving final plat of Harper Ridge Resubdivision, Phase 2, Unit 1, for
1982- 4-   record purposes only.
135   1982
Res.  12-  Accepting dedication of Fairfield Estates Subdivision and approving final
1982- 20-  plat thereof.
155   1982
Res.  12-  Accepting dedication of Colonial Forest V, Phase 2, and approving final
1982- 20-  plat thereof.
166   1982
Res.  6-6-
1983- 1983 Approving preliminary plat of Cannon Development Subdivision, Inc.
84
Res.  7-   Approving final plat of Cannon Development Subdivision, Inc., for record
1983- 18-  purposes only.
100   1983
Res.  8-1-
1983- 1983 Approving preliminary plat of Pepperwood Park Estates No. 2.
109
Res.  8-
1983- 15-  Approving plat of sewer easement relocation for Rolero, Inc.
116   1983
Res.  9-6- Approving final plat and accepting dedication of streets in Cromwell Drive
1983- 1983 Subdivision, Liberty Hills Subdivision No. 3 and Hunt Club Meadows
105        Subdivision No. 4 abutting enumerated sublots.
Res.  10-  Approving final plat of Pepperwood Park Estates Subdivision No. 2, for
1983- 17-  record purposes only.
140   1983
Res.  11-
1983- 7-   Approving final plat of Churchill Downs Subdivision, Phase I.
148   1983
Res.  12-
1983- 19-  Approving final plat of Ledgebrook Lane Subdivision.
149   1983
Res.  12-
1983- 19-  Approving final plat of Spring Lakes Colony No. 5.
150   1983
Res.  12-
1983- 19-  Approving preliminary plat of King Ranch Estates Subdivision.
167   1983
Res.  12-  Accepting and approving resubdivision plat of SOM Hills Resubdivision -
1983- 19-  Phase II.
168   1983
Res.  1-   Approving final dedication plat of Cochran Road from the South Corporation
1984- 16-  Line to Solon Road, and offering dedication thereof to Cuyahoga County.
3     1984
Res.  3-5-
1984- 1984 Approving final plat of SOM Hills Estates Subdivision I.
10
Res.  3-   Accepting and approving resubdivision plat of SOM Hills Resubdivision -
1984- 19-  Phase IV.
26    1984
Res.  4-2-
1984- 1984 Approving preliminary plat of Constan I Subdivision.
31
Res.  5-
1984- 21-  Approving final plat of Harper Ridge Subdivision I - Phase II.
4     1984
Res.  5-
1984- 21-  Approving preliminary plat of Pepperwood Lane Subdivision.
32    1984
Res.  5-   Approving preliminary plat of Cloverly Subdivision, subject to certain
1984- 21-  conditions.
47    1984
Res.  6-
1984- 18-  Approving preliminary plat of High Point Estates Subdivision.
64    1984
Res.  7-
1984- 16-  Approving preliminary plat of Buckthorn Glen Subdivision.
83    1984
Res.  9-4-
1984- 1984 Approving final plat of Constan I Subdivision, for record purposes only.
119
Res.  11-  Approving final plat of Hunt Club Meadows Subdivision No. 5 (formerly
1984- 5-   Buckthorn Glen), for record purposes only.
153   1984
Res.  12-
1984- 17-  Accepting dedication of Pepperwood Park Estates II Subdivision.
166   1984
1984- 12-
172   17-  Accepting dedication of Churchill Downs Phase II Subdivision.
      1984
Res.  3-4-
1985- 1985 Accepting final plat of Cloverly Subdivision, for record purposes only.
5
1985- 3-
22    18-  Accepting dedication of SOM Hills Subdivision Phase II.
      1985
Res.  4-
1985- 19-  Approving preliminary plat of Southside Park II Subdivision.
112   1985
1985- 5-6- Accepting dedication of Carriage Park II Subdivision.
49    1985
1985- 5-6- Accepting dedication of Constan I Towne Park Subdivision.
50    1985
Res.  7-1-
1985- 1985 Approving preliminary plat of Pepperwood III Subdivision.
96
Res.  10-  Approving final plat of South Side Park II Subdivision, for record
1985- 7-   purposes only.
162   1985
Res.  10-
1985- 21-  Accepting dedication of Oakview Estates Subdivision Phase I.
25    1985
Res.  10-  Approving final plat of Pepperwood Lane Subdivision, for record purposes
1985- 21-  only.
173   1985
Res.  11-  Approving preliminary plat of Meadow Estates Subdivision I, subject to
1985- 4-   certain conditions.
154   1985
Res.  3-
1986- 17-  Approving preliminary plat of King Ranch Estates III.
20    1986
Res.  3-
1986- 17-  Approving North Arthur Subdivision.
28    1986
Res.  4-7-
1986- 1986 Approving final plat of Summerset I Subdivision.
29
Res.  4-
1986- 21-  Approving Meadow Estates Subdivision, for record purposes only.
49    1986
Res.  5-
1986- 19-  Approving preliminary plat of Rollingbrook Estates Subdivision.
76    1986
Res.  5-   Accepting final plat of Pepperwood Lane Subdivision, for record purposes
1986- 19-  only.
77    1986
Res.  6-2-
1986- 1986 Approving plat of King Ranch Estates III, for record purposes only.
74
Res.  6-2-
1986- 1986 Approving preliminary plat of South Side Park III Subdivision.
75
Res.  7-7-
1986- 1986 Approving final plat of SOM Hills III Subdivision.
85
Res.  7-7- Approving preliminary plat of Dinallo Brainard Estates Subdivision,
1986- 1986 subject to certain conditions.
86
Res.  7-
1986- 21-  Accepting revised dedication plat of Woodall Road.
97    1986
Res.  8-4- Accepting final plat of Rollingbrook Estates Subdivision, for record
1986- 1986 purposes only.
122
Res.  8-
1986- 25-  Approving final plat of Parkland Boulevard, for record purposes only.
134   1986
Res.  9-2- Approving plat of Southside Park III Subdivision, for record purposes
1986- 1986 only.
140
Res.  10-
1986- 6-   Approving preliminary plat of Springside III Subdivision.
145   1986
Res.  10-
1986- 6-   Approving preliminary plat of Hanover Trail Subdivision.
146   1986
Res.  10-
1986- 20-  Accepting dedication of King Ranch Estates Phase III.
149   1986
Res.  11-  Approving final plat of North Arthur Subdivision, for record purposes
1986- 17-  only.
167   1986
Res.  12-
1986- 8-   Approving preliminary plat of Huntington Woods Subdivision.
194   1986
Res.  12-
1986- 8-   Approving Wind Rush Subdivision.
195   1986
Res.  12-  Approving final plat of Hanover Trails Subdivision, for record purposes
1986- 15-  only.
207   1986
Res.  12-
1986- 29-  Accepting dedication of Cloverly Subdivision.
183   1986
Res.  12-
1986- 29-  Accepting dedication of Summerset II Subdivision.
184   1986
Res.  1-
1986- 19-  Accepting dedication of Liberty Hills No. 3 Subdivision.
185   1987
Res.  4-6- Approving final plat of Springside Estates No. 3 Subdivision, for record
1987- 1987 purposes only.
53
Res.  5-4-
1987- 1987 Approving final plat of O’Neill Landing, for record purposes only.
55
Res.  6-1-
1987- 1987 Approving Windrush Subdivision, for record purposes only.
117
Res.  6-
1987- 15-  Approving final plat of West View Boulevard, for record purposes only.
96    1987
Res.  6-
1987- 15-  Accepting dedication of Oakview Estates Phase II Subdivision.
105   1987
Res.  7-6- Approving final plat of Oakview Estates Phase III Subdivision, for record
1987- 1987 purposes only.
138
Res.  10-
1987- 5-   Accepting revised preliminary plat of Huntington Woods Subdivision.
173   1987
Res.  11-
1987- 2-   Approving preliminary plat of Hidden Lakes Subdivision.
216   1987
Res.  11-
1987- 2-   Approving preliminary plat of Crofton-Woodall Subdivision.
226   1987
Res.  1-4- Approving final plat of Huntington Woods Subdivision, for record purposes
1987- 1988 only.
243
Res.  1-4-
1987- 1988 Accepting dedication of Parkland Boulevard.
256
Res.  3-   Approving final plat of Hidden Lakes Subdivision, for record purposes
1988- 21-  only.
13    1988
Res.  4-   Approving final plat of Oakview Estates Subdivision Phase IV, for record
1988- 18-  purposes only.
12    1988
Res.  4-
1988- 18-  Accepting dedication of Rollingbrook Estates Subdivision Phase I.
35    1988
Res.  4-
1988- 18-  Accepting dedication of Springside Estates Subdivision Phase III.
47    1988
Res.  5-
1988- 16-  Accepting dedication of Southside Park III Subdivision.
57    1988
Res.  5-
1988- 16-  Approving preliminary plat of Deer Lawn Farms Subdivision.
59    1988
Res.  6-6-
1988- 1988 Accepting dedication of North Pepperwood Lane Subdivision.
03
Res.  7-
1988- 18-  Accepting dedication of Oakview Estates Subdivision Phase III.
112   1988
Res.  9-6- Approving final plat of Deer Lawn Farms Subdivision, for record purposes
1988- 1988 only.
156
Res.  10-
1988- 3-   Accepting dedication of Fountain Parkway.
190   1988
Res.  10-
1988- 3-   Confirming preliminary plat of Southside Park IV Subdivision.
191   1988
Res.  11-
1988- 7-   Approving preliminary plat of Chagrin Highlands 1 Subdivision.
208   1988
Res.  11-
1988- 7-   Approving preliminary plat of Chagrin Highlands 2 Subdivision.
209   1988
Res.  12-
1988- 19-  Accepting dedication of Rollingbrook Estates Subdivision Phase II.
225   1988
Res.  12-
1987- 19-  Accepting Summerset Subdivision Phase III for dedication.
239   1988
Res.  1-
1988- 16-  Accepting dedication of Southside Park II Subdivision.
224   1989
Res.  2-6-
1989- 1989 Approving preliminary plat of Cambridge Park Subdivision.
3
Res.  2-
1989- 20-  Approving preliminary plat of Marks Meadows Subdivision.
21    1989
Res.  2-   Approving final plat of Oakview Estates Subdivision Phase V, for record
1988- 20-  purposes only.
195   1989
Res.  3-6-
1988- 1989 Accepting dedication of Oakview Estates Phase IV Subdivision.
207
Res.  3-
1987- 20-  Accepting dedication of Hunt Club Subdivision V.
172   1989
Res.  4-3-
1989- 1989 Approving preliminary plat of Brighton Park Estates Subdivision.
40
Res.  4-3- Approving final plat of Cambridge Park Subdivision, for record purposes
1989- 1989 only.
60
Res.  4-
1988- 17-  Accepting dedication of Meadow Estates Subdivision No. 1.
11    1989
Res.  5-1- Accepting plat of Brighton Park Estates Subdivision, for record purposes
1989- 1989 only.
95
Res.  6-5-
1989- 1989 Approving revised preliminary plat of High Point Estates Subdivision.
122
Res.  6-   Approving preliminary plat of Capstick Estates Subdivision and various
1989- 19-  terms and conditions in connection therewith.
98    1989
Res.  8-7-
1989- 1989 Accepting plat of Mark IV Estates Subdivision, for record purposes only.
125
Res.  9-5-
1989- 1989 Accepting dedication plat of Enterprise Parkway.
224
Res.  9-
1989- 18-  Accepting dedication of SOM Hills IV Subdivision.
217   1989
Res.  11-
1989- 20-  Amends Res. 1989-98.
288   1989
Res.  12-
1989- 18-  Approving preliminary plat of Deer Lawn Farms Subdivision.
286   1989
Res.  1-   Approving final plat of Chagrin Highlands Subdivision No. 2, Phase 1, for
1989- 15-  record purposes.
287   1990
Res.  3-5-
1990- 1990 Accepting dedication of final dedication plat of Woodall Road.
8
Res.  3-5-
1990- 1990 Accepting plat of Deer Lawn Farms Subdivision, for record purposes only.
29
Res.  5-
1990- 21-  Approving dedication of Arthur Road Extension.
113   1990
Res.  5-   Approving preliminary plat of Preserve Subdivision, subject to certain
1990- 29-  conditions.
111   1990
Res.  6-4-
1990- 1990 Approving preliminary plat of Harper Pointe Subdivision.
112
Res.  6-4-
1990- 1990 Approving High Point Estates Subdivision, for record purposes only.
131
Res.  10-  Approving the final plat of Harper Pointe Estates Subdivision for record
1990- 1-   purposes.
242   1990
Res.  10-
1990- 1-   Approving the final plat of the Preserve Subdivision for record purposes.
243   1990
Res.  7-
1990- 15-  Accepting the dedication of Oakview Estates Subdivision V(A).
230   1991
Res.  4-
1991- 15-  Approving the final plat for record purposes of the Preserve Subdivision.
53    1991
Res.  5-   Confirming approval of Chagrin Highlands No. 1, Phase 1, Subdivision for
1991- 20-  record purposes only.
94    1991
Res.  7-
1991- 15-  Approving a consolidation plat for the Betsy Investment Co.
140   1991
Res.  10-  Accepting the final plat for record purposes only of the Meadow Estates
1991- 21-  Phase II Subdivision.
188   1991
Res.  12-  Approving the final plat for record purposes only of the Southside Park IV
1991- 2-   Subdivision.
217   1991
Res.  12-
1991- 2-   Accepting the dedication of the Preserve Subdivision, Phase 1.
242   1991
Res.  12-  Accepting the plat of Chagrin Highlands Subdivision No. 1, Phase 2, for
1991- 30-  record purposes only.
244   1991
Res.  1-
1991- 20-  Accepting the dedication of Huntington Woods Subdivision.
18    1992
Res.  1-   Approving final dedication plat of Cochran Road from the south corporation
1992- 20-  line to Solon Road, and offering dedication thereof to Cuyahoga County.
8     1992
Res.  3-
1992- 16-  Confirming approval of the preliminary plat of Forest Hills Subdivision.
45    1992
Res.  3-   Approving the preliminary plat of Chagrin Highlands II, Phase 3
1992- 16-  Subdivision.
49    1992
Res.  4-6- Accepting the final plat of Chagrin Highlands Subdivision No. 2, Phase 3,
1992- 1992 for record purposes only.
62
Res.  5-4-
1992- 1992 Approving the final plat of Chagrin Highlands Subdivision No. 2, Phase 2.
80
Res.  7-6-
1992- 1992 Accepting the dedication of Cambridge Park Estates Subdivision.
115
Res.  8-3- Accepting the revised final plat of Preserve Subdivision Phase 2-A, for
1992- 1992 record purposes only.
118
Res.  8-
1992- 17-  Accepting the dedication of Windrush Subdivision.
144   1992
Res.  10-
1992- 5-   Approving the preliminary plat of Wellingford Estates Subdivision.
170   1992
Res.  12-  Approving the resubdivision plat of Chagrin Highlands II, Phase 2B
1992- 21-  Subdivision.
225   1992
Res.  4-6- Approving the final plat of Forest Hills Subdivision, for record purposes
1993- 1993 only.
27
Res.  5-3-
1993- 1993 Approving the plat of Wellingford Homes, Inc., for record purposes only.
64
Res.  7-
1993- 19-  Accepting the dedication of Preserve Subdivision Phase 1A.
31    1993
Res.  8-2-
1993- 1993 Approving the preliminary plat of Delamere Court Subdivision.
109
Res.  9-   Approving the final plat of Delamere Court Subdivision, for record
1993- 20-  purposes only.
163   1993
Res.  11-  Confirming approval of the preliminary plat of North Park Estates
1993- 15-  Subdivision.
188   1993
Res.  2-7- Approving the final plat of Wellingford Estates Subdivision, Phase II, for
1994- 1994 record purposes only.
14
Res.  4-4-
1994- 1994 Approving the resubdivision of Chagrin Highlands I, Phase D.
46
Res.  7-
1994- 18-  Accepting the consolidation plat for Pridemark Homes, Inc.
105   1994
Res.  8-1-
1994- 1994 Accepting the dedication of the Preserve Subdivision, Phase 2-A.
47
Res.  9-   Approving the plat of North Park Estates Subdivision for record purposes
1994- 19-  only.
142   1994
Res.  10-
1994- 3-   Approving the preliminary plat of the Aylshire Subdivision.
143   1994
Res.  10-  Confirming the approval of the preliminary plat of Horseshoe Farms
1994- 3-   Subdivision.
148   1994
Res.  10-
1994- 17-  Approving the preliminary plat of Timber Trails Subdivision.
155   1994
Res.  12-
1994- 5-   Approving the preliminary plat of Hidden Creek Subdivision.
199   1994
Res.  1-
1995- 16-  Approving the preliminary plat of the Brainard Estates II Subdivision.
7     1995
Res.  3-6- Accepting the plat of the Preserve Subdivision, Phase 3-A, for record
1995- 1995 purposes only.
8
Res.  3-6- Approving the final plat of the Timber Trails Subdivision, for record
1995- 1995 purposes only.
23
Res.  3-6- Accepting the final plat of the Horseshoe Farms Subdivision, for record
1995- 1995 purposes only.
29
Res.  3-6-
1995- 1995 Approving the preliminary plat of the Greenfield Village Subdivision.
48
Res.  3-   Accepting the plat of the Brainard Estates II Subdivision, for record
1995- 20-  purposes only.
60    1995
Res.  3-
1995- 20-  Accepting the dedication of the Preserve Subdivision, Phase 2-A.
61    1995
Res.  6-5- Accepting the plat of the Hidden Creek Subdivision, for record purposes
1995- 1995 only.
107
Res.  6-5- Approving the final plat of the Greenfield Village at Arthur Meadows
1995- 1995 Subdivision, for record purposes only.
108
Res.  7-
1995- 31-  Approving the preliminary plat of the Highland Loch Subdivision.
160   1995
Res.  9-   Approving the final plat of the Ayleshire Subdivision, for record purposes
1995- 18-  only.
173   1995
Res.  11-  Accepting the dedication of the Oakview Estates Subdivision, Phase 5-A, B
1995- 20-  and C.
139   1995
Res.  11-
1995- 20-  Approving the preliminary plat of the Harper Pointe Subdivision, Phase II.
218   1995
Res.  11-
1995- 20-  Accepting the dedication of the Emerald Ridge Parkway.
232   1995
Res.  2-5- Accepting the plat of the Harper Pointe Subdivision, Phase II, for record
1996- 1996 purposes only.
20
Res.  2-
1996- 21-  Accepting the preliminary plat of the Woodlands Subdivision.
30    1996
Res.  4-1-
1996- 1996 Approving the preliminary plat of the Thornbury Subdivision.
57
Res.  5-   Approving the final plat of the Woodlands Subdivision, for record purposes
1996- 20-  only.
97    1996
Res.  5-   Accepting the dedication plat of the Chagrin Highlands No. 1, Phase 2,
1996- 20-  Subdivision.
98    1996
Res.  5-
1996- 20-  Approving the preliminary plat of the Brenna’s Landing Subdivision.
99    1996
Res.  8-   Approving the final plat of the Highland Loch Subdivision, for record
1996- 19-  purposes only.
171   1996
1996- 11-
185   4-   Accepting the final dedication plat of the Meadow Estates II Subdivision.
      1996
Res.  11-  Approving the final plat of the Thornbury Subdivision, Phase I, for record
1996- 18-  purposes only.
204   1996
Res.  12-
1996- 2-   Approving the dedication plat of the Forest Hills Subdivision.
241   1996
Res.  12-
1996- 2-   Approving the dedication plat of the Timber Trails Subdivision.
242   1996
Res.  1-6-
1996- 1997 Approving the dedication plat of Brainard Estates II Subdivision.
217
Res.  1-6-
1996- 1997 Approving the revised plat of the Ayleshire Subdivision.
243
Res.  2-3-
1997- 1997 Approving the dedication plat of the Ayleshire Subdivision.
18
Res.  4-7- Approving the final plat of the Brenna’s Landing Subdivision, for record
1997- 1997 purposes only.
39
Res.  4-7-
1997- 1997 Approving conditions for the approval of the Brenna’s Landing Subdivision.
48
Res.  3-
1997- 17-  Approving the dedication plat of the Greenfield Village Subdivision.
56    1997
Res.  5-   Approving the final plat of Emerald Ridge Parkway, for record purposes
1996- 19-  only.
79    1997
Res.  6-
1997- 16-  Approving the preliminary plat of the North Woods Subdivision.
101   1997
Res.  7-
1997- 21-  Adopting the official spelling of the “O’Neill Landing Subdivision.”
144   1997
Res.  8-   Rejecting acceptance of the dedication of the Liberty Hill No. 3/Hunt Club
1997- 18-  Meadows No. 4 Subdivision; accepting dedication by common law of the
134   1997 remaining streets, public utilities and public grounds thereof.
Res.  9-   Approving the final plat of the North Woods Subdivision, for record
1997- 15-  purposes only.
205   1997
Res.  1-   Approving the final plat of the North Park Subdivision, for record
1998- 20-  purposes only.
13    1998
Res.  8-
1998- 31-  Approving the preliminary plat of Franklin’s Park Subdivision.
161   1998
Res.  9-   Approving the final plat of the Thornbury Subdivision, Phase 2, for record
1998- 24-  purposes only.
177   1998
Res.  10-
1998- 5-   Approving the dedication plat of Thornbury Subdivision, Phase 1.
192   1998
Res.  11-
1998- 16-  Approving the dedication plat of Hidden Creek Subdivision.
217   1998
Res.  12-
1998- 21-  Approving the preliminary plat of the Signature of Solon Subdivision.
238   1998
Res.  3-1-
1999- 1999 Approving the dedication plat of Kruse Drive, Phase 1.
35
Res.  5-3-
1999- 1999 Approving the preliminary plat of the Heritage Estates II Subdivision.
55
Res.  6-7- Approving change of name of the Heritage Estates II Subdivision to the
1999- 1999 Heritage Landing Subdivision.
94
Res.  6-   Approving the final plat of the Heritage Landing Subdivision, formerly
1999- 21-  known as the Heritage Estates II Subdivision, for record purposes only.
114   1999
Res.  6-   Approving the final plat of the Thornbury Subdivision, Phases 3 and 3A,
1999- 21-  for record purposes only.
116   1999
Res.  6-   Approving the final plat of the Franklin’s Park Subdivision, for record
1999- 21-  purposes only.
117   1999
Res.  9-   Approving the final plat of the Signature of Solon Subdivision, Phase 1,
1999- 21-  for record purposes only.
173   1999
Res.  12-
1999- 6-   Approving the dedication plat of the Thornbury Phase 2 Subdivision.
233   1999
Res.  1-
2000- 18-  Approving the preliminary plat of the Sycamore Estates Subdivision.
4     2000
Res.  3-6-
2000- 2000 Approving the preliminary plat of the Luczek Subdivision.
35
Res.  3-6-
2000- 2000 Approving the dedication plat of the Preserve Subdivision Phase 3A.
42
Res.  3-
2000- 20-  Approving the dedication plat of the North Woods Subdivision.
60    2000
Res.  5-
2000- 15-  Approving the dedication plat of Kruse Drive Phase 2.
99    2000
Res.  6-5- Approving the final plat of the Sycamore Estates Subdivision Phase 1, for
2000- 2000 record purposes only.
136
Res.  6-   Amending Res. 1999-116, to change the name of Thornbury Phase 3 and 3A
2000- 19-  Subdivision to Thornbury Phase 3 and Luczek Subdivision, and approving the
160   2000 final plat, for record purposes only.
Res.  7-5-
2000- 2000 Approving the dedication plat of the Preserve Subdivision Phase 3B.
188
Res.  7-
2000- 17-  Approving the dedication plat of Kruse Drive Phase 2.
211   2000
Res.  7-   Approving the dedication plat of the Heritage Estates 1 Subdivision
2000- 17-  (formerly known as “Mark IV Estates”).
212   2000
Res.  8-   Replacing Res. 2000-136, and approving a revised final plat of the
2000- 21-  Sycamore Estates Subdivision Phase 1, for record purposes only.
223   2000
Res.  9-5- Repealing Res. 2000-223, and approving a revised final plat of the
2000- 2000 Sycamore Estates Subdivision Phase 1, for record purposes only.
234
Res.  11-  Approving the revised preliminary plat of the Thornbury Subdivision Phase
2000- 6-   4 and future phases.
294   2000
Res.  11-
2000- 20-  Approving the dedication plat of the Thornbury Subdivision, Phase 3A.
328   2000
Res.  11-  Approving the dedication plat of the Thornbury Phase 3 and Luczek
2000- 20-  Subdivision.
329   2000
Res.  12-  Approving the final plat of the Sycamore Estates Subdivision Phase 2A, for
2000- 4-   record purposes only.
334   2000
Res.  12-  Approving the final plat of the Sycamore Estates Subdivision Phase 2B, for
2000- 4-   record purposes only.
335   2000
Res.  12-  Approving the final plat of the Sycamore Estates Subdivision Phase 2C, for
2000- 4-   record purposes only.
336   2000
Res.  12-  Approving the final plat of the Signature of Solon Subdivision Phase 2,
2000- 4-   for record purposes only.
340   2000
Res.  12-
2000- 4-   Approving the dedication plat of the Preserve Subdivision Phase 3C.
341   2000
Res.  4-   Approving the final plat of the Thornbury Subdivision Phase 4, for record
2001- 16-  purposes only.
58    2001
Res.  4-   Approving the final plat of the Thornbury Subdivision Phase 5, for record
2001- 16-  purposes only.
59    2001
Res.  8-   Approving the final plat of the Thornbury Subdivision Phase 6, for record
2001- 20-  purposes only.
222   2001
Res.  8-
2001- 20-  Approving the dedication plat of Portz Parkway.
223   2001
Res.  10-
2001- 15-  Approving the dedication plat of Emerald Ridge Parkway.
247   2001
Res.  6-   Approving the revised final plat for record purposes only of the Signature
2002- 17-  of Solon Subdivision Phase 2.
135   2002
Res.  7-1-
2002- 2002 Approving the dedication plat of the Brenna’s Landing Subdivision.
151
Res.  12-  Approving the final plat for record purposes only of the Sycamore Estates
2002- 16-  Subdivision Phase 3.
277   2002
Res.  12-  Approving the final plat for record purposes only of the Thornbury
2002- 16-  Subdivision Phase 7.
278   2002
Res.  3-
2003- 17-  Approving the dedication plat of the Thornbury Subdivision, Phase 4.
56    2003
Res.  3-
2003- 17-  Approving the dedication plat of the Thornbury Subdivision, Phase 5.
57    2003
Res.  4-   Approving the preliminary plat of the Pepperwood Park Estates Subdivision
2003- 21-  No. 3.
90    2003
Res.  10-  Approving the final plat for record purposes only of the Pepperwood Park
2003- 8-   Estates Subdivision No. 3.
234   2003
Res.  2-   Approving the final plat for record purposes only of the Thornbury
2004- 18-  Subdivision Phase 8.
30    2004
Res.  8-2-
2004- 2004 Approving the dedication plat of the Highland Loch Subdivision.
172
Res.  2-
2004- 23-  Approving the preliminary plat of the Springside Lane Subdivision.
263   2005
Res.  2-
2005- 23-  Approving the preliminary plat of the Brookside Estates Subdivision.
4     2005
2005- 10-  Approving the final plat for record purposes only of the Brookside Estates
233   17-  Subdivision.
      2005
2005- 12-  Approving the final plat for record purposes only of the Springside Lane
270   5-   Subdivision.
      2005
2005- 12-
274   5-   Approving the dedication plat of the Thornbury Subdivision, Phase 6.
      2005
2006- 2-
34    21-  Approving the dedication plat of Summit Street.
      2006
2007- 3-   Approving the dedication plat of the Heritage Landing Subdivision
61    19-  (Heritage Estates II).
      2007
2008- 6-   Approving the final plat for record purposes only of the Stone Creek
149   16-  Estates Subdivision.
      2008
2008- 8-4- Approving the final plat for record purposes only of the Southwoods
216   2008 Subdivision.
2008- 10-  Approving the final plat for record purposes only of the Carrington Court
274   6-   Senior Housing Development.
      2008
2010- 2-1- Approving the final plat dedication of the Carrington Court Subdivision.
31    2010
2012- 10-
232   1-   Approving the preliminary plat of the Neptune Oval Estates Subdivision.
      2012
2012- 11-
271   5-   Approving the dedication plat of the Thornbury Subdivision, Phase 7.
      2012
2012- 11-
272   5-   Approving the dedication plat of the Thornbury Subdivision, Phase 8.
      2012
2014- 1-6- Approving the revised preliminary plat of the Stone Creek Estates
1     2014 Subdivision.
2015- 12-
254   21-  Approving the final plat dedication of the Southwoods Subdivision.
      2015
2018- 9-
198   17-  Approving the final dedication plat of the Brookside Estates Subdivision.
      2018
2020- 6-1- Approving the re-subdivision of Carrington Court Subdivision.
104   2020
2020- 8-   Accepting the dedication of right-of-way from Wolis, Inc. in connection
155   17-  with the approved lot consolidation of PP#s 952-21-009, 952-21-048, 952-
      2020 21-050 and 952-21- 052 located at 6221 SOM Center Road.
2023- 6-
159   20-  Approving the preliminary plat of the Hawthorne Golf Estates Subdivision.
      2023
2024- 12-  Accepting the dedication of 0.1112 acres of right-of-way easement and a
237   16-  general warranty deed from ABC Solon LLC (Sheetz)
      2024
2025- 4-   Accepting the dedication of a 30 foot right-of-way (PP# 951-19-014) from
86    21-  the West Creek Conservancy.
      2025
          
 
TABLE E: ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL OF REAL PROPERTY
Ord./Res. No. Date Description
Ord./
Res.  Date Description
No.
Res.  4-6- Authorizing purchase of land, from R. Foster, bounded by Portage, Geauga and
1964- 1964 Edith Streets, for park and playground purposes.
48
Res.  4-6- Authorizing purchase of land, from J.E. and E.D. Moore, bounded by Portage,
1964- 1964 Geauga and Edith Streets, for park and playground purposes.
49
Res.  6-   Authorizing purchase of land in the vicinity of Cressmont Avenue and Woodall
1964- 15-  Road, from L-K Building Co., for park and playground purposes.
85    1964
Res.  6-   Authorizing purchase of land in the vicinity of Cressmont Avenue and Woodall
1964- 15-  Road, from C.H. and A. Miller, for park and playground purposes.
86    1964
Res.  7-6-
1964- 1964 Appropriating Permanent Parcel No. 951-41-8 for park and playground purposes.
87
Res.  7-6-
1964- 1964 Appropriating Permanent Parcel No. 951-41-9 for park and playground purposes.
92
Res.  7-6-
1964- 1964 Appropriating Permanent Parcel No. 951-41-34 for park and playground purposes.
93
Res.  7-6-
1964- 1964 Appropriating Permanent Parcel No. 951-41-10 for park and playground purposes.
94
Res.  7-6-
1964- 1964 Appropriating Permanent Parcel No. 951-41-11 for park and playground purposes.
95
Res.  7-6-
1964- 1964 Appropriating Permanent Parcel No. 951-41-2 for park and playground purposes.
96
Res.  7-   Authorizing purchase of land in the vicinity of Cressmont Avenue and Woodall
1964- 20-  Road, from B.W. Spero, for park and playground purposes.
117   1964
Res.  7-   Authorizing purchase of land in the vicinity of Cressmont Avenue and Woodall
1964- 20-  Road, from F.W. and M.A. Marble, for park and playground purposes.
118   1964
Res.  7-   Authorizing purchase of land in the vicinity of Cressmont Avenue and Woodall
1964- 20-  Road, from R.E. and J.W. Marble, for park and playground purposes.
119   1964
Res.  9-8- Authorizing purchase of land in the vicinity of Cressmont Avenue and Woodall
1964- 1964 Road, from E. Sweeney, for park and playground purposes.
135
Res.  10-  Authorizing purchase of land in the vicinity of Cressmont Avenue and Woodall
1964- 5-   Road, from E.A. and M. Wurm, for park and playground purposes.
146   1964
Res.  10-  Authorizing purchase of land in the vicinity of Cressmont Avenue and Woodall
1964- 19-  Road, from W.M. and D.B. Emshoff, for park and playground purposes.
151   1964
Res.  12-  Authorizing purchase of land in the vicinity of Cressmont Avenue and Woodall
1964- 21-  Road, from M.A. Koller, for park and playground purposes.
171   1964
1965- 1-   Appropriating property for expansion of city’s Fire Station site at 6320 SOM
5     18-  Center Road.
      1965
1965- 1-   Appropriating property for expansion of city’s Fire Station site at 6320 SOM
6     18-  Center Road.
      1965
Res.  3-1- Authorizing purchase of land in the vicinity of Cressmont Avenue and Woodall Road
1965- 1965 from J. and M. Topinko for recreational purposes.
35
Res.  3-1- Authorizing purchase of premises from R. M. Hickox for expansion of City Fire
1965- 1965 Station at 6320 SOM Center Road.
36
Res.  3-1- Authorizing purchase of premises from M.C. English for expansion of City Fire
1965- 1965 Station at 6320 SOM Center Road.
37
Res.  3-   Authorizes acceptance of deed for premises on Inwood Road from Solon Local School
1965- 15-  District for a public library site.
45    1965
Res.  6-7-
1965- 1965 Authorizing purchase of property adjacent to City Hall from E.C. and I. Craemer.
89
Res.  6-   Authorizing acceptance of deed, from Forest Park Land Co., for portion of site of
1965- 21-  Sewage Treatment Plant in N.E. Solon.
99    1965
Res.  12-  Accepting park and recreation site in Hunt Club Meadows Subdivision, comprising
1965- 6-   23.4 acres, from Solon Development Corp.
197   1965
Res.  4-   Authorizes purchase of premises from R.G. and L. Beattie for site for sewage
1966- 26-  treatment plant in northeast Solon.
71    1966
1966- 6-6- Authorizes sale of Sublots Nos. 191 to 198 and 204 to 210 in Solon Allotment
100   1966 Company’s Subdivision No. 1.
1966- 9-6- Appropriating 28 acres of land for temporary and permanent easements for sanitary
182   1966 sewers from S. L. and S. L. Mendelson.
1966- 9-   Appropriating property in the vicinity of Rodgers Drive for temporary and
195   19-  permanent easements for sanitary sewers from R.E. and E.M. Smiley.
      1966
Res.  11-  Accepting bids for purchase of Sublots Nos. 191 to 198 and 205 to 210 in Solon
1966- 7-   Allotment Company’s Subdivision No. 1.
204   1966
1967- 2-6- Authorizing sale of land adjacent to Solon High School.
15    1967
1967- 3-6- Authorizing sale of two parcels comprising Sublots Nos. 171 to 190 and 211 to
24    1967 219, the Service Department Bldg., Longley Avenue and Erie Street, in Solon
           Allotment Company’s Subdivision No. 1.
1968- 3-   Authorizing sale of Sublots Nos. 205 and 206 in Solon Allotment Company’s
59    18-  Subdivision No. 1.
      1968
1968- 3-   Authorizing acceptance of real property, and lease of same to American Automatic
68    28-  Vending Corp.
      1968
1968- 5-   Authorizing sale of Sublots Nos. 167 to 198, 205, 206 and 211 to 219 in Solon
111   20-  Allotment Company’s Subdivision No. 1.
      1968
1968- 9-3- Authorizing acceptance of limited warranty deed for 2.4134 acres from American
176   1968 Automatic Vending Corp., in connection with the development of its property on
           Solon Road.
Res.  9-3- Accepting as a gift a warranty deed, for portions of Portage, Cunningham and
1968- 1968 Willow Streets, from L. and S.J. Gillinov.
177
Res.  11-  Authorizing purchase of property from Pioneer Memorial United Presbyterian
1968- 4-   Church.
227   1968
1968- 11-  Authorizing sale of Sublots Nos. 167 to 198 inclusive, 205, 206 and 211 to 219
248   18-  inclusive, in Solon Allotment Company’s Subdivision No. 1.
      1968
Res.  12-  Accepting as gift a warranty deed from Alex Sill & Son Builders, Inc. of portions
1968- 30-  of Portage and Willow Streets.
261   1968
1969- 1-   Authorizing sale of land adjacent to site of Solon High School to Solon Local
15    20-  School District.
      1969
Res.  2-   Accepting bid of Solon Valley Hardware, Inc., for purchase of city property
1969- 17-  comprising three parcels commonly referred to as the “shopping center.”
22    1969
Res.  2-   Repealing Res. 1968-227, and authorizing purchase of property of Pioneer Memorial
1969- 17-  United Presbyterian Church.
28    1969
1969- 4-7- Authorizing sale of Sublots Nos. 167 to 170, 179 to 190, both inclusive, 205, 206
74    1969 and 211 to 219 inclusive in Solon Allotment Company’s Subdivision No. 1.
Res.  5-   Repealing Res. 1969-28, and authorizing purchase and option to purchase
1969- 19-  properties of Pioneer Memorial United Presbyterian Church.
108   1969
Res.       Repealing Res. 1965-197, accepting warranty deeds for a park area in the vicinity
1969- 9-8- of the CEI Easement and premises known as Block “Y” on SW corner of Foxhill Drive
179   1969 and Arthur Road from Solon Development Co., and approving transfer of swimming
           pool site to Hunt Club Home Owners Association.
1970- 2-   Authorizing sale of Sublots Nos. 167 to 170, 179 to 190 inclusive, 205, 206 and
35    16-  211 to 219 inclusive in Solon Allotment Company’s Subdivision No. 1.
      1970
Res.  5-   Accepting bid of Club 4893 for purchase of certain sublots in Solon Allotment
1970- 18-  Company’s Subdivision No. 1.
85    1970
           Authorizing release of interest in certain real estate in the vicinity of SOM
1970- 5-   Center and Arthur Roads to Board of Education of Solon Local School District, and
90    18-  acquisition of a similar interest in other real estate in the vicinity of SOM
      1970 Center and Arthur Roads being conveyed by Solon Local School District to Junior
           Achievement.
Res.  8-3- Authorizing acceptance of deed from Brainard Garden Investment Co. for 0.1919
1970- 1970 acres of land for park purposes and buffer zone.
119
Res.  2-   Authorizing acceptance of deed from Virginia Holding Corp. for 1.46 acres of land
1971- 15-  on Cochran Road for a fire station site.
40    1971
Res.  3-   Authorizing acceptance of deed from Junior Achievement of Greater Cleveland,
1971- 29-  Inc., for site of city swimming pool.
70    1971
Res.  5-   Authorizing agreement with State of Ohio for sale of certain interests in real
1971- 17-  property, in connection with widening of SOM Center Road.
108   1971
Res.  7-   Authorizing acceptance of quit-claim deed from M.M. Stotter, Trustee, for Block
1971- 19-  No. 5 in Solon Allotment Company’s Subdivision No. 1.
147   1971
Res.  9-   Authorizing conveyance of Block No. 5 in Solon Allotment Company’s Subdivision
1971- 20-  No. 1 to Cleveland Catholic Diocese.
182   1971
Res.  10-  Authorizing acceptance of deed as gift from Erico Products, Inc. for
1971- 18-  approximately ten acres of land, for recreational purposes.
197   1971
Res.  12-  Authorizing agreement with, and acceptance of quit claim deed from, Brainard
1971- 6-   Garden Investment Co. for the 12.507 acre parcel between Raintree Industrial Park
213   1971 and Brainard Road.
Res.  7-   Authorizing purchase of 360 acres comprising Grantwood Golf Club and contiguous
1972- 17-  land.
106   1972
1972- 8-   Authorizing acceptance of certain real property, and authorizing lease of the
132   21-  same to Van Dorn Co., in connection with the issuance of city’s industrial
      1972 development revenue bonds.
1973- 4-2- Authorizing agreement with International Telephone and Telegraph Corp.,
47    1973 pertaining to acquisition of a new industrial facility, and lease and sale of the
           same.
1973- 5-   Authorizing acceptance of certain real property, and authorizing lease of same to
79    21-  Jerpbak Bayless Co., in connection with issuance of city’s industrial development
      1973 first mortgage revenue bonds.
Res.  6-   Authorizing acceptance of option to purchase certain real property, from M.S. and
1973- 18-  T.S. McConoughey, for expansion of Grantwood Recreation Park.
94    1973
1973- 6-   Authorizing acceptance of certain real property, and authorizing lease of the
91    25-  same to Monroe Co., Inc., in connection with issuance of city’s industrial
      1973 development first mortgage revenue bonds.
1973- 12-  Authorizing acceptance of certain real property, and authorizing lease of the
177   17-  same to Cyril Bath Co., in connection with issuance of city’s industrial
      1973 development first mortgage revenue bonds.
1974- 5-6- Authorizing acceptance of certain real property, and authorizing lease of same to
61    1974 Allied Steel & Tractor Products, Inc., in connection with issuance of city’s
           industrial development first mortgage revenue bonds.
Res.  8-
1974- 19-  Authorizing purchase of property adjacent to City Hall premises from L.G. Clark.
131   1974
1974- 9-3- Authorizing agreement with Ohio-Nuclear, Inc., pertaining to acquisition of real
134   1974 and personal property comprising four additions to an existing industrial
           facility, and authorizing lease and sale of said property.
Res.  12-  Authorizing acceptance of warranty deed from C. S. and D. M. Steininger for
1974- 23-  approximately 15 acres of land in the vicinity of north side of U.S. Rt. 422 and
199   1974 Briar Hill Subdivision.
Res.  3-   Authorizing purchase agreement with Solon Electric Supply, Inc. for premises at
1975- 24-  6290 SOM Center Road.
55    1975
1976- 12-  Authorizing acceptance of certain real property, and authorizing lease of same to
212   6-   F.C. Thornton Co., in connection with issuance of city’s industrial development
      1976 first mortgage revenue note.
Res.  12-  Accepting conveyance of northerly extension of Spring Grove Drive, Spring Grove
1976- 20-  Drive Cul-de-Sac and Erico Drive from State of Ohio.
221   1976
Res.  1-   Authorizing agreement with Solon Development Co. providing for transfer to city
1977- 17-  of certain premises in the vicinity of Pettibone Road and Liberty Hills
4     1977 Subdivision No. 2 for development of premises as park and recreation area.
1977- 10-  Appropriating land from H. Kudley et al., comprising portions of Permanent Parcel
210   17-  Nos. 951-2-14 to 951-2-19, for city park purposes.
      1977
Res.  5-   Authorizing dismissal of various appropriation actions filed against property
1978- 22-  owners pursuant to Res. 1977-210.
81    1978
1978- 5-   Authorizing agreement with Cleveland Glass Insulations, Inc., pertaining to
106   22-  acquisition of an industrial and distribution facility.
      1978
Res.  7-
1978- 17-  Authorizing purchase of Pioneer Memorial United Presbyterian Church.
163   1978
1978- 12-  Authorizing acceptance of an interest in real property comprising the site of the
261   6-   Monroe Company, Inc., 1978 Project, and the lease thereof.
      1978
1979- 3-5- Authorizing sale of unimproved portion of leased land to the Jerpbak Bayless Co.
57    1979
Res.  5-   Accepting quit-claim deed, from SOM Center Properties, for land for park
1980- 19-  purposes.
76    1980
Res.  11-  Authorizing purchase agreement with A., C., J. and B. Krejci for 34600 to 34660
1980- 19-  Aurora Road.
168   1980
Res.  8-3- Accepting warranty deed to three parcels, in Cheswick II Subdivision, from
1981- 1981 TransCon Builders, Inc.
83
1982- 3-1- Accepting various offers of settlement for acquisition of right-of-way from
25    1982 abutting property owners on Cochran Road.
Res.  8-
1982- 16-  Authorizing acquisition of right-of-way from A.L. Zabko for Cochran Road Project.
115   1982
1983- 3-7- Accepting deeds from various property owners in connection with Cochran Road
32    1983 Improvement.
1983- 5-2- Accepting deeds from various property owners in connection with Cochran Road
66    1983 Improvement.
Res.  8-   Authorizing agreement with Technicare Corp. for sale of certain property adjacent
1983- 15-  to Beaver Meadow Parkway.
117   1983
Res.  10-  Accepting quit claim deed from Ricardo Construction Co., granting approximately
1985- 21-  0.0845 acres for recreational purposes.
176   1985
Res.  3-   Authorizing purchase agreement with Sunrise Land Co. to purchase approximately 24
1986- 17-  acres of land on Russell Drive, so as to protect Blue Heron Rookery.
42    1986
Res.  11-  Authorizing purchase of land, comprising Permanent Parcel 951-5-18, from M.C.
1988- 7-   Keyes and H. Whisenhunt.
204   1988
Res.  1-   Authorizing purchase of real estate from A.L. Ronkos, Executrix of Estate of Mary
1989- 16-  Finta.
4     1989
Res.  9-   Authorizing purchase of approximately 39.87 acres of unimproved vacant land from
1989- 18-  Ralph Victor Construction, Inc.
251   1989
1989- 10-  Appropriating fee simple interest in Permanent Parcel Nos. 951-5-17 and 951-5-19,
270   16-  owned respectively by Zion Memorial Park Association and Hawkins Trading Co., for
      1989 expansion of Mt. Hope Cemetery.
1989- 11-  Appropriating property for recreational parks, playgrounds, park entrances and
267   20-  boulevards.
      1989
Res.  1-
1990- 15-  Authorizing quit claim deed conveying Erico Drive to Erico Products, Inc.
20    1990
Res.  6-4-
1990- 1990 Accepting quit-claim deed from Technicare Corp.
132
Res.  7-2- Authorizing purchase of property located at 6611 SOM Center Road from B.M. and
1990- 1990 S.A. Walker for expansion and upgrading of Community Park.
166
Res.  8-6- Authorizing agreement with Kayell Development Co., for acquisition of three
1990- 1990 parcels of land adjacent to Community Park.
167
1990- 7-
177   16-  Appropriating seven parcels for Solon Road widening.
      1990
1990- 9-4- Appropriating property, comprising 30.597 acres in the vicinity of Aurora and
222   1990 Liberty Roads, for recreational parks, playgrounds, municipal buildings and park
           entrances and boulevards.
Res.  9-   Authorizing purchase of land from Hawkins Trading Co. and Zion Memorial Park for
1990- 17-  addition to Mt. Hope Cemetery.
231   1990
Res.  9-
1990- 17-  Authorizing purchase of property at 35300 Aurora Road from L. Lucarelli.
237   1990
1991- 3-   Appropriation of property for highway purposes in connection with the Solon Road
47    18-  widening project.
      1991
1991- 4-   Appropriation of property for highway purposes in connection with the Solon Road
64    15-  widening project.
      1991
1991- 4-   Appropriation of property for highway purposes in connection with the Solon Road
70    29-  widening project.
      1991
Res.  5-6-
1991- 1991 Accepting a deed from Solon Associates Co., an Ohio partnership.
75
1991- 5-
91    20-  Accepting a deed from the Nomis Development Corp., Inc.
      1991
1991- 9-   Appropriation of property for recreation, parks, playgrounds, park entrances and
184   16-  boulevards, and municipal buildings.
      1991
1991- 10-  Accepting various offers of settlement in connection with the Solon Road widening
209   21-  project and authorizing transfer of deeds therefor.
      1991
Res.  1-   Appropriation of property abutting Cochran and Harper Roads, for road widening
1992- 20-  project.
14    1992
Res.  3-   Authorizing agreement with Wheeling & Lake Erie Railway Co. to purchase a portion
1992- 16-  of the abandoned Chagrin Falls Branch Line.
35    1992
Res.  3-
1992- 16-  Accepting a deed from Nomis Development Corp., Inc.
52    1992
Res.  8-   Authorizing purchase agreement with Stonewood Homes, Inc., for Sublot 83 in the
1992- 31-  Oakview Subdivision.
153   1992
Res.  11-
1992- 2-   Accepting ownership and operation of the Pepperwood Lift Station.
193   1992
Res.  4-   Accepting deed of easement and bill of sale from the Pepperwood Lane Homeowners
1993- 19-  Association for the Pepperwood Lift Station.
46    1993
Res.  6-9-
1993- 1993 Authorizing purchase agreement with L. and M. Baker for 6539 SOM Center Road.
86
Res.  8-2-
1993- 1993 Authorizing purchase agreement with D. and B. Geiger for 34950 Aurora Road.
131
Res.  9-   Authorizing agreement with Atlas Copco North America, Inc., for the purchase of
1993- 20-  five and one-half acres adjacent to the Solon Service Building.
162   1993
Res.  1-   Authorizing purchase and option agreements with J.J. Quinn for approximately
1993- 17-  seven acres consisting of PP#s 954-02-027 through 954-02-034, 954-02-060 through
208   1994 954-02-062, 954-02-177, 954-02-178 and 954-02-013.
Res.  5-   Authorizing purchase agreement with J. Vanyor, Jr., for 2.75 acres on Bainbridge
1994- 16-  Road.
87    1994
Res.  7-   Authorizing purchase agreement with R.M. Hovan for approximately 2.05 acres on
1994- 18-  Bainbridge Road.
107   1994
Res.  10-  Authorizing agreement with A.E. and A.J. Rapas for purchase of approximately 1.83
1994- 3-   acres.
159   1994
Res.  2-   Authorizing purchase agreement with M. Tuskes for approximately 4.17 acres on
1995- 20-  Bainbridge Road.
30    1995
Res.  3-6- Authorizing agreement with R. Hrabak for purchase of certain property located on
1995- 1995 Bainbridge Road.
56
Res.  3-6- Authorizing purchase agreement with T.J. and B.P. Nezbeda for approximately 5.590
1995- 1995 acres on Bainbridge Road.
57
1995- 3-   Appropriation of property on Bainbridge Road for construction of water detention
67    20-  basins.
      1995
Res.  7-
1995- 17-  Accepting a warranty deed from Board Associates.
141   1995
Res.  7-
1995- 17-  Authorizing purchase agreement with G.J. and J.K. Marek for 6663 SOM Center Road.
152   1995
Res.  8-7- Authorizing termination of lease, quit-claim deed and bill of sale with Fedmet
1995- 1995 International Corp.
166
Res.  9-
1995- 18-  Authorizing purchase agreement with P. and V. Alexander for 6599 SOM Center Road.
195   1995
Res.  12-
1995- 6-   Accepting a deed from Atlas Copco North America, Inc.
249   1995
Res.  12-  Approving purchase agreement with D.R. De Von and D.M. Svec for approximately
1995- 18-  14.5 acres.
234   1995
Res.  6-   Authorizing revised purchase agreement with the Board of Library Trustees of the
1996- 17-  Cuyahoga County Public Library for purpose of operating a free public library.
128   1996
Res.  8-
1996- 19-  Authorizing purchase agreement with J.B. Luxenberg for 6629 SOM Center Road.
157   1996
Res.  1-
1997- 22-  Authorizing purchase agreement with L. Luxenberg for 6619 SOM Center Road.
17    1997
1997- 4-7- Appropriation of the rear 180 feet of 6619 SOM Center Road for the construction
51    1997 of the Solon Branch of the Cuyahoga County Public Library.
Res.  4-   Authorizing agreement with Mardot Ltd. Partnership for the sale of property
1997- 23-  located off of Beaver Meadow Parkway.
88    1997
Res.  6-   Appropriation of approximately 3,711 acres located at 6619 SOM Center Road for
1997- 16-  construction of the Solon Branch of the Cuyahoga Country Library, in the absence
132   1997 of an agreement with the owners. Amends Res. 1997-51.
1997- 8-4- Appropriation of 6647 SOM Center Road for street purposes.
160   1997
Res.  8-4-
1997- 1997 Authorizing sale of two parcels totaling 1.46 acres fronting on Cochran Road.
172
Res.  9-2- Authorizing purchase agreement with U.S. Laboratories, Inc. for right-of-way in
1997- 1997 connection with the extension of Kruse Drive.
193
Res.  9-2- Authorizing purchase agreement with N. Farinacci, Executrix of the estate of
1997- 1997 Dominic P. Gruttadauria, for right-of-way in connection with the extension of
194        Kruse Drive.
Res.  9-2- Authorizing purchase agreement with R.F. and H. Poletek for right-of-way in
1997- 1997 connection with the extension of Kruse Drive.
195
Res.  9-2- Authorizing purchase agreement with Williams Trucking Co. for right-of-way in
1997- 1997 connection with the extension of Kruse Drive.
196
Res.  9-2- Authorizing purchase agreement with P. Laughlin for right-of-way in connection
1997- 1997 with the extension of Kruse Drive.
197
Res.  4-6- Accepting the bid of N.D.T., Ltd., for the purchase of city-owned land on Cochran
1998- 1998 Road.
72
Res.  9-   Authorizing conveyance by quit-claim deed of the site of the former Cuyahoga
1998- 24-  County Library located at 33860 Inwood Drive to the Board of Education of the
167   1998 Solon City School District.
Res.  9-   Accepting a warranty deed from Sunrise Development Co. for the pump station
1998- 24-  property located in Thornbury Subdivision.
176   1998
Res.  3-   Authorizing purchase agreements with various property owners for the expansion of
1999- 29-  the Blue Heron Rookery.
48    1999
Res.  6-7- Authorizing purchase agreement with the Ohio Department of Transportation (ODOT)
1999- 1999 for right-of-way in connection with the widening of SOM Center Road.
90
Res.  6-7- Authorizing purchase agreement with N. and M. Sajatovic for property to expand
1999- 1999 the Blue Heron Rookery.
112
Res.  10-  Authorizing purchase of property from Evergreen Memorial Park Assn. and Zion
1999- 18-  Memorial Park Assn. to expand the Blue Heron Rookery.
207   1999
1999- 12-  Accepting donation of approximately 23.5 acres located at the southeast
243   20-  intersection of Pettibone and Liberty Roads, from Cameratta Properties, L.P., and
      1999 DiSanto Enterprises, Inc.
Res.  7-5-
2000- 2000 Authorizing purchase agreement with B. Baker for property located on Aurora Road.
181
Res.  7-5- Authorizing purchase agreement with J.P. Vacik for property located on Aurora
2000- 2000 Road.
182
Res.  7-5- Authorizing purchase agreement with Clayton National Inc., for property located
2000- 2000 on SOM Center Road (S.R. 91).
187
Res.  11-  Accepting quit-claim deed from C.R. Steininger, for donation of property located
2000- 20-  on the north side of S.R. 422.
331   2000
Res.  12-  Authorizing modification to agreement with the Ohio Department of Transportation
2000- 18-  (ODOT) for the purchase of right-of-way in connection with the widening of SOM
353   2000 Center Road.
Res.  12-
2000- 18-  Authorizing advertisement for sale of 0.11 acres of city-owned property.
362   2000
Res.  2-5- Accepting quit claim deed from Solon Development Company, for donation of
2001- 2001 property located on the west side of SOM Center Road.
32
Res.  3-   Authorizing purchase agreement with the Solon Board of Education for property
2001- 19-  located along the east side of SOM Center Road and the south side of Portz
55    2001 Parkway.
Res.  4-   Authorizing advertisement for sale of city-owned property located at 6539 SOM
2001- 16-  Center Road.
116   2001
Res.  4-   Authorizing purchase agreements for the acquisition of property to expand the
2001- 16-  Blue Heron Rookery.
117   2001
Res.  5-   Accepting general warranty deeds from Cameratta Properties LP and DiSanto
2001- 21-  Enterprise, Inc., for the donation of real property located at 7445 Liberty Road
143   2001 and property located at the southeast intersection of Pettibone and Aurora Roads.
Res.  7-2-
2001- 2001 Authorizing purchase and sale agreements with Raymond Dynowski for real property.
170
Res.  7-2- Authorizing purchase and sale agreement with Raymond and Edmond Dynowski for real
2001- 2001 property.
171
Res.  7-2- Authorizing purchase and sale agreement with Atlantis Liberty Holdings, Inc., for
2001- 2001 real property.
172
Res.  7-2- Advertising for the sale of a portion of city-owned property located at PP# 952-
2001- 2001 21-038 SOM Center Road.
173
Res.  7-   Authorizing purchase and sale agreement with Chagrin River Land Conservancy for
2001- 11-  approximately 21.6283 acres of real property situated between South Chagrin
183   2001 Reservation of the Cleveland Metropolitan District and SOM Center Road.
Res.  8-   Authorizing purchase and sale agreement with Joanne and Mark Zettl, for real
2001- 20-  property.
220   2001
Res.  8-   Authorizing purchase and sale agreement with Joanne and Mark Zettl, for real
2001- 20-  property.
221   2001
Res.  9-   Authorizing purchase and sale agreement with the Cleveland Hebrew Schools for
2001- 19-  real property located at 6539 SOM Center Road.
230   2001
Res.  10-  Authorizing purchase agreement with the Jewish Federation of Cleveland for 11.15
2001- 15-  acres of property to expand the Blue Heron Rookery.
250   2001
Res.  11-  Authorizing a first amendment to the purchase agreement with Chagrin River Land
2001- 5-   Conservancy regarding the North Branch Preserve.
255   2001
Res.  12-  Authorizing a second amendment to the purchase agreement with Chagrin River Land
2001- 17-  Conservancy regarding the North Branch Reserve.
287   2001
Res.  1-7- Authorizing a purchase agreement for property located at 7385 SOM Center Road
2002- 2002 (PP# 956-04-025).
2
Res.  1-7- Authorizing a purchase agreement for property located at 34065 Pettibone Road
2002- 2002 (PP# 956-04-030).
3
Res.  1-   Authorizing a first amendment to the agreement of purchase and sale with the
2002- 23-  Solon Board of Education.
17    2002
Res.  3-4- Authorizing a purchase agreement with Solon Park Apartments, Inc. for the
2002- 2002 purchase of real property (PP# 954-30-015).
52
Res.  4-1- Authorizing an agreement for real property and easement transfers and settlement
2002- 2002 of all claims related thereto with Cooker Restaurant Corporation and Landerhaven
78A        Country Club Estates, Ltd.
Res.  5-6- Accepting the bid of Philip Wenk for the sale and removal of the house structure
2002- 2002 on city-owned property at 34065 Pettibone Road.
104
Res.  5-6-
2002- 2002 Authorizing a purchase and sale agreement for PP# 955-28-017 Aurora Road.
105
Res.  10-  Authorizing the sale of a portion of city-owned property located at PP# 952-21-
2002- 21-  038 SOM Center Road.
242   2002
Res.  12-  Accepting the bid of William J. Sgro for the sale of a portion of city-owned
2002- 16-  property located at PP# 952-21-038 SOM Center Road.
294   2002
Res.  3-   Authorizing a purchase and sale agreement for property located at 6320 SOM Center
2003- 23-  Road (PP# 952-21-038).
47    2003
Res.  7-7- Authorizing negotiation to purchase right-of-way necessary for the Aurora East
2003- 2003 Sewer and Pettibone Road Reconstruction Projects.
185
Res.  9-   Authorizing a purchase agreement for the acquisition of property to expand the
2003- 15-  Blue Heron Rookery.
222   2003
Res.  11-  Authorizing a purchase and sale agreement for property located at 35410 Aurora
2003- 3-   Road (PP# 954-40-002).
223   2003
Res.  12-  Authorizing a purchase and sale agreement for property located at 34970 Aurora
2003- 1-   Road (PP# 954-35-004).
289   2003
Res.  1-   Accepting a general warranty deed for the acquisition of PP# 954-40-002 located
2004- 20-  at 35410 Aurora Road.
13    2004
Res.  7-   Accepting a general warranty deed for the acquisition of PP# 954-35-004 located
2004- 19-  at 34970 Aurora Road.
163   2004
Res.  9-   Declaring the intent to appropriate certain property (part of PP# 956-28-002 and
2004- 20-  PP# 956-28-001) for the Aurora East Sewer Project.
194   2004
Res.  1-   Authorizing a contract with Course 43 Ltd., for the sale and purchase of real
2005- 18-  property in connection with the donation of right-of-way for Summit Street (PP#
13    2005 956-32-002 Block B-4).
Res.  1-   Accepting various contracts for purchase of rights-of-way and easements in
2005- 18-  connection with the Aurora East Sewer/ Pettibone Reconstruction Projects.
14    2005
2005- 2-   Authorizing sale of city-owned property consisting of PP#s 954-35-001, 954-35-
34    23-  002, 954-35-003 and 954-35-004 located on Aurora Road.
      2005
Res.  2-   Accepting various contracts for purchase of rights-of-way and easements in
2005- 23-  connection with the Aurora East Sewer/Pettibone Reconstruction Projects.
39    2005
2005- 4-   Accepting various contracts for purchase of rights-of-way and a right of entry in
93    18-  connection with the Aurora East Sewer/Pettibone Reconstruction Projects.
      2005
2005- 5-   Authorizing agreement of sale with the Trust for Public Land for property located
113   16-  at the end of Springside Lane (PP# 952-05-082).
      2005
2005- 5-   Authorizing purchase of real estate located at 34045 Bainbridge Road, known as
125   16-  the “Lorenzo Solon Bull Property.”
      2005
2005- 6-   Accepting bid of Gross Builders for the sale of city-owned property consisting of
127   20-  approximately 27.22 acres (PP#s 954-35-001, 954-35-002, 954-35-003 and 954-35-
      2005 004) on Aurora Road for the purpose of developing senior housing.
2005- 6-   Accepting various contracts for purchase of rights-of-way and a right of entry in
153   20-  connection with the Aurora East Sewer/Pettibone Reconstruction Projects.
      2005
2005- 8-1- Authorizing the purchase of real estate located at 34205 Bainbridge Road.
181   2005
2005- 8-   Accepting various contracts for purchase of rights-of-way in connection with the
180   15-  Aurora East Sewer/Pettibone Reconstruction Projects.
      2005
2005- 8-   Authorizing the purchase of real estate located at 35050 Aurora Road (PP# 954-35-
201   15-  008).
      2005
2005- 9-   Accepting a general warranty deed from Irene Destro for the donation of
208   19-  approximately 1.10 acres of real property located adjacent to Fire Station 1 (PP#
      2005 951-34-017).
2005- 9-   Accepting a right of entry and two contracts for purchase of rights-of-way in
210   19-  connection with the Aurora East Sewer/Pettibone Reconstruction Projects (PP#s
      2005 954-25-018, 955-37-115, 956-17-008).
2005- 10-  Authorizing a purchase agreement for the acquisition of property to expand the
236   17-  Blue Heron Rookery (PP#s 956-14-001, 956-14-002, 956-14-003 and 956-14-004
      2005 Russell Drive).
2005- 12-  Accepting various contracts for purchase of rights-of-way in connection with the
285   19-  Aurora East Sewer/Pettibone Reconstruction Projects.
      2005
2005- 12-  Declaring the intent to appropriate property for the Pettibone Reconstruction
286   19-  Project.
      2005
2006- 2-6- Accepting various contracts for purchase of rights-of-way and easements in
26    2006 connection with the Aurora East Sewer/Pettibone Reconstruction Projects.
2006- 3-   Accepting a right-of-way and a contract for purchase of right-of-way in
56    20-  connection with the Aurora East Sewer/Pettibone Reconstruction Projects.
      2006
2006- 5-1- Accepting contracts for purchase of right-of-way in connection with the Aurora
93    2006 East Sewer/Pettibone Reconstruction Projects.
2006- 5-   Authorizes a land purchase agreement with McGill Acquisitions, LLC for property
104   15-  located at the eastern corporate limit of the city (PP# 956-37-002).
      2006
2006- 5-   Accepting contracts for a drainage easement and purchase of right-of-way in
111   15-  connection with the Aurora East Sewer/Pettibone Reconstruction Projects.
      2006
2006- 8-7- Authorizes the appropriation of certain real property owned by Roger F. Sindilek
185   2006 for the Pettibone Road Reconstruction Project.
2006- 8-7- Authorizes the appropriation of certain real property owned by Bruce W. and Kay
186   2006 L. Thomas for the Pettibone Road Reconstruction Project.
2006- 8-7- Authorizes the appropriation of certain real property owned by Jeff Victor for
187   2006 the Pettibone Road Reconstruction Project.
2006- 8-7- Authorizes the appropriation of certain real property owned by Carl C. and Susan
188   2006 T. Holtz for the Pettibone Road Reconstruction Project.
2006- 8-7- Authorizes the appropriation of certain real property owned by John L. and
189   2006 Kimberly A. Myers for the Pettibone Road Reconstruction Project.
2006- 8-7- Authorizes the appropriation of certain real property owned by National City
190   2006 Bank, trustee, for the Pettibone Road Reconstruction Project.
2006- 11-  Authorizes an agreement with Station 43, LLC, and accepts the donation of
259   6-   property (part of PP# 956-38-049).
      2006
2006- 11-  Accepting a contract for the purchase of right-of-way in connection with the
278   20-  Aurora East Sewer/Pettibone Reconstruction Projects.
      2006
2006- 12-  Authorizes an agreement with James Quinn to purchase real estate located on
289   18-  Melbury Avenue (PP# 954-02-174).
      2006
2006- 12-  Accepting a contract for the purchase of right-of-way in connection with the
293   18-  Aurora East Sewer/Pettibone Reconstruction Projects.
      2006
2007- 3-   Accepting a general warranty deed from James J. Quinn for PP# 954-02-174 located
70    19-  on Melbury Avenue.
      2007
2007- 5-7- Accepting a contract for the purchase of right-of-way in connection with the
122   2007 Pettibone Reconstruction Project.
2008- 1-   Accepting a contract for the purchase of right-of-way in connection with the
15    22-  Pettibone Reconstruction Project.
      2008
2008- 3-   Accepting a contract for the purchase of right-of-way in connection with the
60    17-  Pettibone Road Reconstruction Project.
      2008
2008- 6-2- Accepting the bid of the Robbins Company for the sale of city-owned property
128   2008 consisting of approximately 4.21 acres (PP# 953-17-006), on Hall Street, as the
           property has no municipal purpose.
2008- 9-   Authorizing a purchase and sale agreement with the Western Reserve Land
245   15-  Conservancy for the purchase of PP# 952-12-005 less a one-acre parcel as
      2008 indicated on Exhibit B of the agreement.
2008- 9-   Authorizing a purchase and sale agreement with Lauren Williams for PP# 954-19-
249   15-  003, located at 32175 Pettibone Road.
      2008
2008- 9-   Authorizing a purchase and sale agreement with the Walter Louis Torrens Revocable
256   15-  Trust for the purchase of a portion of PP# 952-17-034, located at 6120 SOM Center
      2008 Road.
2009- 2-   Amending Ord. 2008-245 authorizing a purchase and sale agreement with the Western
36    17-  Reserve Land Conservancy.
      2009
2009- 2-   Appropriating property for the Solon Road Sidewalk Project: part of PP# 954-01-
41    17-  130; part of PP# 954-01-008, 009, 010; part of PP# 954-01-005.
      2009
2009- 10-  Accepting an Auditor’s Deed for forfeited land sale for Permanent Parcel No. 955-
255   19-  03-070.
      2009
2009- 10-  Accepting an Auditor’s Deed for forfeited land sale for Permanent Parcel No. 955-
256   19-  33-020.
      2009
2009- 11-  Accepting a quit-claim deed from Marleen Brunello for the donation of PP#s 955-
269   2-   33-111 and 955-33-112.
      2009
2010- 3-   Accepting a quit-claim deed from the Ann McCabe Revocable Trust for the donation
63    15-  of PP# 955-13-001 and PP# 955-13-002 located on Bainbridge Road.
      2010
2010- 5-3- Accepting auditor’s deeds for forfeited land sale for various property through
107   2010 the Land Reutilization Program for PP# 951-40-007, PP# 955-37-071, PP# 956-38-
           034, PP# 955-33-038, PP# 951-33-003, PP# 952-23-006 and PP# 955-37-006.
2010- 5-   Accepting a quit-claim deed from Orange Village for the donation of PP# 951-05-
126   17-  020, 021 and 022 located within Mt. Hope Cemetery.
      2010
2010- 6-   Accepting an auditor’s deed for forfeited land sale for PP# 951-11-002 through
154   21-  the Land Reutilization Program.
      2010
2010- 10-  Accepting a quit-claim deed from Serge Vaks for the donation of PP# 954-19-009,
221   4-   located on Pettibone Road.
      2010
2010- 10-  Accepting an auditor’s deed for forfeited land sale for PP# 952-29-014 through
228   18-  the Land Reutilization Program.
      2010
2011- 1-   Authorizing a purchase and sale agreement with Patrick D. Carbone for the
24    18-  purchase of PP# 955-35-098 located at 38235 Aurora Road.
      2011
2011- 11-  Accepting a director’s deed from the Ohio Department of Transportation for PP#
225   21-  952-21-054.
      2011
2013- 9-   Accepting a quit-claim deed from William B. Kerek for the donation of permanent
196   16-  parcels 955-37-060, 955-37-061 and 955-37-062.
      2013
2014- 5-   Authorizing a purchase and sale agreement with the estate of Grace E. Arena for
115   19-  the purchase of property located at 35100 Aurora Road.
      2014
2014- 9-   Confirming and verifying the transfer of ownership of 32947 Charmwood Oval on
182A  15-  which the “Hunt Club Swimming Pool” is located, from the Hunt Club Homeowners
      2014 Association to the city.
2015- 5-8- Accepting an auditor’s deed for forfeited land sale for permanent parcel number
101   2015 955-33-023 through the land reutilization program.
2015- 5-   Accepting an auditor’s deed for forfeited land sale for permanent parcel number
102   18-  953-22-002 through the land reutilization program.
      2015
2016- 6-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute a donation letter and quit claim deed for 0.002
130   20-  acres of city owned property located at the southwest corner of the intersection
      2016 of SOM Center Road and Lisa Lane for right-of-way purposes.
2016- 10-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute a purchase agreement for various interests in
177   17-  real property located at 34050 Aurora Road (PP# 954-29-025) for the SOM Center
      2016 Road and Aurora Road Intersection Improvements Project.
2016- 10-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute a purchase agreement for various interests in
179   17-  real property located at 6445 SOM Center Road (PP# 954-29-046) for the SOM Center
      2016 Road and Aurora Road Intersection Improvements Project.
2016- 11-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute a purchase agreement for various interests in
193   7-   real property located at 6477 SOM Center Road for the SOM Center Road and Aurora
      2016 Road Intersection Improvements Project.
2016- 12-  Appropriating property interests for the SOM Center Road and Aurora Road
208   5-   Intersection Improvements Project.
      2016
2016- 12-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute a purchase agreement for various interests in
221   29-  real property located at 33825 Aurora Road (PP# 954-03-013) for the SOM Center
      2016 Road and Aurora Road Intersection Improvement Project.
2017- 2-   Authorizing the Mayor and Director of Finance to enter into a purchase and sale
38    21-  agreement with Anne Cheh-Falb for property located at 34185 Bainbridge Road (PP#
      2017 952-21-029).
2017- 5-1- Authorizing the Mayor to execute a purchase agreement for various interests in
82    2017 real property located at 6395 SOM Center Road for the SOM Center Road and Aurora
           Road Intersection Improvement Project.
      8-   Authorizing the settlement of a pending appropriation action to acquire various
2017- 21-  interests in real property located at 6353 and 6375 SOM Center Road and 34165
150   2017 Aurora Road for the SOM Center Road and Aurora Road Intersection Improvements
           Project.
      10-  Repealing Ordinance No. 2017-150 and to re-authorize the settlement of a pending
2017- 16-  appropriation action to acquire various interests in real property located at
182   2017 6353 and 6375 SOM Center Road and 34165 Aurora Road for the SOM Center Road and
           Aurora Road Intersection Improvements Project.
2018- 2-   Authorizing the Director of Law to approve and execute a joint motion and an
42    20-  agreed order to transfer the title of record of Erico Drive to the State of Ohio
      2018 Department of Transportation.
2018- 7-   Authorizing the Mayor and Director of Finance to enter into a purchase and sale
134   16-  agreement with Cannon Road Partners, LLC and to accept the donation of property
      2018 located on Cannon Road (PP# 951-22-004).
2018- 10-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a bill of sale with MM Cuyahoga Energy, LLC
218   15-  and NEO Cuyahoga, LLC.
      2018
2018- 11-  Authorizing the settlement of a pending appropriation action to acquire various
246   5-   interests in real property located at 6459 SOM Center Road.
      2018
2018- 11-  Authorizing the settlement of a pending appropriation action to acquire various
277   19-  interests in real property located at 6465 SOM Center Road.
      2018
2020- 3-2- Authorizing the Mayor and Director of Finance to enter into a purchase and sale
51    2020 agreement with Swaminarayan Shubh Sanskar Sanstha Inc. for permanent PP# 954-02-
           021, located at 33156 Solon Road.
2020- 10-  Accepting the bid of Chick-Fil-A for the exchange of city-owned property
175   19-  comprised of 0.0102 acres of PP# 952-17-041 for property comprised of 0.0147
      2020 acres of PP# 952-17-003.
2021- 3-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract for Right of Entry and purchase of
59    15-  0.4553 acres of PP# 954-35-005 in connection with the Clearwater Court Extension
      2021 to Portz Parkway Project.
2021- 4-   Authorizing the Mayor or his designee to enter into a contract for the purchase
83    19-  of right-of-way from Solon Community Living, Inc. in connection with the Aurora
      2021 Road Reconstruction Phase I Project.
2021- 4-   Authorizing the Mayor or his designee to enter into a contract for the purchase
84    19-  of right-of-way from James L. Childers and Merwonne Childers in connection with
      2021 the Aurora Road Reconstruction Phase I Project.
2021- 4-   Authorizing the Mayor or his designee to enter into a contract for the purchase
85    19-  of right-of-way from Lisa M. Roch in connection with the Aurora Road
      2021 Reconstruction Phase I Project.
2021- 4-   Authorizing the Mayor or his designee to enter into a contract for the purchase
86    19-  of right-of-way from Paul Myers and Mary Ellen Myers in connection with the
      2021 Aurora Road Reconstruction Phase I Project.
2021- 4-   Authorizing the Mayor or his designee to enter into a contract for the purchase
87    19-  of right-of-way from David G. Dixon in connection with the Aurora Road
      2021 Reconstruction Phase I Project.
2021- 5-   Authorizing the Mayor or his designee to enter into a contract for the purchase
104   17-  of right-of-way from Jeffrey Dale Murphy in connection with the Aurora Road
      2021 Reconstruction Phase I Project.
2021- 5-   Authorizing the Mayor or his designee to enter into a contract for the purchase
105   17-  of right-of-way from Gregory McClain and Arlenar McClain in connection with the
      2021 Aurora Road Reconstruction Phase I Project.
2021- 6-7- Amending Ordinance 2021-59 which authorized the Mayor to execute a contract for
123   2021 Right of Entry and purchase of 0.4553 acres of PP# 954-35-005 in connection with
           the Clearwater Court Extension to Portz Parkway Project.
2021- 6-7- Authorizing the Mayor or his designee to enter into a contract for the purchase
124   2021 of right-of-way from Irene F. Schmegner Trust in connection with the Aurora Road
           Reconstruction Phase I Project.
2021- 6-7- Authorizing the Mayor or his designee to enter into a contract for the purchase
125   2021 of right-of-way from Amy Spiker and J. Scott Spiker in connection with the Aurora
           Road Reconstruction Phase I Project.
2021- 6-7- Authorizing the Mayor or his designee to enter into a contract for the purchase
126   2021 of right-of-way from Byzantine Catholic Diocese of Parma in connection with the
           Aurora Road Reconstruction Phase I Project.
2021- 6-7- Authorizing the Mayor or his designee to enter into a contract for the purchase
127   2021 of right-of-way from Jillian Filarski in connection with the Aurora Road
           Reconstruction Phase I Project.
2021- 6-7- Authorizing the preparation of plans and specifications for the sale of
134   2021 approximately 3.6575 acres of city-owned property located on Aurora Road west of
           Portz Parkway.
2021- 7-   Authorizing the Mayor or his designee to enter into a contract for the purchase
148   19-  of right-of-way from Jose L. Chavez in connection with the Aurora Road
      2021 Reconstruction Phase I Project.
2021- 7-   Authorizing the Mayor or his designee to enter into a contract for the purchase
149   19-  of right-of-way from Dana Rinicella in connection with the Aurora Road
      2021 Reconstruction Phase I Project.
2021- 7-   Authorizing the Mayor or his designee to enter into a contract for the purchase
150   19-  of right-of-way from Jeffrey Hartig and Harron Hartig in connection with the
      2021 Aurora Road Reconstruction Phase I Project.
2021- 8-   Authorizing the Mayor or his designee to enter into a contract for the purchase
177   16-  of right-of-way from David J. Frank and Sarah E. Frank in connection with the
      2021 Aurora Road Reconstruction Phase I Project.
2021- 8-   Authorizing the Mayor or his designee to enter into a contract for the purchase
178   16-  of right-of-way from William J. Jakovcic in connection with the Aurora Road
      2021 Reconstruction Phase I Project.
2021- 8-   Approving permanent right-of-way acquisitions for various City of Solon
180   16-  properties for the Aurora Road Reconstruction Project Phase I.
      2021
2021- 8-   Authorizing the Mayor and the Director of Finance to enter into a purchase and
189   27-  sale agreement with William L. Weigle and Diane M. Weigle for the purchase of PP#
      2021 952-21- 030 located at 34215 Bainbridge Road.
2021- 9-9- Authorizing the Mayor or his designee to enter into a contract for the purchase
193   2021 of right-of-way from Echo Solon, LLC in connection with the Aurora Road
           Reconstruction Phase I Project.
2021- 9-9- Appropriating property interests for the Aurora Road Reconstruction Project Phase
194   2021 I.
2021- 11-  Authorizing the Mayor and Director of Finance to execute a purchase and sale
226   1-   agreement for the sale of city-owned property consisting of approximately 3.6575
      2021 acres (PP# 954- 35-069) located on Aurora Road west of Portz Parkway.
2021- 11-  Accepting a quit-claim deed from Stouffer Corporation, for the donation of PP#
231   15-  951-33-009.
      2021
2021- 12-  Authorizing the Mayor or his designee to enter into a contract for the purchase
249   6-   of right-of-way from SHR Aurora Road, LLC in connection with the Aurora Road
      2021 Reconstruction Phase I Project.
2021- 12-  Authorizing the Mayor and the Director of Finance to enter into a purchase, sale
250   20-  and lease agreement with Robert P. Sanda for the purchase of PP# 952-21-031
      2021 located at 34245 Bainbridge Road.
2022- 1-   Authorizing the Mayor or his designee to enter into a contract for the purchase
10    18-  of right-of-way from Alan R. Dynowski and Thomas J. Dynowski for Parcel 60A WD,T.
      2022
2022- 1-   Authorizing the Mayor or his designee to enter into a contract for the purchase
11    18-  of right-of-way from Alan R. Dynowski for Parcel 60B WD,T.
      2022
2022- 1-   Authorizing the Mayor or his designee to enter into a contract for the purchase
12    18-  of right-of-way from Eric A. Lewis for Parcel 71, WD,T.
      2022
2022- 2-7- Authorizing the Mayor or his designee to enter into a contract for the purchase
45    2022 of right-of-way from William Szuhay and Rita Szuhay for Parcel 32 WD,T.
2022- 3-7- Authorizing the Mayor or his designee to enter into a contract for the donation
77    2022 of right-of-way from Solon Medical, LLC for Parcel 4 WD,A,T.
2022- 3-7- Authorizing the Mayor or his designee to enter into a contract for the purchase
78    2022 of right-of-way from Annette M. Chan for Parcel 55 WD,T.
2022- 3-7- Authorizing the Mayor or his designee to enter into a contract for the purchase
79    2022 of right-of-way from Annette M. Chan and Willie L. Chan for Parcel 57A WD,T.
2022- 3-   Authorizing the Mayor or his designee to enter into a contract for the purchase
87    21-  of right-of-way from Carrington Court Apartments, Ltd.
      2022
2022- 3-   Authorizing the Mayor or his designee to enter into a contract for the donation
88    21-  of right-of-way from Carrington Court Residential, L.P.
      2022
2022- 3-   Authorizing the Mayor or his designee to enter into a contract for the donation
89    21-  of right-of-way from Carrington Court Residential, L.P.
      2022
2022- 5-   Authorizing the Mayor or his designee to accept the donation of right- of-way
125   16-  from Greg and Anna Greenspan for 5930 Liberty Road.
      2022
2022- 5-
129   16-  Amending Ordinance No. 2022-87.
      2022
2023- 1-   Approving the sale of city-owned property consisting of approximately 0.14 acres
21    17-  (PP# 954-35-071) to Solon Community Living Inc.
      2023
2023- 4-   Amending Ord. 2022-12 authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract for the
94    17-  purchase of right-of-way from Eric A. Lewis in connection with the Aurora Road
      2023 reconstruction project.
2023- 7-   Authorizing the Mayor or designee to enter into a contract for the purchase of
165   17-  right-of-way from the Chabad Jewish Center of Solon in connection with the US 422
      2023 and Harper Road interchange project.
2023- 8-7- Authorizing the Mayor or designee to enter into a contract for the purchase of
184   2023 right-of-way from the Advent Lutheran Church in connection with the US 422 and
           Harper Road interchange project.
2023- 8-7- Authorizing the Mayor or designee to enter into a contract for the purchase of
185   2023 right-of-way from Cori A. Carmosino in connection with the US 422 and Harper Road
           interchange project.
2023- 8-7- Authorizing the Mayor or designee to enter into a contract for the purchase of
186   2023 right-of-way from William E. Cohen and Laura A. Cohen in connection with the US
           422 and Harper Road interchange project.
2024- 10-  Authorizing the Mayor or designee to enter into an economic development agreement
160   21-  with JJJ Real Estate, LLC, for purchase and sale of real property, approximately
      2024 2.88 acres of city owned property (the proposed hotel parcel).
2024- 11-  Authorizing the Mayor or designee to enter into a contract for the purchase of
215   18-  right-of-way from Great Lakes Hotel Group, LLC in connection with the Enterprise
      2024 Parkway Bridge replacement project.
2024- 11-  Authorizing the Mayor or designee to enter into a contract for the purchase of
216   18-  right-of-way from Robert Freedman and Kelly A. Freedman in connection with the
      2024 Enterprise Parkway Bridge replacement project.
2025- 1-   Appropriating fee simple interest in real estate, PP# 955-03-097, owned by Forest
2     21-  Park Land Company for the "Solon to Chagrin Falls Trail Project".
      2025
           Authorizing the Mayor or his designee to enter into a contract for the purchase
2025- 3-3- of right-of-way from Widewaters EDR Solon Hotel Company, LLC, a Delaware Limited
52    2025 Liability Company in connection with the Enterprise Parkway Bridge Replacement
           Project.
2025- 6-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract for the purchase of a turnaround
126   16-  easement with Geraldine Boscarello and Anthony Kadar, 6931 Elmwood Drive.
      2025
2025- 12-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute an assignment agreement of agreement of purchase
228   1-   and sale from Norfolk Southern Railway Company and a transfer agreement with West
      2025 Creek Conservancy concerning the Headwaters Connector Greenway Project.
          
 
TABLE F: LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY
Ord./Res. No. Date Description
Ord./
Res.  Date Description
No.
Res.  5-4- Authorizing lease, from Cyril Bath Co., of its baseball diamond during
1964- 1964 1964.
69
Res.  7-   Authorizing lease of land from Sunrise Development Co. for recreational
1964- 20-  purposes during 1964-65.
112   1964
Res.  10-  Authorizing lease, from C.S. Steininger, Timberlane, Inc., A. Adie and A.
1964- 19-  Gierloff, of property for use as skating rink for 1964-65 winter season.
149   1964
Res.  11-  Authorizing lease with Nickel Plate Development, Inc., for operation of a
1964- 2-   sanitary landfill on premises on Cochran Road.
160   1964
1965- 9-7- Authorizing lease of a municipal library building and site thereof to the
135   1965 Cuyahoga County Library.
Res.  10-  Authorizing lease with C.S. Steininger for property north of Bainbridge
1965- 4-   Road for use as skating rink for 1965–66 winter season.
155   1965
Res.  4-   Authorizing lease with Cyril Bath Co. for use of its baseball diamond at
1966- 26-  Aurora and Solon Roads during 1966.
73    1966
Res.  6-6- Authorizing agreement with Chagrin Valley Sales and Service Co., Inc., for
1966- 1966 its use of Solon Service Garage for two months.
108
Res.  11-  Authorizing lease with A. Adie for Sublot 191 in Longview Heights
1966- 7-   Subdivision for use as skating rink for 1966–67 winter season.
213   1966
Res.  10-  Authorizing lease with A. Adie for Sublot 191 in Longview Heights
1967- 16-  Subdivision for use as skating rink for 1967-68 winter season.
172   1967
1968- 3-   Authorizing lease of a project and site thereof to American Automatic
68    28-  Vending Corp.
      1968
Res.  9-3- Approving supplement to lease with American Automatic Vending Corp., to
1968- 1968 include land from Nickel Plate Development, Inc.
176
Res.  10-  Authorizing lease with A. Adie for Sublot 191 in Longview Heights
1966- 7-   Subdivision for use as skating rink for 1968–69 winter season.
208   1968
Res.  5-   Authorizing lease with Cyril Bath Co. for use of its baseball diamond at
1969- 19-  Aurora and Solon Roads during 1969.
103   1969
1969- 8-   Authorizing supplemental lease with American Automatic Vending Corp., in
152   18-  connection with issuance of Series 1969 Bonds.
      1969
Res.  5-4- Authorizing lease with Cyril Bath Co. for use of its baseball diamond at
1970- 1970 Aurora and Solon Roads during 1970.
74
1970- 8-   Authorizing third supplement to lease between the city and American
126   31-  Automatic Vending Corp., in connection with an industrial development
      1970 project.
Res.  7-   Authorizing lease of City Hall basement to Junior Achievement of Greater
1971- 19-  Cleveland, Inc., for one year.
150   1971
1972- 8-   Authorizing lease of project site to Van Dorn Co., in connection with
132   21-  issuance of city’s industrial development revenue bonds.
      1972
Res.  11-  Authorizing lease of certain property for neighborhood skating rink for
1972- 6-   1972–73 winter season.
187   1972
1973- 4-2- Authorizing lease of new industrial facility to International Telephone
47    1973 and Telegraph Corp.
1973- 5-   Authorizing lease of certain real property to Jerpbak Bayless Co., in
79    21-  connection with issuance of city’s industrial development first mortgage
      1973 revenue bonds.
Res.  6-4-
1973- 1973 Authorizing lease of baseball diamond from Cyril Bath Co. during 1973.
86
1973- 6-
91    25-  Authorizing lease of site of a project to Monroe Co., Inc.
      1973
1973- 9-4- Authorizing sublease and lease of a project and site thereof to
135   1973 International Telephone and Telegraph Corp.
1973- 12-  Authorizing lease of a project and site thereof to Cyril Bath Co. for
177   17-  industrial development.
      1973
Res.  1-7- Authorizing lease with M.S. McConoughey for premises at 7119 Jackson Road
1973- 1974 in Bainbridge Township, on property of Grantwood Recreational Park.
180
Res.  1-   Authorizing lease with Club 4893 for use of land on Melbury Avenue for ice
1974- 21-  skating rink.
7     1974
Res.  4-1- Authorizing lease of baseball diamond from Cyril Bath Co. for recreational
1974- 1974 purposes during 1974.
39
Res.  5-6- Authorizing lease of a project and site thereof to Allied Steel & Tractor
1974- 1974 Products, Inc. for industrial development.
61
1974- 9-3- Authorizing lease of four additions to existing industrial facility to
134   1974 Ohio-Nuclear, Inc.
Res.  6-
1976- 21-  Amends lease agreement between city and Cyril Bath Co. dated 12-1-1973.
120   1976
Res.  9-7- Authorizing lease contract with W. and C. Koza for premises in Grantwood
1976- 1976 Recreation Park.
162
1976- 12-  Authorizing lease of a project and site thereof to F. C. Thornton Co. for
212   6-   industrial development.
      1976
Res.  3-   Authorizing lease of baseball diamond from Cyril Bath Co. for recreational
1978- 20-  purposes during 1978.
47    1978
1978- 12-  Authorizing supplemental lease of a project and site thereof to Monroe
261   6-   Co., Inc., for industrial, commercial and distribution development.
      1978
1979- 3-5- Amends lease authorized by Ord. 1973-80.
57    1979
Res.  4-2- Authorizing lease of baseball diamond from Cyril Bath Co. for recreational
1979- 1979 purposes during 1979.
75
Res.  10-  Authorizing Grantwood Board of Trustees to enter into lease agreement for
1979- 1-   premises in Grantwood Recreation Park.
207   1979
Res.  5-   Authorizing lease of baseball diamond from Continental Alloy Steel Co. for
1980- 19-  recreational purposes during 1980.
74    1980
Res.  10-  Authorizing lease of 26.3962 acres of land from Solon City Board of
1980- 20-  Education for recreational purposes.
158   1980
Res.  2-6- Authorizing agreement between Chairman of Grantwood Recreation Board of
1984- 1984 Trustees and Mr. and Mrs. E.G. Boehnlein for lease of premises at
6          Grantwood Recreation Park.
Res.  11-  Authorizing lease of city-owned property, and house thereon, on Aurora
1984- 19-  Road to Hattie Larlham Foundation for 5 years.
155   1984
Res.  2-3- Authorizing agreement, between Chairman of Grantwood Recreation Park Board
1986- 1986 of Trustees and Mr. and Mrs. E.G. Boehnlein, for lease of premises at
7          Grantwood Recreation Park.
Res.  3-   Authorizing lease, from Continental Alloy, of its baseball diamond at
1986- 17-  Aurora and Solon Roads for recreational purposes during 1986.
40    1986
Res.  3-   Authorizing lease, from Western Electric Co., of its baseball diamond at
1986- 17-  32000 Aurora Road during 1986.
41    1986
Res.  2-2- Authorizing agreement between Chairman of Grantwood Recreation Park Board
1987- 1987 of Trustees and Mr. and Mrs. E.G. Boehnlein for lease of premises at
007        Grantwood Recreation Park.
Res.  7-8- Authorizing amended lease with Board of Education of Solon City School
1987- 1987 District for recreational purposes.
151
Res.  7-8- Authorizing lease with Board of Education of Solon City School District
1987- 1987 for recreational purposes.
152
Res.  12-  Authorizing lease agreement between Chairman of Grantwood Recreation Park
1987- 21-  Board of Trustees and Mr. and Mrs. E.G. Boehnlein for lease of premises at
257   1987 Grantwood Recreation Park.
Res.  2-   Authorizing lease with Marty Tabone to rent office space for use by Solon
1988- 22-  Income Tax Department.
25    1988
Res.  2-   Authorizing lease agreement with Solon Players for use of theater/
1989- 20-  auditorium at Solon City Hall.
27    1989
Res.  11-  Authorizing new lease of city-owned property on Aurora Road, for 20 years,
1989- 6-   to Hattie Larlham Foundation.
264   1989
Res.  1-   Authorizing agreement between Chairman of Grantwood Recreation Park Board
1990- 15-  of Trustees and Mr. and Mrs. E.G. Boehnlein for lease of premises at
19    1990 Grantwood Recreation Park.
Res.  9-4- Authorizing lease with Solon Office Campus Joint Venture to rent office
1990- 1990 space for use by Planning and Development Department.
205
Res.  12-  Authorizing lease with Richard and Patricia Finn for use of 35300 Aurora
1990- 10-  Road.
277   1990
Res.  1-   Authorizing agreement between Chairman of Grantwood Recreation Park Board
1992- 20-  of Trustees and Mr. and Mrs. E.G. Boehnlein for lease of premises at
7     1992 Grantwood Recreation Park.
Res.  5-4- Authorizing lease with M.R. Tabone for office space on the first floor of
1992- 1992 33610 Solon Road for various city departments.
79
Res.  10-  Authorizing lease with Landerwood Co. for part of Solon Park Place, 33790
1992- 19-  Bainbridge Road, for a senior activity center.
185   1992
Res.  12-  Authorizing lease agreement with Consolidated Rail Corp. for landscaping
1992- 7-   purposes behind proposed City Hall.
211   1992
Res.  6-
1993- 21-  Authorizing lease renewal with the Solon Players for 1993–1995.
105   1993
Res.  6-9-
1993- 1993 Authorizing lease agreement with L. and M. Baker for 6539 SOM Center Road.
86
Res.  2-   Authorizing modification of lease authorized by Res. 1988-25 and Res.
1994- 21-  1992-79.
24    1994
Res.  4-4- Authorizing lease of space on Richmond Road for use by the Pollution
1994- 1994 Control Department for an off-site laboratory.
43
Res.  11-  Authorizing and directing the Chairman of the Grantwood Recreation Park
1994- 7-   Board of Trustees to enter into a lease agreement with Mr. and Mrs. E.G.
176   1994 Boehnlein, for the residential premises located at Grantwood Recreation
           Park.
Res.  2-5- Authorizing lease agreement with the Cuyahoga County Public Library System
1996- 1996 for the occupancy of the new Solon Branch of the Cuyahoga County Public
28         Library System.
Res.  6-   Authorizing tower and building lease agreement with Cellular One, for
1996- 17-  construction and operation of a communications tower adjacent to the new
114   1996 Police Department facility on Solon Road.
Res.  6-
1996- 17-  Amends agreement authorized by Res. 1996-28.
128   1996
Res.  1-
1997- 22-  Authorizing lease agreement with L. Luxenberg for 6619 SOM Center Road.
17    1997
Res.  7-   Authorizing lease agreement with Ameritech for a wireless communication
1997- 21-  tower on city-owned property off of Melbury Street.
133   1997
Res.  10-  Authorizing gas lease and easement agreement with NEO Cuyahoga, LLC, for
1997- 20-  the Solon Landfill.
216   1997
Res.  3-   Authorizing temporary lease agreement with W.G. Lockhart Construction Co.,
1998- 16-  pertaining to the Batch Plant.
48    1998
Res.  8-   Authorizing renewal of lease agreement with Solon Park Place for use of
1999- 16-  space at 33790 Bainbridge Road for the Solon Senior Citizens Center, for 2
161   1999 years.
Res.  1-   Authorizing lease agreement with the Cuyahoga County Public Library for
2001- 16-  real property located at 34125 Portz Parkway.
4     2001
Res.  11-  Authorizing renewal of lease agreement with Solon Park Place for space at
2001- 19-  33790 Bainbridge Road for use as the Solon Senior Citizens Center, for 20
272   2001 months.
Res.  1-   Authorizing a modification to the lease agreement with the Landerwood
2002- 23-  Company for lease of space for the Senior Citizens Center.
19    2002
Res.  10-  Authorizing the Mayor and Finance Director to enter into a sublease
2002- 7-   agreement with the Chabad Jewish Center of Solon for use of facilities at
223   2002 the Solon Senior Center.
Res.  3-   Amending and restating Res. 2003-289 for the lease of premises at 34970
2004- 29-  Aurora Road.
67    2004
2005- 6-7- Authorizing a lease agreement with the Parmelee family in connection with
133   2005 the purchase of the property at 34045 Bainbridge Road.
2005- 11-  Authorizing the Finance Director to request proposals for the lease of
260   21-  Grantwood land for the purpose of natural gas and oil exploration.
      2005
2006- 1-   Authorizes an amendment to the lease with Jaye Luxenberg for premises
5     17-  located at 6629 SOM Center Road.
      2006
2006- 1-   Authorizes an amendment to the lease established by a settlement agreement
6     17-  with Leonard Luxenberg for premises located at 6619 SOM Center Road.
      2006
2006- 3-   Authorizes a lease agreement with PEP Drilling Company for oil and gas
54    20-  well exploration at Grantwood Recreational Park.
      2006
2008- 7-   Authorizes a lease agreement with the Mid-America Management Corporation
202   21-  for use of space located in the Solon Square Shopping Center by the Solon
      2008 Center for the Arts.
2009- 2-   Authorizing a storm water management lease agreement with the Briar Lake
08    17-  Association.
      2009
2009- 5-   Authorizing a storm water management lease agreement with the Briar Lake
106   18-  Association.
      2009
2010- 3-
59    15-  Amending Ord. 2009-106.
      2010
2010- 10-  Amending the lease agreement with MIDAMCO for space utilized by the Solon
238   18-  Center for the Arts located in the Solon Square Shopping Center.
      2010
2011- 1-3- Amending Ord. 2010-59.
1     2011
2011- 1-   Executing a supplemental lease agreement with the Board of Trustees of the
23    18-  Cuyahoga County Public Library for the construction and occupancy of an
      2011 addition to the Solon Branch of the Cuyahoga County Public Library.
2012- 12-  Authorizing a purchase and sale agreement and lease agreement with Amie
294   17-  Meeken for the purchase of PP# 952-31-036 located at 35765 Timberlane
      2012 Drive.
2012- 12-  Authorizing a purchase and sale agreement and lease agreement with Carolyn
295   17-  Jackson for the purchase of PP# 952-31-035 located at 35805 Timberlane
      2012 Drive.
2014- 5-   Authorizing a lease agreement with the Board of Trustees of the Solon
123   19-  Historical Society for occupancy of the Solon Historical Society Building
      2014 and Museum.
2016- 7-   Amending the lease agreement with MIDAMCO for space utilized by the Solon
125   18-  Center for the Arts located in the Solon Square Shopping Center.
      2016
           Authorizing the Mayor and/or his designee to enter into a ten-year site
2018- 2-   lease agreement with Agile Network Builders, LLC for use of space located
26    20-  on the telecommunication tower located at 33000 Solon Road for the purpose
      2018 of constructing, installing, operating and maintaining a wireless
           communications system.
2021- 9-9- Amending the lease agreement with Solon Square, LLC, by the Mid- America
197   2021 Management Corporation for space utilized by the Solon Center for the Arts
           located in the Solon Square Shopping Center.
2022- 2-   Approving the lease and management agreement and project development
34    22-  agreement with the Board of Park Commissioners of the Cleveland
      2022 Metropolitan Park District for the Solon to Chagrin Falls Trail.
2022- 5-   Authorizing the Mayor or his designee to enter into an interim economic
133   16-  development agreement and lease with JJJ Real Estate, LLC in connection
      2022 with 2.85 acres of city-owned property on PP# 954-02-013 and 954-02-174.
2022- 5-   Authorizing the Mayor and the Director of Finance to extend the lease
137   16-  agreement with Robert P. Sanda for PP# 952-21-031 located at 34245
      2022 Bainbridge Road.
2023- 12-  Amending Ordinance No. 2022-133, to extend the interim economic
269   18-  development agreement and lease with JJJ Real Estate, LLC.
      2023
           Approving the exchange agreement, use agreement and lease agreement
2024- 5-6- between the city and the Board of Education of Solon City School District,
92    2024 where the city shall lease the Arthur Road Pool property back from the
           Board of Education for a term of at least five years.
2024- 7-   Approving a lease agreement with the Board of Trustees of the Cuyahoga
131   15-  County Public Library.
      2024
2024- 10-  Amending Ord. 2022-133, entering into an agreement and lease with JJJ Real
161   21-  Estate, in connection with 2.85 acres of city-owned property to extend the
      2024 lease.
2025- 10-  Approving the first amendment to the tower and building lease agreement
197   20-  with Cellco Partnership dba Verizon Wireless for leasing of the
      2025 communications (cell) tower adjacent to the police station.
      12-  Amending Ordinance No. 2022-34 which approved the lease and management
2025- 15-  agreement and project development agreement with the Board of Park
239   2025 Commissioners of the Cleveland Metropolitan Park District for the Solon to
           Chagrin Falls Trail and authorizing the Mayor to execute said documents.
          
 
TABLE G: STREET GRADE LEVELS AND CHANGE OF STREET NAME
Ord./Res. No. Date Description
Ord./
Res.  Date Description
No.
1980- 11-  Huntsman Drive, in Liberty Hills Phase III-Hunt Club Phase IV Subdivision, to
133   17-  Cromwell Drive.
      1980
1980- 11-  South Path Drive, in Colonial Forest Estates Subdivision No. V, to Bunker
134   17-  Hill Drive.
      1980
1981- 5-
20    18-  South Spring Grove Drive to Hillenbrand Drive.
      1981
1985- 1-7- Sunnybrook Drive to Boulder Creek Drive, and Redwood Ct. to Aspen Glen Drive,
3     1985 both in SOM Hills Estates III Subdivision.
Res.  12-  Red Oak, East Scarlet Oak, West Scarlet Oak, Pin Oak, South Scarlet Oak and
1986- 15-  White Oak Drives, and Acorn Court, to Lisa and Lindsay Lanes, Seneca Drive
202   1986 and Acorn Court.
Res.  2-2- North Deepwood Trail to Landings Drive, and South Deepwood Trail to O’Neils
1987- 1987 Drive, both in Pepperwood Park Estates Subdivision No. 3.
28
Res.  4-
1989- 17-  Fortran Drive to Marquis Drive.
66    1989
Res.  5-3-
1993- 1993 Westview Boulevard. to Arnold Miller Parkway.
62
Res.  5-   Changing the names of Lincoln Drive to Seminole Way, Continental Drive to
1994- 16-  Arapaho Way, and Marquis Drive to Navajo Trail, in the Mark IV Estates
77    1994 Subdivision (now the Heritage Estates Subdivision).
1996- 2-
38    21-  Declaring the name of the Community Park Drive as Portz Parkway.
      1996
1996- 2-
39    21-  Declaring the name of the loop road off Solon Road as Kruse Drive.
      1996
Res.  4-7- Changing the name of Wellingford Circle to Wellingford Court, in the
1997- 1997 Wellingford Estates Subdivision.
75
Res.  11-
2002- 4-   Changing the name of Belmar Road to Flanders Drive.
248   2002
          
 
TABLE H: ANNEXATION AND DETACHMENT OF TERRITORY
 
Ord./Res. No. Date      Description
2000-220      8-21-2000 Authorizing annexation of contiguous territory in
                        Bainbridge Township.
                       
 
TABLE I: ZONING MAP CHANGES
Ord./Res. No. Date Description
Ord./
Res.  Date Description
No.
1944- 11-  Property bounded on east by SOM Center Road, on south and west by Erie R.R.
30    20-  and on north by Youmell property is zoned U-3 Retail Business.
      1944
1945- 5-   Property of D.H. Arnold at southeast corner of Miles and Brainard Roads is
8     21-  zoned U-3 Retail Business.
      1945
1945- 5-   Property of E. F. Baumann at southeast corner of Miles and Brainard Roads is
21    21-  zoned U-3 Retail Business.
      1945
1947- 12-
56    29-  Part of Lot 6, Tract 2, is zoned for U-3 Retail Business.
      1947
1949- 4-7- Part of Solon Allotment Company’s Subdivision 1 on Aurora Road is zoned for
8     1949 U-3 Retail Business.
1949- 9-1- Part of Lot 4, Tract 2, is zoned for U-3 Retail Business.
18    1949
1951- 3-
16    22-  Two parcels, parts of Lots 2, 4 and 19, are zoned for U-7 Manufacturing.
      1951
1951- 3-   Property at Aurora Road and Solon Boulevard. is zoned for U-3 Retail
17    22-  Business.
      1951
1951- 3-   Property at W. & L. E. R.R. and SOM Center Road is zoned for U-5 Commercial
18    22-  Business.
      1951
1951- 5-3- Two parcels at W. & L. E. R.R. and Aurora and Bainbridge Roads are zoned for
19    1951 U-5 Commercial Business.
1951- 5-3- Part of Lot 30 is zoned for U-1 One-Family Residence.
20    1951
1952- 6-
29    19-  Part of Lots 4 and 29 is zoned for U-1-A Two-Family Residence.
      1952
1952- 7-   Sublots 29 to 52, Solon Allotment Company’s Subdivision 1, are zoned for U-
40    17-  2 Multiple-Family Residence.
      1952
1952- 10-  Sublots 28 and 53 to 55, Solon Allotment Company’s Subdivision 1, are zoned
46    2-   for U-3 Retail Business.
      1952
1953- 2-5- Two parcels in part of Lots 3, 4, 7, 8 and 30 are zoned for U-
1     1953 7 Manufacturing.
1953- 5-7- Two parcels in part of Lots 6 and 28 are zoned for U-7 Manufacturing.
10    1953
1953- 6-   Sublot 29, Solon Allotment Company’s Subdivision 1, is zoned for U-3 Retail
39    18-  Business.
      1953
1953- 11-
80    5-   Part of Lot 2, Tract 1, is zoned for U-3 Retail Business.
      1953
1953- 12-  Sublots 16 to 19, Solon Allotment Company’s Subdivision 1, are zoned for U-
92    3-   3 Retail Business.
      1953
1953- 1-
106   22-  Part of Lot 30, Tract 1, is zoned for U-7 Manufacturing.
      1954
1954- 6-
30    21-  Four parcels in Lots 18 and 31 are zoned for U-7 Manufacturing.
      1954
1954- 8-5- Part of Lot 5, Tract 2, is zoned for U-5 Commercial Business.
57    1954
1954- 3-3- Two parcels in Lots 15 and 29, Tract 2, are zoned for U-3 Retail Business.
92    1955
1955- 6-
47    16-  Part of Lots 5 and 6, Tract 2, is zoned for U-5 Commercial Business.
      1955
1955- 9-1- Changes building line on north side of Aurora Road to 180 feet.
90    1955
1956- 1-   Block 8, Solon Allotment Company’s Subdivision 2, is zoned for U-3 Retail
9     19-  Business.
      1956
1959- 12-  Two parcels in Lots 2, 3, 18 and 19, in Tract 3, are zoned for U-
59    29-  7 Manufacturing.
      1959
1962- 3-   Sublots 53, 54, 55 in Solon Allotment Co.’s Subdivision No. 1, from U-
18    29-  3 Business to U-2 Residence.
      1962
1962- 4-2- Part of Lots 12, 19 and 31 of Solon Township, from U-1 Residence to U-
19    1962 7 Manufacturing.
1963- 8-5- Original Solon Township Lots 15, 16, 29 and 36, Tract 2, from U-1 Residence
59    1963 to U-2 Residence.
1963- 9-   400-acre subdivision, west of SOM Center Road between Arthur and Pettibone
98    16-  Roads, from U-1 Residence to U-2 Residence and U-3 Retail Business, and
      1963 permitting 75 feet by 160 feet lots.
1964- 4-
174   19-  Solon Airport property, from U-4 Airport to U-1 Residence.
      1965
1965- 7-   Certain premises on north side of Aurora Road, from U-1 Residence to U-
71    19-  3 Retail Business.
      1965
1965- 11-  City Hall site and contiguous property, from U-7 Manufacturing to U-
133   15-  1 Residence.
      1965
1965- 2-7- Certain premises at NE corner of SOM Center and Solon Roads, from U-
157   1966 7 Manufacturing to U-3 Commercial Business.
1966- 8-   Certain premises on east side of SOM Center Road, from U-1 Single-Family to
119   15-  U-2 Multiple-Family.
      1966
1966- 12-  Certain premises on north side of Aurora Road, from U-5 Commercial Business
205   19-  to U-3 Retail Business.
      1966
1967- 6-   Part of Original Solon Township Lots 4 and 5, Tract 2 (2.8918 acres), from U-
70    19-  1 Single-Family to U-1-A Two-Family.
      1967
1967- 8-   Part of Original Solon Township Lots 21 and 5 (certain premises near
99    21-  intersection of Solon and SOM Center Roads), from U-1 Single-Family to U-
      1967 8 Motorist Service District.
1968- 12-  Changing certain premises on Bainbridge Road to Class U-8 Motorist Service
212   30-  and U-2 Multiple-Family District.
      1968
1968- 1-   Certain premises on west side of Brainard Road, from U-1 Single-Family to U-
234   20-  7-A Warehouse District.
      1969
1968- 1-   Changing use classification of certain premises in Hunt Club Meadows
238   20-  Subdivision on west side of SOM Center Road between Arthur and Pettibone
      1969 Roads.
1970- 9-   Changing certain premises on west side of Brainard Road from Class U-
124   21-  1 Single-Family to U-7-A Warehouse District.
      1970
1972- 3-   Changing certain premises (Solon Foundry) from U-7 Manufacturing to U-
15    20-  3 Retail Business District.
      1972
1972- 7-   Changing certain premises in the southeast quadrant of SOM Center Road and
82    31-  Aurora Road to U-3 Retail Business District.
      1972
1973- 4-2- 6.877 acres on west side of SOM Center Road, from Class U-3 Retail Business
5     1973 to Class U-1 Single-Family House District.
1975- 6-2- Part of Original Solon Township Lots 19 and 30 in Tract 1, from U-2 Multiple-
61    1975 Family to U-7 Manufacturing.
1975- 1-   Part of Original Solon Township Lot 5, Tract 2, from U-1 and U-5 to U-
155   19-  8 Motorist Service.
      1976
1976- 2-   Property in the vicinity of Brainard Road, Route 422 and Miles Road, from U-
215   21-  1 Single-Family to U-3 Retail Business District.
      1977
1977- 6-   Approximately 2.6 acres near Aurora Road and Erie-Lackawanna R.R., from U-
69    20-  1 Single-Family to U-5-A General Office District.
      1977
1977- 6-   All land zoned U-1 north of the proposed relocated Route 422 to the boundary
83    20-  lines of the city, from U-1 Single-Family House District to U-1-B Single-
      1977 Family House District.
1977- 7-   All land zoned U-1 south of the proposed relocated Route 422 and east of
84    13-  Liberty Road to the city boundaries, from U-1 Single-Family to U-1-C Single-
      1977 Family House District.
1977- 8-   3.396 acres in the vicinity of Bainbridge Road, relocated Harper Road, Old
127   15-  Harper Road and Con-Rail, from U-8 Motorist Service to U-5 Commercial
      1977 Business District.
1977- 11-  All land zoned U-1 south of Pettibone Road and west of Liberty Road to the
139   7-   city boundaries, from U-1 Single-Family to U-1-C Single-Family House
      1977 District.
1978- 6-5- The southeast corner of Aurora and Cochran Roads, from U-7 to U-9.
208   1979
1979- 11-  Parcels along SOM Center and Solon Roads from U-8 Motor Service, U-
10    6-   7 Manufacturing and U-5 Commercial Business to U-5-A General Office District.
      1979
1979- 11-  Land at SE corner of Aurora and Cochran Roads from U-7 Manufacturing to U-
158   6-   9 Office Park District.
      1979
1982- 1-   Certain premises on the north side of Bainbridge Road between Harper and
153   17-  Solon Roads, from U-1 to U-7.
      1982
1983- 11-  Certain premises on SOM Center Road from U-1 Single-Family Residence District
12    8-   to U-3 Retail Business; other premises on SOM Center Road from U-1 Single-
      1983 Family Residence District to U-5A General Office District.
1983- 11-  Certain premises on Aurora Road from U-1 Single-Family Residence District to
13    8-   U-5A General Office District.
      1983
1984- 11-  200 foot deep strip of land on Arthur Road from U-7 Manufacturing to U-
97    6-   1 Single-Family Residence District.
      1984
1984- 5-7- 25.07 acres near intersection of SOM Center Road and relocated Interstate 422
86    1985 from U-8 Motor Service and U-1 Single-Family Residence District to U-9 Office
           Park District.
1986- 11-  12.76 acres on Bainbridge Road from U-1 Single-Family Residence to U-
96    4-   7 Manufacturing District.
      1986
1987- 11-  Changing the classification of certain areas within the city from U-1 Single-
147   3-   Family House District to U-1-B Single-Family House District.
      1987
1987- 11-  Changing the classification of certain areas within the city from U-1, U-1-
148   3-   B and U-1-C Single-Family House District to U-1-D Single-Family House
      1987 District - One Acre and U-1-E Single-Family House District - Five Acres.
1987- 11-  Property on the south side of Solon Road between SOM Center Road and Rt. 422
198   3-   overpass (Sedlak), from U-7 to U-3.
      1987
1987- 11-  Property on the northeast corner of Bainbridge and Harper Roads (Stouffer),
164   3-   from U-8 and U-5-A to U-9 (Nestle).
      1987
1988- 11-  Certain property on the north side of Aurora Road between Metro Park Drive
121   8-   and Mt. Olive Cemetery, from U-1-D to U-2-A.
      1988
1989- 2-6- South side of Aurora Road east of intersection with Cochran Road, from U-7 to
2     1989 U-7-B.
1990- 9-4- Permanent Parcels 951-4-8 through 951-4-13 on Miles Road, from U-1 to U-3.
176   1990
1992- 3-2- A 7.6515 acre parcel on the southwest side of Aurora Road, east of Cochran
20    1992 Road, from U-9 to U-7-B.
1993- 8-   A triangular parcel located at the southeast section of the Solar Shopping
88    30-  Center, from U-1 to U-3.
      1993
1993- 8-   A trapezoidal parcel located at the eastern section of the Solar Shopping
89    30-  Center, from U-5-A to U-3.
      1993
1993- 8-   A triangular parcel located east of the Solar Shopping Center, from U-1 to U-
115   30-  5-A.
      1993
1993- 8-   A rectangular parcel located south of the Solar Shopping Center, from U-2 to
116   30-  U-5-A.
      1993
1994- 8-   Certain backland areas, from U-1, U-1-C, U-1-B and U-1-E to U-1-D and from U-
104   29-  1 and U-1-C to U-1-B.
      1994
1995- 2-   A parcel containing approximately 2.315 acres at 33675 Solon Road, from U-
4     20-  5 to U-3.
      1995
1995- 1-   A parcel containing approximately 21.952 acres located at the corner of
264   15-  Bainbridge and Harper Roads, from U-9 to U-5-A.
      1996
1996- 8-5- A parcel containing approximately 6.764 acres adjacent to and south of the
117   1996 Industrial Service District, from U-7 to U-7-B.
1996- 8-   A parcel containing approximately 18.728 acres behind the Midwestern Inn
169   19-  along Rt. 422, from U-9 to U-3-A.
      1996
1997- 9-2- A parcel containing approximately 15 acres located in the vicinity of
173   1997 Bainbridge Road and proposed Kruse Drive, from U-5 to U-3-A.
1997- 9-2- A parcel containing approximately 27 acres located in the vicinity of
174   1997 Bainbridge Road, from U-5, U-5-A, U-1-B and U-1-A to U-5-B.
1998- 8-
127   31-  Approximately 305 acres from U-1-E and U-1-D to U-1-F.
      1998
1998- 8-   A parcel containing 3.3 acres on the north side of Cannon Road abutting the
157   31-  City of Bedford Hts., from U-1 to U-5-A.
      1998
1999- 8-   Approximately 9.11 acres located at the end of Arthur Road, from U-7 to U-1-
113   16-  B.
      1999
2000- 7-   Approximately 24,000 square feet of property located at the northeast corner
121   17-  of Kruse Drive and Bainbridge Road, from U-1-B to U-5-B.
      2000
2004- 8-
149   16-  Approximately 27.22 acres located on Aurora Road from U-1B to U-2B.
      2004
2005- 4-3- Creating a G-1 Greenspace District and rezoning various city-owned properties
219   2006 into that District.
2005- 4-3- Creating a G-2 Parks and Recreation District and rezoning the property
220   2006 comprising Grantwood Recreational Park, the Community Park and Portage Park
           into That District.
      8-   PP#s 954-34-001, 954-34-013, 954-34-014, and 954-34-016, recently
2008- 18-  consolidated as 954-34-001, comprising approximately 3.4 acres located on SOM
201   2008 Center Road between the Solar Shopping Center and the Cleveland Hebrew
           School, from O-1 to C-3.
2009- 8-   Submitting to the electors the question of enacting a new Chapter 1278 of the
197   31-  Planning and Zoning Code creating a Commercial Shopping Center District and
      2009 rezoning various parcels to the C-3-A zoning district.
2011- 8-   PP#s 951-28-021, 951-28-020, 951-28-019, 951-28-023, 951-28-025, 951-28-024,
173   30-  951-28-014, 951-28-008, 951-28-009, 951-28-010, 951-28-011, and 951-28-012
      2011 from R-1-D to I-2.
           Rezoning approximately 2.5 acres of real property identified as permanent
2012- 10-  parcel numbers 954-29-027, 954-29-028, 954-29-029, 954-29-030, 954-20-031 and
233   15-  954-29-032 located directly east of the Solon Village Shopping Center from
      2012 the C-3-A Commercial Shopping Center District to the O-1 General Office
           District.
2013- 2-4- Rezoning various parcels totaling approximately 5.69 acres, located on Aurora
11    2013 Road near the intersection of Aurora Road and Solon Road, from the current C-
           3 Commercial Zoning District to the C-4 Motor Service Commercial District.
2014- 2-3- Rezoning certain permanent parcels resulting from a judicial order from the
3     2014 Cuyahoga County trial court, case CV-08-674430, titled Parkstone Capital
           Partners vs. City of Solon, Ohio.
2016- 7-5- Certifying to the Cuyahoga County Board of Elections an ordinance proposed by
134   2016 initiative petition to rezone certain property in the city from C-
           3 Commercial to R-3 Multi Family Residential.
2016- 7-   Rezoning PP# 951-26-004 and 951-26-006 located at 5910 Harper Road and 5900
123   18-  Harper Road from I-2 Industrial Manufacturing to O-2 Office Park.
      2016
           Electors approved the rezoning of PP#s 952-19-005, 952-19-006, 952-19-007,
2017- 5-8- 952-19-008, 952-19-009 and 952-19-013 comprising approximately 5.38 acres
193   2018 located to the east of the intersection of Kruse Drive and Bainbridge Road
           from C-1 Historic Commercial and C-2 Restricted Commercial to R-3-A Senior
           Citizen Residential.
2018- 11-  Electors approved the enactment of a new Chapter 1284 of the Planning and
160   6-   Zoning Code to create an I-3 Industrial Auto Service District and
      2018 implementing the zone for property located at 31835 - 31935 Aurora Road.
2019- 11-  Rezoning PP# 952-26-018 located on Solon Road from the C-3 Commercial to the
127   5-   I-2 Industrial Manufacturing.
      2019
      11-  Electors approved enacting a new Chapter 1286-A of the Planning and Zoning
2019- 5-   Code to create a mixed-use planning district A zoning classification and
128   2019 implementing the new zoning district for all properties in the area bounded
           by Aurora Road, Solon Road, Station Street and Melbury Avenue.
      12-  Electors approved enacting a new Chapter 1272-A of the Planning and Zoning
2019- 2-   Code to create a multi family residential special needs classification and
192   2019 implementing the new zoning district for properties located at the southwest
           corner of Aurora Road and Portz Parkway.
           Electors approved the rezoning of PP# 953-02-001 and a portion of PP# 951-17-
2020- 11-  012 consisting of a total of 32.645 acres of land adjacent to Hawthorne
106   3-   Valley Country Club currently zoned R-1-D (Single Family Residential
      2020 District) rezoned and implemented to the newly created R-2-A (One and Two-
           Family Residential Senior Citizen District).
      11-  Electors approved the rezoning of PP# 954-30-019, 954-30-018 and 954-30-017
2021- 2-   comprising of approximately 1.8 acres located at 34575, 34645 and 34675
119   2021 Aurora Road, from the current R-1-C (Single Family Residential District) to
           the O-1 (General Office District).
2023- 11-  Electors approved the rezoning of PP# 951-04-006 located on Brainard Road
63    7-   from the current multi-zoning of C-3 (Commercial) and R-1-D (Single Family
      2023 Residential) to only R-1-D (Single Family Residential).
2023- 4-   Rezoning PP# 954-29-016 located at 34501 Aurora Road from the O-1 (General
89    17-  Office District) to the C-3 (Commercial District), located in the central
      2023 retail district.
2023- 11-  Electors approved the rezoning of various PP#s totaling approximately 5.27
149   7-   acres, located at 29500 Aurora Road from the current I-2 (Industrial
      2023 Manufacturing District) to the C-4 (Motorist Service Commercial District).
2023- 11-  Electors approved the rezoning of PP#s 951-26-004 and 951-26–006 located at
150   7-   5910 and 5900 Harper Road from the current O-2 (Office Park District) to the
      2023 C-4 (Motorist Service Commercial District).
2025- 8-   Rezoning PP# 952-20-027 located at 33095 Bainbridge Road from the multi-
152   18-  zoning of C-l (Historical Commercial) and C-2 (Restricted Commercial) to only
      2025 C-2 (Restricted Commercial), located in the central retail district.
          
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
Historical References to Ohio Revised Code
References to 1964 Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
HISTORICAL REFERENCES TO OHIO REVISED CODE
R.C. Section Code Section
R.C. Section                             Code Section
1.01                                     202.01
1.02                                     202.02
1.05                                     202.02
1.14                                     202.03
1.15                                     202.03
1.23                                     202.05
1.42                                     202.03
1.43                                     202.03
1.44                                     202.02
1.45                                     202.03
1.50                                     202.06
1.55                                     202.05
1.58                                     202.04
1.59                                     202.02
128.01(A)                                606.29
128.96(F) - (H)                          606.29
128.99(A)                                606.29
128.99(B)                                606.29
701.01                                   202.02
901.51                                   642.06
901.99(A)                                642.06
925.62                                   618.06
925.99(B)                                618.06
955.10                                   618.095
955.21                                   618.08
955.24                                   618.09
955.25                                   618.10
955.54                                   618.23
                                         618.09,
955.99(B)                                618.095,
                                         618.10
955.99(E)                                618.08
955.99(O)                                618.23
959.01                                   618.02
959.02                                   618.03
959.03                                   618.04
959.13                                   618.05
959.131                                  618.05
959.21                                   618.24
959.99(B)                                618.03
959.99(C)                                618.04
959.99(D)                                618.05,
                                         618.24
959.99(E)                                618.05
959.99(E)(2)                             618.02
959.99(E)(7)                             618.24
1349.17                                  642.155
1349.99                                  642.155
2901.01                                  606.01
2901.02                                  606.03
2901.03                                  606.04
2901.04                                  606.05
2901.09                                  606.30
2901.11                                  606.055
2901.13                                  606.06
2901.21                                  606.07
2901.22                                  606.02
2901.23                                  606.08
2901.24                                  606.09
2903.05                                  636.01
2903.06                                  434.08
2903.08(A)(3), (C)(3), (D)(3), (E) - (G) 434.08
2903.09                                  636.001
2903.10                                  636.23
2903.13                                  636.02
2903.14                                  636.03
2903.16                                  636.23
2903.21                                  636.04
2903.211                                 636.045
2903.22                                  636.05
2903.31                                  636.19
2903.311(B), (C)                         636.19
2905.03                                  636.06
2905.12                                  636.09
2907.06                                  666.03
2907.08                                  666.05
2907.09                                  666.04
2907.10                                  666.06
2907.23                                  666.07
2907.231                                 666.07
2907.24                                  666.08
2907.241                                 666.085
2907.25                                  666.09
2907.26                                  666.10
2907.31                                  666.11
2907.311                                 666.115
2907.33                                  666.14
2907.35                                  666.15
2907.36                                  666.16
2907.37                                  666.17
2907.38                                  666.20
2907.39                                  666.21
2907.40                                  666.23
2909.01                                  642.01
2909.03                                  642.09
2909.06                                  642.10
2909.07                                  642.11
2909.08(A) - (E)                         672.12
2909.09                                  642.10
2909.10                                  642.37
2909.101                                 642.37
2909.11(B) - (D)                         642.25
2909.31                                  606.28
2911.21                                  642.12
2911.211                                 642.125
2911.23                                  642.12
2911.32                                  642.13
2913.01                                  642.01
2913.02                                  642.02
2913.04                                  642.05
2913.07                                  642.35
2913.11                                  642.14
2913.21                                  642.15
2913.31(B)                               642.145
2913.31(C)(2)                            642.145
2913.32                                  642.36
2913.33                                  642.16
2913.40                                  642.34
2913.401                                 642.34
2913.41                                  642.17
2913.42                                  642.18
2913.43                                  642.19
2913.44                                  642.20
2913.441                                 606.26
2913.45                                  642.21
2913.47                                  642.32
2913.48                                  642.33
2913.51                                  642.22
2913.61(B) - (E)                         642.24
2913.71                                  642.03
2913.72                                  642.035
2915.02(A) - (G), (K)                    630.02
2915.03                                  630.03
2915.04                                  630.04
2915.05                                  630.05
2915.06                                  630.14
2915.09                                  630.06
2915.091                                 630.10
2915.092                                 630.11
2915.093                                 630.12
2915.094                                 630.13
2915.10                                  630.07
2915.11                                  630.08
2915.12                                  630.09
2915.13                                  630.12
2915.14                                  630.15
2917.01                                  648.13
2917.03                                  648.01
2917.031                                 648.01
2917.04                                  648.02
2917.05                                  648.03
2917.12                                  648.05
2917.13                                  648.06
2917.14                                  648.14
2917.21                                  636.15
2917.211                                 666.25
2917.31                                  648.07
2917.32                                  648.08
2917.40                                  636.18
2917.41                                  642.30
2919.21                                  636.10
2919.22(A) - (E)                         636.11
2919.22(H)                               636.11
2919.23                                  636.12
2919.24                                  636.13
2919.25                                  636.17
2919.27                                  636.045
2921.01                                  606.01
2921.13                                  606.10
2921.14                                  606.105
2921.21                                  606.11
2921.22                                  606.12
2921.23                                  606.13
2921.29                                  606.28
2921.31                                  606.14
2921.32                                  606.15
2921.321                                 642.08
2921.33                                  606.16
2921.331(A) - (C)                        606.165
2921.331(E)                              606.165
2921.331(F)                              606.165
2921.36                                  612.13
2921.42                                  606.17
2921.43                                  606.18
2921.44                                  606.19
2921.45                                  606.20
2921.51                                  606.25
2921.52(A) - (D)                         606.27
2923.02                                  606.21
2923.03                                  606.22
2923.11                                  672.01
2923.12                                  672.02
2923.1211(B)                             672.15
2923.1211(C)                             672.15
2923.1212                                672.15
2923.122(C) - (G)                        672.14
2923.126                                 672.15
2923.131                                 672.025
2923.15                                  672.03
2923.16                                  672.04
2923.162                                 672.095
2923.18                                  672.05
2923.19                                  672.05
2923.20                                  672.07
2923.201                                 672.16
2923.211                                 672.085
2923.24                                  672.13
2925.01                                  624.01
2925.04(A), (B), (C)(5), (G)             624.025
2925.12                                  624.04
2925.13(A) - (C), (F)                    624.05
2925.14                                  624.14
2925.141                                 624.14
2925.31                                  624.07
2925.32(B)(4)                            624.073
2925.32(D)(2)                            624.073
2925.32(F)                               624.073
2925.32(G)                               624.073
2925.33                                  624.076
2925.34                                  624.17
2925.36(A) - (C)                         624.08
2925.37(A)                               624.15
2925.37(G)                               624.15
2925.50                                  624.10
2925.51                                  624.10
2925.511                                 624.10
2925.55                                  624.16
2925.56                                  624.16
2925.57                                  624.16
2925.58                                  624.16
2925.62                                  624.18
2927.02                                  636.20
2927.021                                 636.20
2927.022                                 636.20
2927.023                                 636.20
2927.03                                  636.22
2927.11                                  642.07
2927.12                                  636.21
2927.15                                  636.26
2927.17                                  666.24
2929.21                                  698.02
2929.22                                  698.03
2929.23                                  666.99
2929.24                                  698.02
2929.25                                  698.02
2929.26                                  698.02
2929.27                                  698.02
2929.28                                  698.02
2929.31                                  698.04
2929.41                                  698.05
2935.041                                 606.23
2935.36(E)                               698.01
2981.07                                  642.205
2981.11                                  606.24
2981.12                                  606.24
2981.13(A)                               606.24
3701.81                                  660.02
3701.82                                  660.01
3701.99(B)                               660.01
3701.99(C)                               660.02
3715.05                                  624.16
3715.06                                  624.16
3716.11                                  636.16
3716.99(C)                               636.16
3719.08(A)                               624.13
3719.08(E)                               624.13
3719.172(A)                              624.09
3719.172(B)                              624.09
3719.19                                  624.10
3719.99(C)                               624.13
3719.99(E)                               624.09
3737.61                                  1660.06
3737.63                                  1660.08
3737.64                                  1610.08
3737.65                                  1660.09
3743.01                                  672.10
3743.54                                  672.10
3743.60(E) - (L)                         672.10
3743.61(E) - (J)                         672.10
3743.63                                  672.10
3743.64                                  672.10
3743.65(A) - (E)                         672.10
3743.66                                  672.10
3743.68(B)                               672.10
3743.80                                  672.10
3743.99(C), (D), (F) - (H)               672.10
3767.13                                  660.04
3767.29                                  660.06
3767.99(B)                               660.06
3767.99(C)                               660.04
3780.36                                  624.02
3780.99                                  624.02
3781.55                                  666.04
3791.01                                  1402.03
3791.02                                  1402.03
3791.03                                  1402.03
3791.04                                  1402.03
4301.01                                  612.01
4301.22(A)(2)                            612.16
4301.22(B)                               612.03
4301.244                                 612.01
4301.62                                  612.07
4301.63                                  612.02
4301.631                                 612.16
4301.633                                 612.02
4301.634                                 612.02
4301.637                                 612.06
4301.64                                  612.04
4301.65                                  612.17
4301.69                                  612.02
4301.70                                  612.06
                                         612.06,
4301.99(A)                               612.07,
                                         612.17
4301.99(B)                               612.04,
                                         612.16
4301.99(C)                               612.02
4301.99(D)                               612.03
4301.99(E)                               612.02,
                                         612.16
4301.99(F)                               612.02
4301.99(H)                               612.03
4301.99(I)                               612.02
4301.99(J)                               612.17
4303.202(D)(2)                           612.08
4303.208(C)                              612.08
4303.25                                  612.05
4303.99(D)                               612.08
4501.01(LL)                              402.075
4501.01(TT)                              416.12
4506.01                                  442.01
4506.011                                 442.02
4506.04(A)                               442.03
4506.04(B)                               442.03
4506.04(C)                               442.03
4506.10(A)                               442.04
4506.10(E)                               442.04
4506.12(I)                               442.03
4506.12(J)                               442.03
4506.15                                  442.05
4506.19                                  442.06
4506.20                                  442.07
4506.23                                  442.08
4507.02(A)(1)                            436.01
4507.02(A)(2)                            436.02
4507.03                                  436.01
4507.04                                  436.01
4507.05(F)                               436.03
4507.05(I)                               436.03
4507.071(B) - (J)                        436.035
4507.30                                  436.04
4507.35                                  436.06
4507.99                                  436.02
4509.102                                 606.10
4510.037(J)                              436.071
                                         436.071,
4510.04                                  436.073,
                                         436.074,
                                         436.075
4510.05                                  408.04,
                                         698.07
4510.11                                  436.071
4510.111                                 436.071
4510.12                                  436.072
4510.14                                  436.073
4510.16                                  436.074
4510.21                                  436.075
4510.44                                  434.011
4511.01(A)                               402.53
4511.01(B)                               402.20
4511.01(C)                               402.21
4511.01(D)                               402.12
4511.01(E)                               402.29
4511.01(F)                               402.37
4511.01(H)                               402.22
4511.01(I)                               402.08
4511.01(J)                               402.02
4511.01(K)                               402.51
4511.01(L)                               402.06
4511.01(M)                               402.50
4511.01(N)                               402.38
4511.01(O)                               402.26
4511.01(P)                               402.30
4511.01(Q)                               402.32
4511.01(T)                               402.13
4511.01(U)                               402.15
4511.01(V)                               402.17
4511.01(W)                               402.25
4511.01(X)                               402.24
4511.01(Y)                               402.11
4511.01(Z)                               402.27
4511.01(AA)                              402.195
4511.01(BB)                              402.44
4511.01(CC)                              402.08
4511.01(DD)                              402.28
4511.01(EE)                              402.345
4511.01(FF)                              402.39
4511.01(GG)                              402.19
4511.01(HH)                              402.45
4511.01(JJ)                              402.40
4511.01(KK)                              402.18
4511.01(LL)                              402.10
4511.01(MM)                              402.36
4511.01(NN)                              402.07
4511.01(OO)                              402.33
4511.01(PP)                              402.52
4511.01(QQ)                              402.48
4511.01(RR)                              402.49
4511.01(SS)                              402.31
4511.01(TT)                              402.46
4511.01(UU)                              402.34
4511.01(VV)                              402.355
4511.01(WW)                              402.165
4511.01(XX)                              402.03
4511.01(YY)                              402.16
4511.01(ZZ)                              402.14
4511.01(AAA)                             402.46
4511.01(BBB)                             402.42
4511.01(CCC)                             402.04
4511.01(DDD)                             402.335
4511.01(EEE)                             402.225
4511.01(FFF)                             402.077,
                                         402.515
4511.01(GGG)                             402.02
4511.01(HHH)                             402.227
4511.01(III)                             402.275
4511.01(JJJ)                             402.345
4511.01(KKK)                             402.045
4511.01(LLL)                             402.175
4511.01(MMM)                             402.175
4511.01(NNN)                             402.197
4511.01(OOO)                             402.277
4511.01(PPP)                             402.385
4511.01(QQQ)                             402.174
4511.01(RRR)                             402.53
4511.01(RRR) - (UUU)                     402.115
4511.03                                  432.18
4511.031                                 414.11
4511.04                                  404.03
4511.041                                 404.035
4511.042                                 404.035
4511.05                                  404.04
4511.051                                 412.05
4511.12(A)                               414.01
4511.12(B)                               414.01
4511.121(A) - (C)                        414.01
4511.121(D)                              414.01
4511.121(E)                              414.01
4511.13                                  414.03
4511.131                                 414.04
4511.132                                 432.155
4511.14                                  414.05
4511.16                                  414.07
4511.17                                  414.08
4511.18                                  414.09
4511.181                                 434.01
4511.19(A) - (F)                         434.01
4511.19(G) - (M)                         434.01
4511.191(A)                              434.01
4511.191(D)                              434.01
4511.192                                 434.01
4511.194                                 434.01
4511.20                                  434.02
4511.201                                 434.02
4511.202                                 434.025
4511.203                                 436.05
4511.204                                 432.43
4511.205                                 432.46
4511.21(A) - (G)                         434.03
4511.21(O)                               434.03
4511.21(P)                               434.03
4511.211                                 434.035
4511.213                                 432.195
4511.214                                 434.09
4511.215                                 434.09
4511.216                                 434.09
4511.22                                  434.04
4511.23                                  434.05
4511.24                                  434.06
4511.25                                  432.01
4511.251                                 434.07
4511.26                                  432.02
4511.27                                  432.03
4511.28                                  432.04
4511.29                                  432.05
4511.30                                  432.06
4511.31                                  432.07
4511.32                                  432.28
4511.33                                  432.08
4511.34                                  432.09
4511.35                                  432.29
4511.36                                  432.10
4511.37                                  432.11
4511.38                                  432.12
4511.39                                  432.13
4511.41                                  432.15
4511.42                                  432.16
4511.43                                  432.17
4511.431(A)                              432.20
4511.431(B)                              432.20
4511.432                                 432.205
4511.44                                  432.20
4511.441                                 416.09
4511.45                                  432.19
4511.451                                 432.21
4511.452                                 416.08
4511.454                                 432.19
4511.46                                  416.01
4511.47                                  416.02
4511.48                                  416.03
4511.481                                 416.10
4511.49                                  416.04
4511.491                                 416.11
4511.50                                  416.05
4511.511                                 416.07
4511.512                                 416.12
4511.513                                 416.13
4511.514                                 416.14
4511.521                                 474.10
4511.54                                  474.03
4511.60                                  432.27
4511.61                                  432.32
4511.62                                  432.31
4511.63                                  432.32
4511.64                                  432.33
4511.65                                  414.02
4511.66                                  452.01
4511.661                                 452.06
4511.67                                  452.02
4511.681                                 452.055
4511.69                                  452.04
4511.70                                  432.23,
                                         452.07
4511.701                                 440.08
4511.71                                  432.24
4511.712                                 432.34
4511.713(A)                              432.39
4511.713(B)                              432.39
4511.714                                 432.24
4511.72                                  432.25
4511.73                                  432.26
4511.74                                  412.01
4511.75                                  432.30
4511.79                                  442.09
4511.81(A) - (H)                         438.28
4511.81(K)                               438.28
4511.81(L)                               438.28
4511.82                                  432.40
4511.84                                  432.41
4511.85                                  440.11
4513.02(A)                               438.01
4513.02(H)                               438.01
4513.021                                 438.26
4513.03                                  438.02
4513.04                                  438.03
4513.05                                  438.04
4513.06                                  438.05
4513.07                                  438.06
4513.071                                 438.25
4513.08                                  438.07
4513.09                                  438.08
4513.10                                  438.09
4513.11                                  438.10
4513.111                                 438.10
4513.112                                 438.10
4513.113                                 438.10
4513.114                                 438.10
4513.115                                 438.10
4513.12                                  438.11
4513.13                                  438.12
4513.14                                  438.13
4513.15                                  438.14
4513.16                                  438.15
4513.17                                  438.16
4513.171                                 438.165
4513.182                                 438.17
4513.19                                  438.18
4513.20                                  438.19
4513.21                                  438.20
4513.22                                  438.21
4513.23                                  438.22
4513.24                                  438.23
4513.241(C) - (J)                        438.235
4513.241(K)                              438.235
4513.263                                 438.29
4513.29                                  440.03
4513.30                                  438.24
4513.31                                  440.06
4513.32                                  440.05
4513.34                                  440.01
4513.36                                  404.02
4513.361                                 404.10
4513.60                                  452.055
4513.601                                 452.055
4513.61                                  452.05
4513.64                                  452.05
4513.66                                  436.14
4513.68                                  436.14
                                         438.09,
                                         438.17,
                                         438.19,
4513.99                                  438.24,
                                         440.01,
                                         440.03,
                                         440.05,
                                         440.06
4519.01                                  476.01
4519.02                                  476.08
4519.20                                  476.02
4519.40                                  476.03
4519.401                                 434.09
4519.41                                  476.04
4519.44                                  476.05
4519.46                                  476.06
4519.48                                  476.07
4519.66                                  476.09
4549.02                                  436.11
4549.021                                 436.12
4549.03                                  436.13
4549.08                                  436.10
4549.081(B)                              414.01
4549.081(C)                              414.01
4549.20                                  438.32
4933.18                                  642.26
4933.19                                  642.26
5577.05                                  440.02
5577.06                                  440.02
5577.11                                  440.03
5577.15                                  440.05
5577.99(C)                               440.02
5577.99(E)                               440.03
5589.08                                  440.07
5589.081                                 440.07
5589.12                                  642.23
5589.99(B)                               440.07,
                                         642.23
                                         
 
REFERENCES TO 1964 CODE
1964 Code Section 2014 Code Section
1964 Code Section 2014 Code Section
503.04            618.19
503.05            618.19
503.06            618.19
503.07            618.22
503.08            618.17
503.081(f)        618.18
503.13            618.14
503.14            618.16
503.19            618.20
503.99            618.16,
                  618.17
507.01            648.10
507.02            648.10
507.03            648.10
507.99            648.10
509.08            648.09
509.10            642.28
510.01            634.01
                  634.05,
510.02            634.06,
                  634.11
510.03            634.12
510.04            634.13
510.05            634.14
510.07            634.15
510.08            634.16
521.06            660.05
521.10            660.13
521.11            660.14
521.14            660.03
521.15            660.07
521.17            660.16
521.18            660.17
521.25            660.18
521.27            660.19
521.28            660.11
523.03            618.13
523.99            618.13
529.09            612.09
529.10            612.10
529.11            612.11
529.12            612.12
529.14            612.14
529.15            612.15
531.01            648.11
531.02            648.11
531.03            648.11
531.99            648.11
537.22            636.24
539.01            648.12
539.02            648.12
539.99            648.12
541.10            642.105
541.25            642.29
541.26            642.31
549.11            672.11
549.12            672.075
621.12            660.084
                  
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
1964-48  4-6-1964    TSO E
1964-49  4-6-1964    TSO E
1964-55  4-6-1964    TSO D
1964-67  5-4-1964    TSO D
1964-69  5-4-1964    TSO F
1964-80  6-1-1964    TSO B
1964-85  6-15-1964   TSO E
1964-86  6-15-1964   TSO E
1964-88  6-15-1964   TSO A
1964-87  7-6-1964    TSO E
1964-90  7-6-1964    TSO D
1964-92  7-6-1964    TSO E
1964-93  7-6-1964    TSO E
1964-94  7-6-1964    TSO E
1964-95  7-6-1964    TSO E
1964-96  7-6-1964    TSO E
1964-112 7-20-1964   TSO F
1964-115 7-20-1964   TSO B
1964-117 7-20-1964   TSO E
1964-118 7-20-1964   TSO E
1964-119 7-20-1964   TSO E
1964-130 8-17-1964   TSO B
1964-135 9-8-1964    TSO E
1964-133 10-5-1964   TSO D
1964-146 10-5-1964   TSO E
1964-149 10-19-1964  TSO F
1964-151 10-19-1964  TSO E
1964-160 11-2-1964   TSO F
1964-161 11-2-1964   TSO B
1964-171 12-21-1964  TSO E
1964-175 12-21-1964  TSO D
1965-7   1-18-1965   TSO B
1965-17  2-1-1965    TSO D
1965-18  2-1-1965    TSO D
1965-25  2-15-1965   TSO D
1965-35  3-1-1965    TSO E
1965-36  3-1-1965    TSO E
1965-37  3-1-1965    TSO E
1965-40  3-15-1965   TSO D
1965-45  3-15-1965   TSO E
1965-47  4-5-1965    TSO D
1965-48  4-5-1965    TSO D
1965-75  5-17-1965   TSO D
1965-79  5-17-1965   TSO D
1965-83  5-27-1965   TSO D
1965-84  5-27-1965   TSO D
1965-89  6-7-1965    TSO E
1965-97  6-21-1965   TSO B
1965-99  6-21-1965   TSO E
1965-119 8-2-1965    TSO D
1965-122 8-16-1965   TSO D
1965-143 9-20-1965   TSO D
1965-155 10-4-1965   TSO F
1965-159 10-4-1965   TSO B
1965-192 12-6-1965   TSO D
1965-193 12-6-1965   TSO D
1965-194 12-6-1965   TSO D
1965-197 12-6-1965   TSO E
1965-205 12-20-1965  TSO D
1966-8   1-17-1966   TSO B
1966-18  2-7-1966    TSO D
1966-19  2-7-1966    TSO D
1966-40  3-7-1966    TSO B
1966-46  3-21-1966   TSO B
1966-2   4-4-1966    TSO D
1966-66  4-18-1966   TSO D
1966-71  4-26-1966   TSO E
1966-73  4-26-1966   TSO F
1966-76  5-2-1966    TSO B,
                     TSO C
1966-80  5-2-1966    TSO B
1966-81  5-2-1966    TSO B
1966-85  5-16-1966   TSO B
1966-86  5-16-1966   TSO B
1966-87  5-16-1966   TSO D
1966-98  6-6-1966    TSO D
1966-108 6-6-1966    TSO F
1966-97  6-20-1966   TSO D
1966-127 8-15-1966   TSO D
1966-174 8-23-1966   TSO D
1966-175 8-23-1966   TSO B
1966-176 8-23-1966   TSO D
1966-208 10-17-1966  TSO B
1966-204 11-7-1966   TSO E
1966-213 11-7-1966   TSO F
1966-235 1-16-1967   TSO D
1967-102 6-19-1967   TSO D
1967-103 6-19-1967   TSO D
1967-172 10-16-1967  TSO F
1967-203 1-15-1968   TSO B
1967-186 3-4-1968    TSO B
1968-140 7-8-1968    TSO D
1968-171 9-3-1968    TSO B
1968-176 9-3-1968    TSO F
1968-177 9-3-1968    TSO E
1968-186 9-16-1968   TSO B
1966-208 10-7-1968   TSO F
1968-227 11-4-1968   TSO E
1968-261 12-30-1968  TSO E
1969-22  2-17-1969   TSO E
1969-28  2-17-1969   TSO E
1969-94  4-21-1969   TSO B
1969-103 5-19-1969   TSO F
1969-108 5-19-1969   TSO E
1969-179 9-8-1969    TSO E
1970-18  2-2-1970    TSO D
1970-74  5-4-1970    TSO F
1970-83  5-4-1970    TSO D
1970-85  5-18-1970   TSO E
1970-86  5-18-1970   TSO B
1970-119 8-3-1970    TSO E
1970-138 9-8-1970    TSO B
1971-37  2-15-1971   TSO D
1971-40  2-15-1971   TSO E
1971-70  3-29-1971   TSO E
1971-74  4-5-1971    TSO B,
                     TSO D
1971-87  4-19-1971   TSO B
1971-12  5-17-1971   TSO B
1971-108 5-17-1971   TSO E
1971-147 7-19-1971   TSO E
1971-150 7-19-1971   TSO F
1971-182 9-20-1971   TSO E
1971-197 10-18-1971  TSO E
1971-213 12-6-1971   TSO E
1972-18  2-7-1972    TSO B
1972-106 7-17-1972   TSO E
1972-156 9-18-1972   TSO D
1972-165 10-2-1972   TSO B
1972-187 11-6-1972   TSO F
1972-197 11-20-1972  TSO D
1972-198 11-20-1972  TSO D
1972-201 11-20-1972  TSO B
1973-6   2-5-1973    TSO B
1973-64  5-7-1973    TSO D
1973-85  5-21-1973   TSO B
1973-86  6-4-1973    TSO F
1973-94  6-18-1973   TSO E
1973-117 8-6-1973    TSO D
1973-180 1-7-1974    TSO F
1974-7   1-21-1974   TSO F
1974-39  4-1-1974    TSO F
1974-61  5-6-1974    TSO F
1974-77  6-17-1974   TSO D
1974-131 8-19-1974   TSO E
1974-173 10-7-1974   TSO B
1974-199 12-23-1974  TSO E
1975-55  3-24-1975   TSO E
1975-67  4-21-1975   TSO B
1975-60  5-19-1975   1424.09
1976-21  2-2-1976    TSO D
1976-99  5-17-1976   TSO B
1976-120 6-21-1976   TSO F
1976-147 8-2-1976    TSO B
1976-162 9-7-1976    TSO F
1976-163 9-7-1976    TSO D
1976-53  9-20-1976   TSO D
1976-168 9-20-1976   TSO D
1976-170 9-20-1976   TSO D
1976-172 9-20-1976   TSO D
1976-181 10-18-1976  TSO D
1976-221 12-20-1976  TSO E
1976-222 12-20-1976  TSO B
1977-4   1-17-1977   TSO E
1977-11  1-17-1977   TSO D
1977-26  2-21-1977   TSO D
1977-57  4-4-1977    TSO D
1977-59  4-4-1977    TSO D
1977-67  4-18-1977   TSO D
1977-68  4-18-1977   TSO D
1977-49  5-2-1977    TSO D
1977-58  5-2-1977    TSO D
1977-102 5-23-1977   TSO B
1977-103 6-6-1977    TSO B
1977-105 6-6-1977    TSO D
1977-106 6-6-1977    TSO D
1977-143 7-13-1977   TSO B
1977-165 8-15-1977   TSO D
1977-166 8-15-1977   TSO D
1977-195 9-19-1977   TSO B
1977-199 10-17-1977  TSO D
1977-200 11-21-1977  TSO D
1978-16  2-6-1978    TSO D
1978-17  3-6-1978    TSO D
1978-47  3-20-1978   TSO F
1978-80  4-17-1978   TSO D
1978-57  5-22-1978   TSO B
1978-59  5-22-1978   TSO B
1978-81  5-22-1978   TSO E
1978-84  5-22-1978   TSO D
1978-90  5-22-1978   TSO D
1978-91  5-22-1978   TSO D
1978-108 5-22-1978   TSO D
1978-163 7-17-1978   TSO E
1978-186 8-7-1978    TSO B
1978-184 8-21-1978   TSO D
1978-194 8-21-1978   TSO D
1978-203 9-5-1978    TSO D
1978-195 9-18-1978   TSO D
1978-231 11-6-1978   TSO B
1978-237 11-6-1978   TSO B
1978-246 12-4-1978   TSO B
1978-266 12-18-1978  TSO B
1978-202 1-15-1979   TSO D
1978-239 3-5-1979    TSO D
1979-27  3-5-1979    TSO D
1979-28  3-5-1979    TSO D
1979-75  4-2-1979    TSO F
1978-267 5-7-1979    TSO D
1979-23  5-21-1979   TSO D
1979-153 7-16-1979   TSO D
1979-173 8-20-1979   TSO B
1979-174 8-20-1979   TSO B
1979-189 9-17-1979   TSO D
1979-206 10-1-1979   TSO D
1979-207 10-1-1979   TSO F
1979-21  10-15-1979  TSO D
1980-48  3-31-1980   TSO D
1980-53  5-5-1980    TSO D
1980-74  5-19-1980   TSO F
1980-75  5-19-1980   TSO B
1980-76  5-19-1980   TSO E
1980-78  5-19-1980   TSO D
1980-105 7-7-1980    TSO B
1980-146 10-6-1980   TSO B
1980-147 10-6-1980   TSO B
1980-158 10-20-1980  TSO F
1980-154 11-17-1980  TSO D
1980-168 11-19-1980  TSO E
1981-71  6-1-1981    TSO B
1981-79  6-22-1981   TSO B
1981-92  7-20-1981   TSO A
1981-98  7-20-1981   TSO B
1981-83  8-3-1981    TSO E
1981-121 9-21-1981   TSO B
1981-147 12-7-1981   TSO B
1981-82  2-15-1982   TSO D
1982-22  3-15-1982   TSO D
1982-43  4-5-1982    TSO B
1982-44  4-5-1982    TSO B
1982-73  6-21-1982   TSO B
1982-100 7-19-1982   TSO D
1982-37  8-16-1982   TSO D
1982-103 8-16-1982   TSO D
1982-107 8-16-1982   TSO B
1982-115 8-16-1982   TSO E
1982-128 9-20-1982   TSO D
1982-129 9-20-1982   TSO D
1982-130 9-20-1982   TSO D
1982-131 9-20-1982   TSO B
1982-135 10-4-1982   TSO D
1982-139 10-18-1982  TSO B
1982-140 10-18-1982  TSO B
1982-151 11-15-1982  TSO B
1982-155 12-20-1982  TSO D
1982-159 12-20-1982  TSO B
1982-165 12-20-1982  TSO B
1982-166 12-20-1982  TSO D
1983-40  3-21-1983   TSO B
1983-84  6-6-1983    TSO D
1983-85  6-6-1983    TSO B
1983-100 7-18-1983   TSO D
1983-109 8-1-1983    TSO D
1983-116 8-15-1983   TSO B,
                     TSO D
1983-117 8-15-1983   TSO E
1983-105 9-6-1983    TSO D
1983-123 9-6-1983    TSO B
1983-140 10-17-1983  TSO D
1983-148 11-7-1983   TSO D
1983-149 12-19-1983  TSO D
1983-150 12-19-1983  TSO D
1983-167 12-19-1983  TSO D
1983-168 12-19-1983  TSO D
1984-2   1-16-1984   TSO B
1984-3   1-16-1984   TSO D
1984-6   2-6-1984    TSO F
1984-10  3-5-1984    TSO D
1984-26  3-19-1984   TSO D
1984-29  3-19-1984   TSO B
1984-31  4-2-1984    TSO D
1984-66  5-7-1984    TSO B
1984-4   5-21-1984   TSO D
1984-32  5-21-1984   TSO D
1984-47  5-21-1984   TSO D
1984-84  6-4-1984    TSO B
1984-64  6-18-1984   TSO D
1984-100 6-18-1984   TSO B
1984-83  7-16-1984   TSO D
1984-123 8-6-1984    TSO B
1984-119 9-4-1984    TSO D
1984-153 11-5-1984   TSO D
1984-155 11-19-1984  TSO F
1984-163 12-3-1984   TSO B
1984-166 12-17-1984  TSO D
1985-5   3-4-1985    TSO D
1985-53  4-15-1985   TSO B
1985-112 4-19-1985   TSO D
1985-96  7-1-1985    TSO D
1985-145 9-3-1985    TSO B
1985-162 10-7-1985   TSO D
1985-167 10-7-1985   TSO B
1985-25  10-21-1985  TSO D
1985-173 10-21-1985  TSO D
1985-175 10-21-1985  TSO B
1985-176 10-21-1985  TSO E
1985-154 11-4-1985   TSO D
1986-1   1-6-1986    TSO B
1986-7   2-3-1986    TSO F
1986-20  3-17-1986   TSO D
1986-28  3-17-1986   TSO D
1986-40  3-17-1986   TSO F
1986-41  3-17-1986   TSO F
1986-42  3-17-1986   TSO E
1986-29  4-7-1986    TSO D
1986-49  4-21-1986   TSO D
1986-36  5-7-1986    TSO A
1986-76  5-19-1986   TSO D
1986-77  5-19-1986   TSO D
1986-74  6-2-1986    TSO D
1986-75  6-2-1986    TSO D
1986-85  7-7-1986    TSO D
1986-86  7-7-1986    TSO D
1986-97  7-21-1986   TSO D
1986-121 8-4-1986    TSO C
1986-122 8-4-1986    TSO D
1986-134 8-25-1986   TSO D
1986-140 9-2-1986    TSO D
1986-145 10-6-1986   TSO D
1986-146 10-6-1986   TSO D
1986-149 10-20-1986  TSO D
1986-167 11-17-1986  TSO D
1986-194 12-8-1986   TSO D
1986-195 12-8-1986   TSO D
1986-202 12-15-1986  TSO G
1986-207 12-15-1986  TSO D
1986-183 12-29-1986  TSO D
1986-184 12-29-1986  TSO D
1986-185 1-19-1987   TSO D
1987-013 1-19-1987   TSO B
1987-014 1-19-1987   TSO B
1987-007 2-2-1987    TSO F
1987-25  2-2-1987    TSO B
1987-26  2-2-1987    TSO B
1987-28  2-2-1987    TSO G
1987-30  2-2-1987    TSO B
1987-64  3-30-1987   TSO B
1987-53  4-6-1987    TSO D
1987-55  5-4-1987    TSO D
1987-93  5-4-1987    TSO B
1987-117 6-1-1987    TSO D
1987-95  6-15-1987   TSO A
1987-96  6-15-1987   TSO D
1987-105 6-15-1987   TSO D
1987-123 6-15-1987   TSO B
1987-133 7-6-1987    TSO B
1987-138 7-6-1987    TSO D
1987-151 7-8-1987    TSO F
1987-152 7-8-1987    TSO F
1987-174 8-17-1987   TSO B
1987-193 9-8-1987    TSO B
1987-173 10-5-1987   TSO D
1987-216 11-2-1987   TSO D
1987-225 11-2-1987   230.06
1987-226 11-2-1987   TSO D
1987-230 11-16-1987  1250.24
1987-235 11-16-1987  TSO B
1987-257 12-21-1987  TSO F
1987-260 12-21-1987  TSO B
1987-243 1-4-1988    TSO D
1987-256 1-4-1988    TSO D
1988-25  2-22-1988   TSO F
1988-13  3-21-1988   TSO D
1988-12  4-18-1988   TSO D
1988-35  4-18-1988   TSO D
1988-47  4-18-1988   TSO D
1988-56  4-18-1988   TSO B
1988-57  5-16-1988   TSO D
1988-59  5-16-1988   TSO D
1988-03  6-6-1988    TSO D
1988-5   6-6-1988    TSO B
1988-112 7-18-1988   TSO D
1988-55  8-1-1988    406.06
1988-136 8-2-1988    TSO B
1988-156 9-6-1988    TSO D
1988-159 9-6-1988    TSO B
1988-160 9-6-1988    TSO B
1988-161 9-6-1988    TSO B
1988-118 10-3-1988   TSO B
1988-190 10-3-1988   TSO D
1988-191 10-3-1988   TSO D
1988-204 11-7-1988   TSO E
1988-208 11-7-1988   TSO D
1988-209 11-7-1988   TSO D
1987-239 12-19-1988  TSO D
1988-225 12-19-1988  TSO D
1988-224 1-16-1989   TSO D
1989-4   1-16-1989   TSO E
1989-3   2-6-1989    TSO D
1988-195 2-20-1989   TSO D
1989-21  2-20-1989   TSO D
1989-27  2-20-1989   TSO F
1988-207 3-6-1989    TSO D
1987-172 3-20-1989   TSO D
1989-40  4-3-1989    TSO D
1989-60  4-3-1989    TSO D
1988-11  4-17-1989   TSO D
1989-66  4-17-1989   TSO G
1989-95  5-1-1989    TSO D
1989-122 6-5-1989    TSO D
1989-127 6-5-1989    TSO B
1989-98  6-19-1989   TSO D
1989-125 8-7-1989    TSO D
1989-224 9-5-1989    TSO D
1989-217 9-18-1989   TSO D
1989-251 9-18-1989   TSO E
1989-264 11-6-1989   TSO F
1989-288 11-20-1989  TSO D
1989-286 12-18-1989  TSO D
1989-287 1-15-1990   TSO D
1990-19  1-15-1990   TSO F
1990-20  1-15-1990   TSO E
1990-28  2-5-1990    TSO B
1990-33  2-19-1990   210.01
1990-36  2-19-1990   210.02
1990-8   3-5-1990    TSO D
1990-29  3-5-1990    TSO D
1990-113 5-21-1990   TSO D
1990-111 5-29-1990   TSO D
1990-112 6-4-1990    TSO D
1990-131 6-4-1990    TSO D
1990-132 6-4-1990    TSO E
1990-166 7-2-1990    TSO E
1990-167 8-6-1990    TSO E
1990-205 9-4-1990    TSO F
1990-215 9-4-1990    TSO B
1990-216 9-4-1990    TSO B
1990-231 9-17-1990   TSO E
1990-237 9-17-1990   TSO E
1990-242 10-1-1990   TSO D
1990-243 10-1-1990   TSO D
1990-245 10-1-1990   406.06
1990-265 11-19-1990  TSO B
1990-270 11-19-1990  TSO B
1990-277 12-10-1990  TSO F
1991-2   1-7-1991    TSO B
1991-35  3-4-1991    TSO B
1991-36  3-4-1991    TSO B
1991-53  4-15-1991   TSO D
1991-75  5-6-1991    TSO E
1991-76  5-6-1991    TSO B
1991-94  5-20-1991   TSO D
1991-95  5-20-1991   TSO B
1990-230 7-15-1991   TSO D
1991-140 7-15-1991   TSO D
1991-153 8-5-1991    TSO B
1991-176 9-3-1991    TSO B
1991-186 9-16-1991   TSO B
1991-188 10-21-1991  TSO D
1991-217 12-2-1991   TSO D
1991-242 12-2-1991   TSO D
1991-244 12-30-1991  TSO D
1991-252 12-30-1991  TSO B
1991-18  1-20-1992   TSO D
1992-7   1-20-1992   TSO F
1992-8   1-20-1992   TSO D
1992-14  1-20-1992   TSO E
1992-25  2-3-1992    TSO B
1992-35  3-16-1992   TSO E
1992-45  3-16-1992   TSO D
1992-49  3-16-1992   TSO D
1992-52  3-16-1992   TSO E
1992-62  4-6-1992    TSO D
1992-79  5-4-1992    TSO F
1992-80  5-4-1992    TSO D
1992-98  6-1-1992    TSO B
1992-99  6-1-1992    TSO B
1992-108 6-29-1992   TSO B
1992-112 7-6-1992    TSO B
1992-113 7-6-1992    TSO B
1992-115 7-6-1992    TSO D
1992-118 8-3-1992    TSO D
1992-143 8-17-1992   TSO B
1992-144 8-17-1992   TSO D
1992-153 8-31-1992   TSO E
1992-154 8-31-1992   TSO B
1992-82  9-21-1992   TSO C
1992-170 10-5-1992   TSO D
1992-185 10-19-1992  TSO F
1992-168 11-2-1992   TSO B
1992-193 11-2-1992   TSO E
1992-211 12-7-1992   TSO F
1992-216 12-7-1992   TSO B
1992-217 12-7-1992   TSO B
1992-218 12-7-1992   TSO A
1992-210 12-21-1992  TSO B
1992-225 12-21-1992  TSO D
1993-15  2-15-1993   TSO B
1993-24  3-1-1993    TSO B
1993-2   3-15-1993   TSO C
1993-27  4-6-1993    TSO D
1993-46  4-19-1993   TSO B,
                     TSO E
1993-62  5-3-1993    TSO G
1993-64  5-3-1993    TSO D
1993-65  5-3-1993    TSO B
1993-74  5-17-1993   TSO B
1993-86  6-9-1993    TSO E,
                     TSO F
1993-50  6-21-1993   TSO C
1993-105 6-21-1993   TSO F
1993-31  7-19-1993   TSO D
1993-109 8-2-1993    TSO D
1993-120 8-2-1993    TSO B
1993-131 8-2-1993    TSO E
1993-138 8-16-1993   TSO B
1993-162 9-20-1993   TSO E
1993-163 9-20-1993   TSO D
1993-180 10-4-1993   TSO B
1993-188 11-15-1993  TSO D
1993-176 12-6-1993   TSO C
1993-208 1-17-1994   TSO E
1994-14  2-7-1994    TSO D
1994-17  2-7-1994    TSO B
1994-24  2-21-1994   TSO F
1994-27  3-7-1994    TSO B
1994-43  4-4-1994    TSO F
1994-46  4-4-1994    TSO D
1994-77  5-16-1994   TSO G
1994-87  5-16-1994   TSO E
1994-88  7-18-1994   TSO C
1994-105 7-18-1994   TSO D
1994-107 7-18-1994   TSO E
1994-108 7-18-1994   TSO B
1994-47  8-1-1994    TSO D
1994-122 8-1-1994    TSO B
1994-142 9-19-1994   TSO D
1994-143 10-3-1994   TSO D
1994-148 10-3-1994   TSO D
1994-159 10-3-1994   TSO E
1994-155 10-17-1994  TSO D
1994-176 11-7-1994   TSO F
1994-199 12-5-1994   TSO D
1995-7   1-16-1995   TSO D
1994-200 2-6-1995    TSO C
1995-30  2-20-1995   TSO E
1995-8   3-6-1995    TSO D
1995-23  3-6-1995    TSO D
1995-29  3-6-1995    TSO D
1995-48  3-6-1995    TSO D
1995-56  3-6-1995    TSO E
1995-57  3-6-1995    TSO E
1995-60  3-20-1995   TSO D
1995-61  3-20-1995   TSO D
1995-75  4-3-1995    TSO B
1995-79  4-17-1995   TSO B
1995-107 6-5-1995    TSO D
1995-108 6-5-1995    TSO D
1995-110 6-5-1995    TSO B
1995-111 6-5-1995    TSO B
1995-129 6-19-1995   TSO B
1995-140 7-17-1995   TSO B
1995-141 7-17-1995   TSO E
1995-142 7-17-1995   TSO B
1995-152 7-17-1995   TSO E
1995-160 7-31-1995   TSO D
1995-166 8-7-1995    TSO E
1995-179 8-21-1995   TSO B
1995-173 9-18-1995   TSO D
1995-185 9-18-1995   TSO B
1995-195 9-18-1995   TSO E
1995-219 11-6-1995   TSO B
1995-139 11-20-1995  TSO D
1995-218 11-20-1995  TSO D
1995-232 11-20-1995  TSO D
1995-238 11-20-1995  TSO B
1995-249 12-6-1995   TSO E
1995-234 12-18-1995  TSO E
1996-5   1-15-1996   TSO B
1996-10  1-15-1996   TSO B
1996-20  2-5-1996    TSO D
1996-24  2-5-1996    TSO B
1996-28  2-5-1996    TSO F
1996-12  2-17-1969   Ch. 242
1996-29  2-21-1996   TSO B
1996-30  2-21-1996   TSO D
1996-32  2-21-1996   TSO B
1996-34  2-21-1996   TSO B
1996-59  3-4-1996    TSO B
1996-57  4-1-1996    TSO D
1996-97  5-20-1996   TSO D
1996-98  5-20-1996   TSO D
1996-99  5-20-1996   TSO D
1996-100 5-20-1996   TSO B
1996-115 6-3-1996    TSO B
1996-114 6-17-1996   TSO F
1996-121 6-17-1996   406.06
1996-122 6-17-1996   406.06
1996-128 6-17-1996   TSO E,
                     TSO F
1996-161 8-5-1996    TSO B
1996-157 8-19-1996   TSO E
1996-171 8-19-1996   TSO D
1996-173 10-21-1996  TSO B
1996-208 10-21-1996  TSO B
1996-218 11-4-1996   TSO B
1996-204 11-18-1996  TSO D
1996-241 12-2-1996   TSO D
1996-242 12-2-1996   TSO D
1996-217 1-6-1997    TSO D
1996-237 1-6-1997    TSO C
1996-243 1-6-1997    TSO D
1996-244 1-22-1997   TSO C
1997-17  1-22-1997   TSO E,
                     TSO F
1997-18  2-3-1997    TSO D
1997-56  3-17-1997   TSO D
1997-39  4-7-1997    TSO D
1997-48  4-7-1997    TSO D
1997-75  4-7-1997    TSO G
1997-83  4-23-1997   TSO B
1997-84  4-23-1997   TSO B
1997-88  4-23-1997   TSO E
1996-79  5-19-1997   TSO D
1997-107 5-19-1997   TSO B
1997-101 6-16-1997   TSO D
1997-130 6-16-1997   TSO B
1997-132 6-16-1997   TSO B,
                     TSO E
1997-133 7-21-1997   TSO F
1997-144 7-21-1997   TSO D
1997-147 7-21-1997   TSO B
1997-172 8-4-1997    TSO E
1997-134 8-18-1997   TSO D
1997-193 9-2-1997    TSO E
1997-194 9-2-1997    TSO E
1997-195 9-2-1997    TSO E
1997-196 9-2-1997    TSO E
1997-197 9-2-1997    TSO E
1997-205 9-15-1997   TSO D
1997-180 10-6-1997   TSO B
1997-216 10-20-1997  TSO B,
                     TSO F
1997-218 10-20-1997  TSO B
1997-229 11-17-1997  TSO B
1997-230 11-17-1997  TSO B
1997-251 11-17-1997  TSO B
1997-262 12-1-1997   230.09
1998-13  1-20-1998   TSO D
1998-48  3-16-1998   TSO F
1998-72  4-6-1998    TSO E
1998-80  4-6-1998    TSO B
1998-161 8-31-1998   TSO D
1998-167 9-24-1998   TSO E
1998-175 9-24-1998   TSO B
1998-176 9-24-1998   TSO E
1998-177 9-24-1998   TSO D
1998-192 10-5-1998   TSO D
1998-217 11-16-1998  TSO D
1998-222 12-7-1998   TSO B
1998-234 12-7-1998   TSO B
1998-238 12-21-1998  TSO D
1998-242 12-21-1998  TSO B
1998-244 12-21-1998  TSO B
1999-35  3-1-1999    TSO D
1999-48  3-29-1999   TSO E
1999-51  4-5-1999    TSO B
1999-55  5-3-1999    TSO D
1999-67  5-3-1999    TSO B
1999-90  6-7-1999    TSO E
1999-94  6-7-1999    TSO D
1999-95  6-7-1999    TSO B
1999-96  6-7-1999    TSO B
1999-112 6-7-1999    TSO E
1999-114 6-21-1999   TSO D
1999-116 6-21-1999   TSO D
1999-117 6-21-1999   TSO D
1999-120 6-21-1999   TSO B
1999-161 8-16-1999   TSO F
1999-165 8-16-1999   TSO B
1999-172 9-21-1999   TSO B
1999-173 9-21-1999   TSO D
1999-207 10-18-1999  TSO E
1999-213 11-1-1999   TSO B
1999-233 12-6-1999   TSO D
1999-241 12-6-1999   TSO B
2000-4   1-18-2000   TSO D
2000-18  1-18-2000   TSO A
2000-35  3-6-2000    TSO D
2000-42  3-6-2000    TSO D
2000-60  3-20-2000   TSO D
2000-71  4-3-2000    TSO B
2000-45  4-17-2000   257.01,
                     257.03
2000-104 5-1-2000    TSO B
2000-99  5-15-2000   TSO D
2000-115 5-15-2000   TSO B
2000-116 5-15-2000   TSO B
2000-145 6-5-2000    TSO B
2000-136 6-5-2000    TSO D
2000-146 6-5-2000    TSO B
2000-153 6-19-2000   672.071
2000-160 6-19-2000   TSO D
2000-163 6-19-2000   TSO B
                     248.01—
2000-154 7-5-2000    248.03,
                     248.05
2000-181 7-5-2000    TSO E
2000-182 7-5-2000    TSO E
2000-187 7-5-2000    TSO E
2000-188 7-5-2000    TSO D
2000-189 7-5-2000    TSO B
2000-190 7-5-2000    TSO B
2000-191 7-5-2000    TSO B
2000-192 7-5-2000    TSO B
2000-211 7-17-2000   TSO D
2000-212 7-17-2000   TSO D
2000-223 8-21-2000   TSO D
2000-224 8-21-2000   TSO B
2000-225 8-21-2000   TSO B
2000-234 9-5-2000    TSO D
2000-254 9-18-2000   TSO B
2000-255 9-18-2000   TSO B
2000-273 10-2-2000   TSO B
2000-274 10-2-2000   TSO B
2000-275 10-2-2000   TSO B
2000-276 10-2-2000   TSO B
2000-277 10-2-2000   TSO B
2000-290 10-16-2000  TSO B
2000-291 10-16-2000  TSO B
2000-294 11-6-2000   TSO D
2000-304 11-6-2000   TSO B
2000-305 11-6-2000   TSO B
2000-306 11-6-2000   TSO B
2000-320 11-20-2000  260.21
2000-328 11-20-2000  TSO D
2000-329 11-20-2000  TSO D
2000-331 11-20-2000  TSO E
2000-334 12-4-2000   TSO D
2000-335 12-4-2000   TSO D
2000-336 12-4-2000   TSO D
2000-340 12-4-2000   TSO D
2000-341 12-4-2000   TSO D
2000-353 12-18-2000  TSO E
2000-362 12-18-2000  TSO E
2001-4   1-16-2001   TSO F
2001-32  2-5-2001    TSO E
2001-33  2-5-2001    TSO B
2001-34  2-5-2001    TSO B
2001-35  2-5-2001    TSO B
2001-55  3-19-2001   TSO E
2001-83  3-19-2001   TSO B
2001-19  4-2-2001    TSO B
2001-95  4-2-2001    TSO B
2001-58  4-16-2001   TSO D
2001-59  4-16-2001   TSO D
2001-116 4-16-2001   TSO E
2001-117 4-16-2001   TSO E
2001-120 5-7-2001    TSO B
2001-143 5-21-2001   TSO E
2001-119 6-4-2001    TSO B
2001-153 6-4-2001    TSO B
2001-166 6-18-2001   TSO B
2001-170 7-2-2001    TSO E
2001-171 7-2-2001    TSO E
2001-172 7-2-2001    TSO E
2001-173 7-2-2001    TSO E
2001-176 7-2-2001    TSO B
2001-177 7-2-2001    TSO B
2001-183 7-11-2001   TSO E
2001-186 7-16-2001   TSO B
2001-220 8-20-2001   TSO E
2001-221 8-20-2001   TSO E
2001-222 8-20-2001   TSO D
2001-223 8-20-2001   TSO D
2001-230 9-19-2001   TSO E
2001-247 10-15-2001  TSO D
2001-250 10-15-2001  TSO E
2001-255 11-5-2001   TSO E
2001-270 11-19-2001  TSO B
2001-272 11-19-2001  TSO F
2001-287 12-17-2001  TSO E
2002-2   1-7-2002    TSO E
2002-3   1-7-2002    TSO E
2002-17  1-23-2002   TSO E
2002-19  1-23-2002   TSO F
2002-27  2-4-2002    TSO B
2002-47  2-20-2002   TSO B
2002-52  3-4-2002    TSO E
2002-67  3-18-2002   TSO B
2002-78A 4-1-2002    TSO E
2002-79  4-1-2002    TSO B
2002-89  4-1-2002    TSO B
2002-104 5-6-2002    TSO E
2002-105 5-6-2002    TSO E
2002-135 6-17-2002   TSO D
2002-151 7-1-2002    TSO D
2002-178 8-5-2002    TSO B
2002-209 9-18-2002   TSO B
2002-223 10-7-2002   TSO F
2002-242 10-21-2002  TSO E
2002-248 11-4-2002   TSO G
2002-250 11-4-2002   TSO B
2002-277 12-16-2002  TSO D
2002-278 12-16-2002  TSO D
2002-294 12-16-2002  TSO E
2003-10  1-22-2003   TSO B
2003-11  1-22-2003   TSO B
2003-56  3-17-2003   TSO D
2003-57  3-17-2003   TSO D
2003-47  3-23-2003   TSO E
2003-90  4-21-2003   TSO D
2003-185 7-7-2003    TSO E
2003-222 9-15-2003   TSO E
2003-234 10-8-2003   TSO D
2003-223 11-3-2003   TSO E
2003-288 12-1-2003   TSO B
2003-289 12-1-2003   TSO E
2004-12  1-20-2004   TSO B
2004-13  1-20-2004   TSO E
2004-30  2-18-2004   TSO D
2004-65  3-29-2004   TSO B
2004-67  3-29-2004   TSO F
2004-163 7-19-2004   TSO E
2004-164 7-19-2004   TSO B
2004-172 8-2-2004    TSO D
2004-194 9-20-2004   TSO E
2004-194 9-20-2004   TSO B
2004-206 9-20-2004   TSO B
2005-13  1-18-2005   TSO E
2005-14  1-18-2005   TSO E
2004-263 2-23-2005   TSO D
2005-4   2-23-2005   TSO D
2005-39  2-23-2005   TSO E
2007-29  2-21-2007   TSO B
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.  Date Passed           Code Section
                                1420.03 
                                1420.09,
                                1424.02 
1928-113  3-4-1929              1424.04,
                                1428.02,
                                1428.04 
                                1428.08
1940-34   10-21-1940            1070.01
1942-12   4-20-1942             848.01
1943-16   6-7-1943              1070.01
1944-30   11-20-1944            TSO I
1944-37   12-29-1944            1496.01,
                                1496.02
1945-8    5-21-1945             TSO I
1945-21   5-21-1945             TSO I
                                1040.01,
1946-1    1-7-1946              1040.03,
                                1040.04
1947-54   11-6-1947             894.01 
                                894.10
1947-56   12-29-1947            TSO I
1949-8    4-7-1949              TSO I
1949-18   9-1-1949              TSO I
1951-16   3-22-1951             TSO I
1951-17   3-22-1951             TSO I
1951-18   3-22-1951             TSO I
1951-19   5-3-1951              TSO I
1951-20   5-3-1951              TSO I
1951-53   1-17-1952             1424.05
1952-29   6-19-1952             TSO I
1952-40   7-17-1952             TSO I
1952-46   10-2-1952             TSO I
1953-1    2-5-1953              TSO I
1953-10   5-7-1953              TSO I
1953-39   6-18-1953             TSO I
1953-80   11-5-1953             TSO I
1953-92   12-3-1953             TSO I
                                1240.01,
                                1240.04,
                                1242.01,
                                1242.03,
                                1244.02 
1953-110  12-30-1953            1244.04,
                                1246.02,
                                1248.01,
                                1248.03,
                                1248.06 
                                1248.08,
                                1250.01
1953-112  12-30-1953            222.01
1953-106  1-22-1954             TSO I
1954-30   6-21-1954             TSO I
1954-57   8-5-1954              TSO I
1955-16   2-17-1955             1252.02
1954-92   3-3-1955              TSO I
1955-41   5-4-1955              1048.03
1955-47   6-16-1955             TSO I
1955-90   9-1-1955              TSO I
1956-9    1-19-1956             TSO I
1956-90   8-20-1956             298.01
1956-71   11-5-1956             868.02 
                                868.04
                                864.01 
                                864.04,
1958-32   6-16-1958             864.06 
                                864.09,
                                864.99
1959-59   12-29-1959            TSO I
1960-67   9-19-1960             1450.01
1960-83   9-19-1960             240.02
1960-141  11-7-1960             1022.01,
                                1022.02
1961-14   2-6-1961              1426.03,
                                1426.04
1961-37   6-16-1961             1248.09
                                1250.08,
1961-50   7-5-1961              1250.13,
                                1250.16 
                                1250.18
                                1220.01 
                                1220.08,
1962-16   2-19-1962             1220.99,
                                1222.01 
                                1222.04
1962-18   3-29-1962             TSO I
1962-19   4-2-1962              TSO I
                                860.01,
1962-41   4-16-1962             860.03,
                                860.06,
                                860.08
                                1224.01 
1962-67   6-4-1962              1224.04,
                                1226.01 
                                1226.04
                                1042.01,
                                1042.04,
                                1042.05,
1962-69   6-4-1962              1042.09,
                                1042.11 
                                1042.17,
                                1042.19 
                                1042.23
1962-101  8-6-1962              1042.26
1963-15   2-4-1963              1428.09
                                1448.01 
1963-52   5-6-1963              1448.04,
                                1448.06 
                                1448.08
1963-103  7-11-1963             238.01 
                                238.03
1963-59   8-5-1963              TSO I
1963-98   9-16-1963             TSO I
1963-167  12-2-1963             406.06
1964-10   2-3-1964              406.06
1964-23   2-17-1964             TSO D
1964-104  7-6-1964              406.06
1964-116  7-20-1964             TSO D
1964-131  8-17-1964             220.02
1964-138  9-8-1964              TSO D
1964-152  10-19-1964            TSO D
1964-157  11-2-1964             TSO D
1965-5    1-18-1965             TSO E
1965-6    1-18-1965             TSO E
1965-15   2-1-1965              TSO D
1965-33   4-5-1965              406.06
1964-174  4-19-1965             TSO I
1965-76   5-17-1965             406.06
1965-77   5-17-1965             406.06
1965-71   7-19-1965             TSO I
1965-123  8-16-1965             406.06
1965-112  9-7-1965              1248.08
1965-135  9-7-1965              TSO F
1965-133  11-15-1965            TSO I
1965-207  12-20-1965            TSO D
1965-208  12-20-1965            TSO D
1965-157  2-7-1966              TSO I
1966-22   3-7-1966              TSO D
1966-45   3-21-1966             406.06
1966-62   4-18-1966             406.06
1966-100  6-6-1966              TSO E
1966-63   6-20-1966             1242.04
1966-119  8-15-1966             TSO I
1966-173  8-23-1966             TSO D
                                858.01 
1966-166  9-6-1966              858.03,
                                858.05 
                                858.07
1966-182  9-6-1966              TSO B,
                                TSO E
1966-195  9-19-1966             TSO B,
                                TSO E
1966-205  12-19-1966            TSO I
1966-248  12-29-1966            1468.02
1967-11   1-16-1967             TSO D
1967-15   2-6-1967              TSO E
1967-24   3-6-1967              TSO E
1967-35   3-6-1967              406.06
1967-49   4-3-1967              1024.01,
                                1024.02
1967-68   5-1-1967              406.06
1967-88   6-5-1967              TSO A
1967-93   6-5-1967              406.06
1967-70   6-19-1967             TSO I
1967-94   6-19-1967             TSO D
1967-95   7-17-1967             TSO D
1967-99   8-21-1967             TSO I
1967-137  8-21-1967             TSO D
1967-139  8-21-1967             406.06
1967-138  9-18-1967             TSO D
1968-14   2-5-1968              406.06
1968-39   3-4-1968              1428.10
1968-42   3-4-1968              1450.02
1968-50   3-4-1968              1420.09
1968-59   3-18-1968             TSO E
1968-64   3-18-1968             1428.09
1968-65   3-18-1968             1420.02,
                                1428.01
1968-68   3-28-1968             TSO E,
                                TSO F
1968-40   4-1-1968              1428.11
1968-76   4-1-1968              406.06
1968-79   4-1-1968              230.03
1968-109  5-6-1968              1048.04
1968-111  5-20-1968             TSO E
1968-123  6-17-1968             406.06
1968-164  9-3-1968              TSO D
1968-176  9-3-1968              TSO E
1968-211  10-7-1968             298.02
1968-237  11-18-1968            406.06
1968-248  11-18-1968            TSO E
1968-193  12-2-1968             1250.04
1968-212  12-30-1968            TSO I
1968-234  1-20-1969             TSO I
1968-238  1-20-1969             TSO I
1969-15   1-20-1969             TSO E
1969-18   2-17-1969             TSO D
1969-23   2-17-1969             1428.03
1969-50   3-17-1969             406.06
1969-73   4-7-1969              406.06
1969-74   4-7-1969              TSO E
1969-136  7-14-1969             TSO D
1969-152  8-18-1969             TSO F
1969-139  9-8-1969              TSO D
1969-175  9-22-1969             TSO D
1969-188  9-22-1969             1428.12
1969-202  10-6-1969             TSO A
1969-203  10-6-1969             TSO A
1969-163  11-17-1969            1240.99
                                1486.01,
1969-204  11-17-1969            1486.02 
                                1486.07
1970-35   2-16-1970             TSO E
1969-233  3-2-1970              406.06
1970-22   3-2-1970              1440.01
                                818.01 
                                818.04,
1970-6    5-4-1970              818.06 
                                818.08,
                                818.10 
                                818.12
1970-90   5-18-1970             TSO E
1970-103  6-15-1970             406.06
1970-104  6-15-1970             1048.05
1970-126  8-31-1970             TSO F
1970-140  9-8-1970              1042.07
1970-124  9-21-1970             TSO I
1970-148  9-21-1970             TSO D
1970-162  10-19-1970            TSO D
1970-178  11-16-1970            406.06
1970-195  12-28-1970            TSO D
1970-197  12-28-1970            406.06
1971-3    1-18-1971             TSO D
1971-50   3-1-1971              406.06
1971-54   3-1-1971              TSO D
1971-120  6-8-1971              406.06
1971-192  10-18-1971            TSO A
1971-196  10-18-1971            406.06
1971-198  10-18-1971            TSO D
1971-214  12-6-1971             TSO D
1972-8    1-17-1972             TSO A
1972-15   3-20-1972             TSO I
1972-60   4-17-1972             406.06
1972-93   6-19-1972             406.06
1972-82   7-31-1972             TSO I
1972-132  8-21-1972             TSO E,
                                TSO F
1972-109  9-18-1972             406.06
1972-116  9-18-1972             1042.27
1972-155  9-18-1972             406.06
1972-154  10-16-1972            406.06
1972-181  10-16-1972            234.08
1972-80   12-18-1972            TSO D
1973-5    4-2-1973              TSO I
1973-47   4-2-1973              TSO E,
                                TSO F
1973-63   5-7-1973              TSO D
1973-66   5-7-1973              240.04
1973-79   5-21-1973             TSO E,
                                TSO F
1973-82   5-21-1973             TSO D
1973-91   6-25-1973             TSO E,
                                TSO F
1973-135  9-4-1973              TSO F
1973-177  12-17-1973            TSO E,
                                TSO F
1973-176  1-7-1974              TSO D
1974-8    1-21-1974             1040.02
1974-11   2-4-1974              TSO D
1974-45   4-1-1974              240.05
1974-61   5-6-1974              TSO E
1974-76   5-20-1974             TSO B,
                                TSO C
1974-104  7-1-1974              240.06
1974-134  9-3-1974              TSO E,
                                TSO F
1974-182  11-4-1974             240.07
1975-20   2-3-1975              TSO B,
                                TSO D
1975-31   3-3-1975              TSO D
1975-68   4-21-1975             TSO D
1975-71   5-5-1975              TSO D
1975-61   6-2-1975              TSO I
1975-88   6-2-1975              TSO D
1975-140  9-15-1975             TSO C,
                                TSO D
1975-128  10-6-1975             892.01 
                                892.06
1975-158  10-6-1975             TSO C
                                208.01,
1975-174  1-5-1976              208.02,
                                208.04
1975-155  1-19-1976             TSO I
                                220.07 
1976-34   4-5-1976              220.09,
                                220.11,
                                220.13
1975-76   5-17-1976             1424.08
1976-56   5-17-1976             1242.02
1976-124  7-6-1976              1430.06 
                                1430.08
1976-67   8-2-1976              1242.04
1974-92   9-7-1976              TSO D
1976-174  10-4-1976             TSO D
1976-199  11-15-1976            234.05
1976-212  12-6-1976             TSO E,
                                TSO F
1976-202  12-20-1976            1496.03,
                                1496.04
1976-215  2-21-1977             TSO I
1976-217  3-7-1977              TSO D
1977-39   4-4-1977              1448.08
1977-53   4-4-1977              TSO D
1977-31   over veto 4-18-1977   1448.03
1977-69   6-20-1977             TSO I
1977-83   6-20-1977             TSO I
1977-128  6-20-1977             TSO A
1977-84   7-13-1977             TSO I
1977-144  7-13-1977             TSO B
1977-76   8-15-1977             TSO C
1977-127  8-15-1977             TSO I
1977-197  10-3-1977             406.06
1977-198  10-3-1977             TSO D
1977-201  10-3-1977             TSO D
1977-210  10-17-1977            TSO E
1977-139  11-7-1977             TSO I
1977-196  11-7-1977             TSO D
1977-216  11-7-1977             TSO B,
                                TSO C
1977-219  11-7-1977             406.06
1977-218  11-21-1977            TSO B
1978-18   2-21-1978             220.03
1978-37   5-22-1978             1252.02
1978-85   5-22-1978             1042.28
1978-106  5-22-1978             TSO E
1978-156  7-5-1978              TSO A
1978-160  8-7-1978              1256.01 
                                1256.07
1976-218  11-6-1978             TSO D
                                858.01,
1978-226  11-6-1978             858.04,
                                858.99
1978-236  12-4-1978             406.06
1978-261  12-6-1978             TSO E,
                                TSO F
1979-9    1-15-1979             220.12
                                1430.01,
1979-12   2-5-1979              1454.01 
                                1454.14
1979-31   2-5-1979              406.06
1979-50   3-5-1979              406.06
1979-57   3-5-1979              TSO E,
                                TSO F
1979-13   4-2-1979              1250.21
                                1020.01,
                                1020.03,
                                1042.06,
1979-33   5-7-1979              1042.08,
                                1042.10,
                                1042.18,
                                1042.24
1979-96   5-7-1979              TSO A
1978-208  6-5-1979              TSO I
1979-172  8-20-1979             TSO B
1979-112  9-17-1979             1242.01
1979-171  9-17-1979             1250.19
1979-10   11-6-1979             TSO I
1979-158  11-6-1979             TSO I
1980-3    1-7-1980              406.06
1980-8    1-21-1980             220.15
1980-2    2-4-1980              TSO D
1980-44   5-5-1980              406.06
1980-144  10-6-1980             406.06
1980-133  11-17-1980            TSO G
1980-134  11-17-1980            TSO G
                                1042.02,
                                1046.01 
1980-138  4-6-1981              1046.03,
                                1046.05,
                                1046.07 
                                1046.11
1981-36   4-6-1981              230.02
1981-20   5-18-1981             TSO G
                                820.01,
1981-69   6-22-1981             820.03 
                                820.09,
                                820.99
1981-56   7-6-1981              406.06
1981-59   7-6-1981              1426.06
1981-87   7-6-1981              1406.06,
                                1406.07
                                634.01 
                                634.03,
                                634.05 
1981-88   8-3-1981              634.07,
                                634.09,
                                 
                                634.11 
                                634.24
1981-119  9-8-1981              406.06
1982-153  1-17-1982             TSO I
1982-25   3-1-1982              TSO E
                                820.01,
1982-53   5-3-1982              820.02,
                                820.06
1982-133  10-4-1982             TSO D
                                804.01,
1982-87   11-1-1982             804.05,
                                804.99
1982-52   11-15-1982            1242.02
1982-161  1-17-1983             406.06
                                804.02,
1983-14   2-7-1983              804.03,
                                804.06,
                                804.07
1983-32   3-7-1983              TSO E
1983-66   5-2-1983              TSO E
1983-124  9-6-1983              TSO C
1983-12   11-8-1983             TSO I
1983-13   11-8-1983             TSO I
1984-17   3-5-1984              406.06
1984-42   5-21-1984             1252.03
1984-77   6-18-1984             1250.14
1984-91   6-18-1984             406.06
1984-92   6-18-1984             406.06
1984-111  7-12-1984             TSO B
1984-51   8-6-1984              1250.20
1984-63B  8-6-1984              TSO C
1984-133  9-17-1984             1426.07
1984-127  10-1-1984             1466.01
1984-129  10-15-1984            1468.01,
                                1468.03
1984-132  10-15-1984            TSO C
1984-97   11-6-1984             TSO I
1984-182  12-3-1984             240.03
1984-185  12-3-1984             TSO B
1984-172  12-17-1984            TSO D
1985-3    1-7-1985              TSO G
1984-63A  2-4-1985              TSO C
1985-22   3-18-1985             TSO D
1985-48   4-1-1985              1242.02
1985-49   5-6-1985              TSO D
1985-50   5-6-1985              TSO D
1984-86   5-7-1985              TSO I
1985-44   5-20-1985             1242.02
1985-70   6-3-1985              1250.07
1985-146  9-3-1985              1450.03
1985-166  10-7-1985             406.06
                                1074.01,
                                1074.02,
1985-169  1-6-1986              1074.07 
                                1074.09,
                                1074.99
1986-12   3-3-1986              282.01 
                                282.03
1986-48   3-17-1986             1466.02
1985-190  7-7-1986              406.06
1986-139  10-6-1986             1250.23
1986-96   11-4-1986             TSO I
1986-182  11-17-1986            406.06
1986-200  12-15-1986            406.06
1986-180  1-19-1987             1072.02 
                                1072.05
1987-29   2-2-1987              1242.05
1987-57   4-6-1987              406.06
1987-82   4-20-1987             240.11
1987-83   4-20-1987             240.12
1987-108  6-15-1987             618.18
1987-111  6-15-1987             1250.05
                                836.01 
1986-198  8-17-1987             836.04,
                                836.99
1987-191  9-8-1987              406.06
1987-207  10-5-1987             1428.01
                                1424.06,
1987-211  10-5-1987             1430.02,
                                1430.03
1987-205  11-2-1987             1248.02
1987-164  11-3-1987             TSO I
1987-198  11-3-1987             TSO I
1987-147  11-3-1987             TSO I
1987-148  11-3-1987             TSO I
1987-245  12-7-1987             406.06
1987-248  12-7-1987             1248.05
1987-255  12-21-1987            406.06
1987-246  2-1-1988              TSO C
1988-17   2-1-1988              234.07
1988-10   3-7-1988              660.20
1988-41   3-21-1988             204.01
1988-45   4-4-1988              406.06
1988-58   5-16-1988             234.02
1988-82   6-6-1988              406.06
1988-120  7-18-1988             1042.25
1988-72   8-1-1988              1250.25
1988-78   8-1-1988              TSO B,
                                TSO C
1988-138  8-2-1988              406.06
1988-139  8-2-1988              406.06
1988-168  9-6-1988              406.06
1988-178  10-3-1988             406.06
                                1610.01,
                                1610.03 
                                1610.06,
                                1610.08,
                                1610.10 
                                1610.13,
                                1610.99,
                                1620.01,
1988-192  10-3-1988             1620.02,
                                1630.01 
                                1630.09,
                                1630.99,
                                1650.01 
                                1650.03,
                                1660.01,
                                1660.02,
                                1660.06 
                                1660.09
1988-201  11-7-1988             406.06
1988-121  11-8-1988             TSO I
1988-205  12-5-1988             406.06
1988-206  12-5-1988             406.06
1988-229  12-5-1988             220.16
1988-245  12-19-1988            406.06
1988-246  12-19-1988            406.06
                                1426.01,
1988-235  1-3-1989              1426.02,
                                1486.06
1989-2    2-6-1989              TSO I
1989-71   4-17-1989             1630.02
1989-72   4-17-1989             1610.09
1989-74   4-17-1989             1660.03 
                                1660.05
1989-75   4-17-1989             1442.01 
                                1442.03
1989-76   4-17-1989             1424.10
1989-77   4-17-1989             1610.07
1989-110  5-15-1989             406.06
1989-126  6-5-1989              294.01
1989-194  7-31-1989             230.05
1989-199  7-31-1989             234.06
1989-82   8-7-1989              660.086,
                                660.15
1989-134  8-9-1989              452.09
1989-57   9-18-1989             840.01
1989-233  9-18-1989             406.06
1989-219  10-2-1989             406.06
                                402.43,
                                404.01,
                                404.05,
                                404.09,
                                406.01 
                                406.05,
                                408.03,
                                412.06,
                                412.07,
                                432.22,
                                432.42,
                                438.31,
1989-229  10-2-1989             440.12 
                                440.14,
                                444.01 
                                444.08,
                                446.01 
                                446.04,
                                446.06,
                                446.07,
                                452.09,
                                452.12 
                                452.14,
                                474.04,
                                474.11,
                                660.075
1989-248  10-16-1989            220.10
1989-270  10-16-1989            TSO E
1989-282  11-6-1989             1640.01 
                                1640.05
1989-267  11-20-1989            TSO E
1989-305  12-4-1989             1424.07
1989-307  12-18-1989            1420.01
1989-308  2-19-1990             TSO A
1990-21   2-19-1990             406.06
1990-34   2-19-1990             804.04
1990-32   3-19-1990             1488.01 
                                1488.05
1990-63   3-19-1990             234.10
                                408.02,
                                416.06,
1990-64   3-19-1990             432.37,
                                436.08,
                                436.09
1990-126  6-4-1990              406.06
1990-106  6-18-1990             TSO C
1990-109  6-18-1990             406.06
1990-177  7-16-1990             TSO E
1990-156  8-6-1990              1242.06
1990-190  8-6-1990              240.13
                                1026.01,
1990-27   9-4-1990              1026.03 
                                1026.07
1990-176  9-4-1990              TSO I
1990-222  9-4-1990              TSO E
1991-8    1-21-1991             414.10
1991-21   2-4-1991              406.06
1991-47   3-18-1991             TSO E
                                Repealed
                                1250.10, Added
                                1250.02,
1991-19   4-1-1991              1250.03,
                                1250.09,
                                1250.12,
                                1250.15
1991-64   4-15-1991             TSO E
1991-70   4-29-1991             TSO E
1991-91   5-20-1991             TSO E
1991-184  9-16-1991             TSO E
1991-209  10-21-1991            TSO E
1991-193  11-4-1991             446.05,
                                634.04
1991-214  11-4-1991             1046.04
                                1044.01 
                                1044.05,
                                1044.055,
                                1044.06,
                                1044.07,
                                1044.073,
                                1044.076,
                                1044.08 
                                1044.10,
                                1044.12 
                                1044.14,
                                1044.145,
                                1044.15 
                                1044.20,
                                1044.203,
                                1044.206,
1991-239  12-2-1991             1044.209,
                                1044.21,
                                1044.213,
                                1044.216,
                                1044.219,
                                1044.22,
                                1044.223,
                                1044.23 
                                1044.30,
                                1044.305,
                                1044.31 
                                1044.35,
                                1044.353,
                                1044.356,
                                1044.36 
                                1044.47,
                                1044.99
1991-195  1-6-1992              406.06
1992-2    1-6-1992              406.06
                                Repealed
1991-219  2-17-1992             868.05, Added
                                868.06
1992-26   2-17-1992             220.01
1992-20   3-2-1992              TSO I
1992-30   3-2-1992              406.06
1991-177  5-4-1992              846.99
1992-116  8-17-1992             240.015
1992-145  8-17-1992             406.06
1992-162  9-21-1992             1448.05
1992-161  11-2-1992             TSO C
1992-182  1-4-1993              406.06
1993-14   2-15-1993             406.06
1993-29   3-15-1993             406.06
                                Repealed
1993-18   4-6-1993              220.14; Added
                                660.12
1993-66   5-3-1993              1485.01
1993-67   5-3-1993              406.06
1993-14   5-17-1993             666.01
1993-42   5-17-1993             666.18
1993-43   5-17-1993             666.19
1993-44   5-17-1993             666.01
1993-82   6-7-1993              1256.03
1993-88   8-30-1993             TSO I
1993-89   8-30-1993             TSO I
1993-115  8-30-1993             TSO I
1993-116  8-30-1993             TSO I
1993-90   9-20-1993             618.16
1993-193  12-6-1993             406.06
1993-213  12-6-1993             406.06
1993-216  12-6-1993             1250.06
1994-35   4-4-1994              1042.29
1994-57   4-20-1994             406.06
1994-62   5-2-1994              406.06
1994-69   5-2-1994              406.06
1994-93   8-15-1994             Repealed
                                1450.04
1994-126  8-15-1994             1424.01
1994-129  8-15-1994             234.12
1994-104  8-29-1994             TSO I
1994-177  11-7-1994             1044.05
1994-171  12-5-1994             452.15
1994-186  1-3-1995              1252.01
1995-1    1-3-1995              406.06
1995-18   1-30-1995             Ch. 260
1995-4    2-20-1995             TSO I
1995-22   3-20-1995             1046.04
1995-67   3-20-1995             TSO E
1995-41   4-3-1995              660.12
1995-51   4-3-1995              1042.025
1995-80   4-17-1995             Ch. 240
1994-187  5-15-1995             618.16
1995-123  6-5-1995              1250.02
1995-115  7-17-1995             452.03
1995-156  9-5-1995              1240.03
1995-186  9-5-1995              406.06
1995-187  9-5-1995              406.06
1995-188  9-5-1995              1248.04
1995-130  9-18-1995             406.06
1995-205  10-2-1995             406.06
1995-203  11-6-1995             1048.047
1995-204  11-6-1995             1048.043
1995-240  11-20-1995            TSO A
1995-241  12-18-1995            1070.03
1995-264  1-15-1996             TSO I
1995-265  1-15-1996             642.04
1995-266  1-15-1996             404.08
1995-262  2-5-1996              TSO C
1996-8    2-5-1996              220.05
1996-11   2-21-1996             406.06
1996-12   2-21-1996             406.06
1996-38   2-21-1996             TSO G
1996-39   2-21-1996             TSO G
                                1064.01 
1996-50   3-4-1996              1064.15,
                                1064.99
1995-279  4-1-1996              406.06
1996-76   4-15-1996             1650.02
1996-87   5-6-1986              Repealed
                                1420.10
1996-126  7-17-1996             1250.22
1996-146  7-17-1996             406.06
1996-117  8-5-1996              TSO I
1996-145  8-5-1996              1428.09
1996-160  8-5-1996              TSO A
1996-169  8-19-1996             TSO I
1996-168  9-16-1996             Repealed
                                1068.01
1996-188  9-16-1996             636.203,
                                636.207
1996-176  10-21-1996            406.06
1996-191  10-21-1996            406.06
1996-192  10-21-1996            406.06
1996-185  11-4-1996             TSO D
                                860.02,
                                860.07,
1996-215  11-18-1996            1430.04,
                                1430.05,
                                1430.09
1996-234  1-6-1997              234.12
1997-51   4-7-1997              TSO E
1997-160  8-4-1997              TSO E
1997-166  8-4-1997              220.105
1997-171  8-4-1997              406.06
1997-186  8-18-1997             234.13
1997-173  9-2-1997              TSO I
1997-174  9-2-1997              TSO I
1997-206  9-15-1997             230.08
1997-237  11-3-1997             TSO A
1997-238  11-3-1997             406.06
1997-240  11-3-1997             1442.04 
                                1442.07
1997-243  11-3-1997             1424.12
1997-123  12-15-1997            1044.33,
                                1046.04
1997-266  12-15-1997            1046.12
1998-2    1-5-1998              Repeals
                                230.07
1998-16   1-20-1998             1046.04
                                1044.02,
                                1044.05,
1998-21   2-2-1998              1044.11,
                                1044.226,
                                1044.31
1998-22   2-2-1998              1046.04,
                                1046.045
1998-39   2-17-1998             406.06
1998-40   2-17-1998             406.06
1998-41   2-17-1998             406.06
1998-54   3-16-1998             406.06
1998-55   3-16-1998             406.06
                                Ch. 260,
                                260.01 
                                260.06,
                                260.08,
1998-25   5-18-1998             260.10,
                                260.14,
                                260.15,
                                260.17 
                                260.20,
                                260.99
1998-93   5-18-1998             648.04
1998-112  6-15-1998             1064.15
                                Repealed
1998-119  7-6-1998              1074.03, Added
                                1074.04 
                                1074.06
1998-132  7-20-1998             406.06
1998-144  8-17-1998             406.06
1998-127  8-31-1998             TSO I
1998-157  8-31-1998             TSO I
1998-181  9-24-1998             624.03
1998-191  10-5-1998             406.06
1998-233  12-7-1998             1610.02
1999-38   3-29-1999             406.06
1999-47   3-29-1999             240.01
1999-54   4-5-1999              440.15
1999-15   4-19-1999             TSO A
1999-64   4-19-1999             260.02
1999-84   5-17-1999             406.06
1999-110  6-7-1999              406.06
1999-111  6-7-1999              406.06
1999-131  7-6-1999              406.06
1999-132  7-6-1999              406.06
1999-133  7-6-1999              406.06
1999-139  7-19-1999             TSO B
1999-140  7-19-1999             TSO B
1999-146  7-19-1999             TSO B
1999-113  8-16-1999             TSO I
1999-159  8-16-1999             406.06
1999-160  9-21-1999             1072.01
1999-179  9-21-1999             TSO A
1999-212  11-1-1999             220.17
1999-243  12-20-1999            TSO E
1999-245  12-20-1999            234.01,
                                234.03
1999-251  12-20-1999            1202.02
2000-22   2-7-2000              260.13
2000-26   2-7-2000              1202.01
2000-61   3-20-2000             252.01
2000-74   4-3-2000              260.09
2000-113  5-15-2000             406.06
2000-149  6-5-2000              298.03
                                Repealed
                                1482.03 
                                1482.06, Added
2000-193  7-5-2000              1482.065,
                                1482.07,
                                1482.08,
                                1482.10
2000-194  7-5-2000              406.06
2000-186  7-12-2000             TSO A
2000-121  7-17-2000             TSO I
2000-122  7-17-2000             1240.02
2000-123  7-17-2000             1242.02
2000-124  7-17-2000             1252.02
2000-164  7-17-2000             Ch. 1050
2000-220  8-21-2000             TSO H
2000-229  9-5-2000              206.01
2000-233  9-5-2000              TSO A
2000-236  9-5-2000              260.11
2000-231  10-2-2000             220.04
2000-282  10-16-2000            260.07
2000-268  11-6-2000             234.04
2000-319  11-20-2000            260.12
2000-325  11-20-2000            252.02
2000-326  11-20-2000            252.03
                                242.01 
2000-339  12-18-2000            242.03,
                                242.035
2000-349  12-18-2000            240.017
2000-350  12-18-2000            244.01 
                                244.05
2000-357  12-18-2000            406.06
2001-12   1-16-2001             Repealed
                                242.04
2001-17   2-5-2001              260.06
2001-29   2-5-2001              260.11
2001-30   2-5-2001              234.05
2001-49   2-19-2001             406.06
2001-94   4-2-2001              1046.07 
                                1046.09
2001-126  5-7-2001              260.06
2001-127  5-7-2001              244.01
2001-130  5-7-2001              1044.05
2001-47   5-21-2001             406.06
                                240.013,
                                242.03,
                                244.02,
2001-123  6-4-2001              252.01,
                                256.01,
                                618.01,
                                1420.02
2001-148  7-2-2001              1072.01 
                                1072.05
2001-185  7-16-2001             260.05
2001-248  10-15-2001            TSO A
2001-249  10-15-2001            1420.025
2001-251  10-15-2001            406.06
2001-274  11-19-2001            406.06
                                Added
2001-237  12-17-2001            260.165, Repealed
                                260.16
2001-297  12-17-2001            406.06
2002-7    1-7-2002              240.15
2002-4    1-23-2002             TSO B
2002-20   1-23-2002             242.01
2002-32   2-4-2002              1044.31,
                                1046.04
                                1226.04,
2002-15   3-4-2002              1242.01,
                                1252.01,
                                1256.03
2002-61   4-1-2002              402.05
2002-62   4-1-2002              432.14
                                474.01,
                                474.02,
2002-63   4-1-2002              474.04 
                                474.06,
                                474.08
2002-58   4-15-2002             406.06
2002-106  5-6-2002              260.05,
                                260.07
2002-140  6-17-2002             406.06
2002-102  7-1-2002              260.06
2002-160  8-19-2002             206.01
2002-203  9-18-2002             1044.356
2002-205  9-18-2002             244.01
2002-208  9-18-2002             TSO B
2002-217  9-18-2002             406.06
                                869.01 
2002-175  10-7-2002             869.22,
                                869.99
2002-219  10-7-2002             260.04
2002-224  10-7-2002             1046.04,
                                1046.07
2002-57   11-4-2002             1250.05
2002-247  11-4-2002             406.06
2002-265  11-18-2002            440.16
2002-275  12-2-2002             234.05
2002-279  12-16-2002            204.01
2002-287  12-16-2002            406.06
2003-12   1-22-2003             240.01
2003-13   1-22-2003             406.06
2003-5    2-3-2003              204.01,
                                260.115
2003-62   3-17-2003             406.06
2003-75   4-7-2003              254.01
2003-104  5-5-2003              257.02
2003-126  5-19-2003             1046.04,
                                1046.065
2003-136  6-16-2003             260.165
2003-187  7-7-2003              Ch. 1042
2003-194  7-21-2003             406.06
2003-173  8-4-2003              1070.04
2003-203  9-15-2003             260.18
2003-215A 9-15-2003             260.115
2003-253  10-20-2003            294.02
2003-290  12-1-2003             240.01
                                1404.01 
2003-298  12-15-2003            1404.05,
                                1404.99
2004-3    1-20-2004             220.07
2004-22   2-2-2004              260.12
2004-25   2-2-2004              252.03
2004-38   2-18-2004             1402.01,
                                1406.01
2004-39   2-18-2004             1424.11
2004-34   3-1-2004              260.13
                                1402.05,
2004-66   3-29-2004             1404.04,
                                1406.04
2004-99   5-3-2004              1660.095
2004-97   5-17-2004             234.03
2004-98   6-7-2004              260.13
2004-112  6-7-2004              1428.09
2004-171  8-15-2005             Repealed
                                618.21
2004-149  8-16-2004             TSO I
                                618.12,
2002-257  10-18-2004            618.125,
                                672.01
2004-238  11-1-2004             260.05
2004-243  11-1-2004             260.22
2004-212  11-15-2004            1046.04
2004-225  11-15-2004            220.01
2004-270  12-6-2004             234.06
2004-271  12-6-2004             1424.11
2004-272  12-20-2004            234.14
2005-6    1-18-2005             618.126
2005-34   2-23-2005             TSO E
2005-35   2-23-2005             406.06
2005-36   2-23-2005             1424.11
                                1044.05,
2005-74   3-21-2005             1044.41,
                                1046.045
2005-91   4-18-2005             406.06
2005-92   4-18-2005             TSO B
2005-93   4-18-2005             TSO E
2005-76   5-2-2005              260.23
005-113   5-16-2005             TSO E
2005-118  5-16-2005             TSO B
2005-125  5-16-2005             TSO E
2005-80   6-6-2005              TSO B
2005-81   6-6-2005              TSO B
2005-50   6-7-2005              242.06
2005-79   6-7-2005              TSO C
2005-133  6-7-2005              TSO F
2005-127  6-20-2005             TSO E
                                Repealed
                                1048.01,
                                1048.02,
                                1426.05, Added or Amended
                                820.02 
                                820.06,
                                820.08,
                                836.01 
                                836.04,
                                860.01 
                                860.07,
                                1020.01,
                                1020.03,
                                1022.01,
                                1024.01,
                                1026.06,
                                1026.07,
                                1042.025,
                                1042.03,
                                1042.09,
                                1042.15,
                                1042.16,
                                1042.18,
                                1042.22,
                                1042.24,
                                1042.99,
                                1044.01,
2005-152  6-20-2005             1044.02,
                                1044.05,
                                1044.13,
                                1044.203,
                                1044.226,
                                1046.04,
                                1046.045,
                                1048.04,
                                1424.01,
                                1424.05 
                                1424.07,
                                1424.10 
                                1424.12,
                                1426.01 
                                1426.04,
                                1430.01 
                                1430.04,
                                1430.08,
                                1430.09,
                                1442.08,
                                1448.06,
                                1448.08,
                                1454.02,
                                1454.08 
                                1454.10,
                                1454.14,
                                1482.07,
                                1482.10
2005-153  6-20-2005             TSO E
2005-154  6-20-2005             TSO A
2005-167  7-18-2005             260.115
2005-169  7-18-2005             234.14
2005-181  8-1-2005              TSO E
2004-171  8-15-2005             Repealed Ch. 1422
2005-180  8-15-2005             TSO E
2005-201  8-15-2005             TSO E
2005-207  9-19-2005             234.06
2005-208  9-19-2005             TSO E
2005-209  9-19-2005             TSO B
2005-210  9-19-2005             TSO E
2005-223  10-5-2005             234.10
2005-229  10-5-2005             242.07
2005-233  10-17-2005            TSO D
2005-236  10-17-2005            TSO E
                                630.01,
2005-202A 11-7-2005             630.021,
                                630.022
2005-222  11-7-2005             240.01
2005-240  11-7-2005             1420.021
2005-237  11-21-2005            1430.05,
                                1430.09
2005-260  11-21-2005            TSO F
2005-270  12-5-2005             TSO D
2005-274  12-5-2005             TSO D
2005-280  12-19-2005            618.127
2005-283  12-19-2005            618.126
2005-285  12-19-2005            TSO E
2005-286  12-19-2005            TSO E
2005-287  12-19-2005            TSO B
2006-5    1-17-2006             TSO F
2006-6    1-17-2006             TSO F
2006-7    1-17-2006             1202.02
2006-2    2-6-2006              1046.04
2006-25   2-6-2006              1046.04
2006-26   2-6-2006              TSO B,
                                TSO E
2006-32   2-21-2006             244.01 
                                244.05
2006-34   2-21-2006             TSO D
2006-35   2-21-2006             TSO B
2006-49   3-6-2006              Added
                                234.07
2006-54   3-20-2006             TSO F
2006-56   3-20-2006             TSO E
2005-219  4-3-2006              TSO I
2005-220  4-3-2006              TSO I
2006-81   4-17-2006             406.06
2006-83   4-17-2006             240.13
2006-92   5-1-2006              234.07
2006-93   5-1-2006              TSO E
2006-94   5-1-2006              TSO B
2006-53   5-15-2006             220.04
2006-104  5-15-2006             TSO E
                                1404.01 
                                1404.06,
2006-105  5-15-2006             1404.99,
                                1406.06,
                                1406.07,
                                1424.11
2006-111  5-15-2006             TSO B,
                                TSO E
                                1420.01,
                                1420.02,
2006-134  6-5-2006              1420.021,
                                1420.025,
                                1420.03 
                                1420.09
2006-90   6-19-2006             260.25
2006-143  6-19-2006             244.01 
                                244.08
2006-144  6-19-2006             240.01
2006-176  7-17-2006             TSO B
2006-185  8-7-2006              TSO E
2006-186  8-7-2006              TSO E
2006-187  8-7-2006              TSO E
2006-188  8-7-2006              TSO E
2006-189  8-7-2006              TSO E
2006-190  8-7-2006              TSO E
2006-191  8-7-2006              TSO B
2006-206  8-21-2006             TSO C
2006-211  8-21-2006             TSO B
2006-238  10-3-2006             406.06
2006-234  10-16-2006            TSO C
2006-255  10-16-2006            TSO C
2006-247  11-6-2006             1424.11,
                                1482.10
2006-259  11-6-2006             TSO E
2006-275  11-20-2006            406.06
2006-278  11-20-2006            TSO E
2006-161  12-4-2006             1046.04
2006-289  12-18-2006            TSO E
2006-293  12-18-2006            TSO E
                                846.01 
2006-294  12-18-2006            846.07,
                                846.99
2006-311  12-18-2006            260.07
2007-8    1-18-2007             260.12
2007-14   1-18-2007             406.06
2007-36   2-21-2007             TSO B
2007-61   3-19-2007             TSO D
2007-68   3-19-2007             406.06
2007-70   3-19-2007             TSO E
2007-74   4-16-2007             260.06
2007-77   4-16-2007             1074.05
2007-78   4-16-2007             TSO B
2007-102  4-16-2007             1046.04
2007-112  5-7-2007              TSO B
2007-122  5-7-2007              TSO E
2007-123  5-7-2007              TSO B
                                808.01 
2007-106  5-21-2007             808.17,
                                808.99
2007-142  5-21-2007             260.08
2007-162  6-18-2007             TSO B
2007-167  7-2-2007              234.15
2007-172  7-16-2007             242.01
2007-192  8-6-2007              234.03
2007-197  8-20-2007             1660.10
2007-199  8-20-2007             1424.11
2007-216  9-17-2007             666.22
2007-224  9-17-2007             234.16
2007-196  10-10-2007            1482.09
                                890.01 
                                890.13,
2007-217  10-15-2007            890.15 
                                890.22,
                                890.99
2007-283  12-3-2007             234.05
2007-284  12-3-2007             260.11
2007-287  12-3-2007             406.06
2007-298  12-13-2007            257.01 
                                257.03
2007-297  12-17-2007            220.18
2007-300  12-17-2007            256.01 
                                256.03
2007-301  12-17-2007            259.01 
                                259.03
2007-305  12-17-2007            255.01 
                                255.05
2008-15   1-22-2008             TSO E
2008-16   1-22-2008             TSO B
2008-19   2-4-2008              406.06
2008-39   2-19-2008             660.075
2008-55   3-17-2008             240.01
2008-59   3-17-2008             406.06
2008-60   3-17-2008             TSO E
                                1257.01 
2008-29   4-7-2008              1257.17,
                                1257.99
2008-82   4-7-2008              TSO B
2008-83   4-7-2008              TSO B
                                1250.22,
2008-66   5-5-2008              1404.06,
                                1424.11,
                                1428.09
2008-102  5-5-2008              TSO B
2008-126  6-2-2008              TSO B
2008-128  6-2-2008              TSO E
2008-136  6-2-2008              1482.10
2008-144  6-2-2008              234.03
2008-149  6-16-2008             TSO D
2008-164  6-16-2008             TSO B
2008-202  7-21-2008             TSO F
2008-203  7-21-2008             244.01
2008-105  8-4-2008              259.02
2008-216  8-4-2008              TSO D
2008-201  8-18-2008             TSO I
2008-245  9-15-2008             TSO E
2008-249  9-15-2008             TSO E
2008-256  9-15-2008             TSO E
2008-274  10-6-2008             TSO D
2008-288  10-6-2008             259.02
                                846.01,
2008-314  11-17-2008            846.03,
                                846.05,
                                846.06
2009-05   1-5-2009              TSO B
2009-06   1-5-2009              TSO B
2009-30   2-2-2009              260.13
2009-31   2-2-2009              242.06
2009-33   2-2-2009              TSO B
2009-08   2-17-2009             TSO F
2009-36   2-17-2009             TSO E
2009-41   2-17-2009             TSO E
2009-46   2-17-2009             TSO B
2009-47   2-17-2009             TSO B
2009-56   3-2-2009              TSO B
2009-115  5-4-2009              TSO B
2009-106  5-18-2009             TSO F
2009-131  5-18-2009             TSO B
2009-132  5-18-2009             TSO B
2009-108  6-1-2009              260.08,
                                260.13
2009-152  6-15-2009             TSO B
2009-174  7-6-2009              234.07
2009-193  8-3-2009              TSO B
2009-196  8-3-2009              TSO B
2009-201  8-17-2009             TSO B
2009-197  8-31-2009             TSO I
2009-242  9-21-2009             TSO B
2009-245  10-5-2009             1046.04
2009-248  10-5-2009             TSO B
2009-255  10-19-2009            TSO E
2009-256  10-19-2009            TSO E
2009-263  11-2-2009             TSO B
2009-269  11-2-2009             TSO E
                                1424.11,
2009-272  11-16-2009            1424.99,
                                1432.99
2010-3    1-19-2010             260.26
2010-25   1-19-2010             TSO B
2010-27   1-19-2010             260.12
2010-30   1-19-2010             TSO B
2010-31   2-1-2010              TSO D
2010-43   2-16-2010             260.25
2010-44   2-16-2010             260.11
2010-45   2-16-2010             260.13
2010-41   3-15-2010             TSO B
2010-59   3-15-2010             TSO F
2010-63   3-15-2010             TSO E
                                1044.02,
                                1044.05,
                                1044.055,
                                1044.09,
                                1044.11,
                                1044.16,
                                1044.18 
                                1044.20,
                                1044.203,
                                1044.206,
                                1044.209,
2010-89   4-19-2010             1044.213,
                                1044.219,
                                1044.22,
                                1044.26,
                                1044.27,
                                1044.31 
                                1044.33,
                                1044.355,
                                1044.356,
                                1044.38,
                                1044.39,
                                1044.41,
                                1044.99
2010-90   4-19-2010             TSO B
2010-106  5-3-2010              TSO B
2010-107  5-3-2010              TSO E
2010-116  5-17-2010             246.01,
                                246.02
                                249.01,
2010-117  5-17-2010             249.02,
                                249.04
                                248.01 
2010-118  5-17-2010             248.03,
                                248.05
2010-119  5-17-2010             252.01 
                                252.03
2010-120  5-17-2010             244.02
2010-126  5-17-2010             TSO E
2010-134  6-7-2010              1046.04
2010-128  6-21-2010             1424.99
2010-152  6-21-2010             249.03,
                                249.04
2010-154  6-21-2010             TSO E
2010-201  8-16-2010             TSO B
2010-202  8-16-2010             TSO B
2010-203  8-16-2010             TSO B
2010-213  9-13-2010             TSO B
2010-214  9-13-2010             TSO B
2010-195  9-20-2010             1462.01 
                                1462.06
2010-221  10-4-2010             TSO E
2010-228  10-18-2010            TSO E
2010-238  10-18-2010            TSO F
2010-244  11-1-2010             260.11
2010-248  11-15-2010            1046.04
2010-280  12-20-2010            260.13
2010-281  12-20-2010            260.05
2011-1    1-3-2011              TSO F
                                1046.01,
                                1046.04,
                                1046.041,
                                1046.045,
2011-13   1-18-2011             1046.06,
                                1046.065,
                                1046.07 
                                1046.09,
                                1046.12
2011-23   1-18-2011             TSO F
2011-24   1-18-2011             TSO E
2011-35   3-7-2011              240.01
2011-39   3-7-2011              TSO B
2011-76   5-2-2011              234.07
2011-79   5-2-2011              406.06
2011-81   5-2-2011              258.04
2011-52   5-16-2011             260.18
2011-93   5-16-2011             406.06
2011-112  6-20-2011             1430.07
2011-136  7-18-2011             TSO B
2011-137  7-18-2011             TSO B
2011-138  7-18-2011             TSO B
2011-139  7-18-2011             TSO B
2011-154  8-15-2011             1254.03
2011-173  8-30-2011             TSO I
2011-111  9-7-2011              1489.01 
                                1489.08
2011-153  9-19-2011             206.01
2011-187  9-19-2011             1044.05
2011-207  11-7-2011             1046.04
2011-208  11-7-2011             260.23
2011-217  11-7-2011             TSO B
2011-223  11-21-2011            TSO C
2011-225  11-21-2011            TSO E
2011-241  12-19-2011            406.06
2011-250  12-19-2011            TSO B
2012-10   1-17-2012             1046.04
2012-17   1-17-2012             TSO B
2012-18   1-17-2012             TSO B
2012-01   2-21-2012             1402.01
2012-2    2-21-2012             1424.11
                                260.02,
2012-46   2-21-2012             260.07 
                                260.09
2012-54   3-5-2012              254.02
                                260.02,
2012-61   3-5-2012              260.07 
                                260.09
2012-62   3-19-2012             242.01
2012-48   4-2-2012              1248.08
2012-109  4-16-2012             894.03
2012-117  5-7-2012              256.02
                                660.05,
                                1022.01,
                                1026.01 
2012-118  5-7-2012              1026.03,
                                1026.06,
                                1026.07,
                                1026.99,
                                1428.11
2012-125  5-7-2012              406.06
2012-127  5-7-2012              234.04
2012-137  5-21-2012             406.06
2012-144  5-21-2012             238.05
2012-197  7-16-2012             238.04
2012-201  8-20-2012             260.05
                                890.03,
2012-202  8-20-2012             890.09,
                                890.10
2012-203  8-20-2012             230.10
2012-214  8-20-2012             TSO B
2012-218  8-20-2012             406.06
2012-241  9-19-2012             TSO B
2012-242  9-19-2012             TSO B
2012-243  9-19-2012             234.10
2012-247  9-19-2012             234.07
2012-232  10-1-2012             TSO D
2012-249  10-1-2012             234.015
2012-233  10-15-2012            TSO I
2012-256  10-15-2012            TSO B
2012-271  11-5-2012             TSO D
2012-272  11-5-2012             TSO D
                                1257.01 
2012-255  12-3-2012             1257.17,
                                1257.99
2012-294  12-17-2012            TSO F
2012-295  12-17-2012            TSO F
2013-11   2-4-2013              TSO I
                                1060.01 
2013-46   3-18-2013             1060.15,
                                1060.99
2013-90   6-3-2013              234.04
                                258.01 
2013-91   6-3-2013              258.06,
                                258.99
2013-122  7-1-2013              890.23
2013-132  7-1-2013              406.06
2013-154  7-15-2013             406.06
2013-196  9-16-2013             TSO E
2013-256  12-2-2013             259.02,
                                259.03
2013-248  12-16-2013            234.03
2013-258  12-16-2013            259.02,
                                259.03
2014-1    1-6-2014              TSO D
2014-4    1-21-2014             260.12
2014-7    1-21-2014             406.06
2014-3    2-3-2014              TSO I
2014-60   3-17-2014             406.06
2014-37   4-7-2014              260.02
2014-38   4-7-2014              260.13
2014-91   4-21-2014             406.06
2014-87   5-5-2014              260.02
2014-115  5-19-2014             TSO E
2014-123  5-19-2014             TSO F
2014-108  6-16-2014             1046.04
2014-182A 9-15-2014             TSO E
2014-184  9-15-2014             234.12
2014-186  9-15-2014             406.06
2014-213  10-6-2014             TSO B
2014-183  10-20-2014            Repealed 234.09
2014-220  10-20-2014            1660.10
2014-208  11-3-2014             254.03
2014-207  11-17-2014            Adopting Ordinance
2014-240  11-17-2014            255.03,
                                255.04
2014-241  11-17-2014            256.01,
                                256.02
2014-242  11-17-2014            258.03,
                                258.05
2014-243  11-17-2014            259.02,
                                259.03
2014-245  11-17-2014            298.03
2014-244  12-15-2014            260.115
2014-268  12-15-2014            Repealed 230.04, Amended
                                246.02
2014-269  1-20-2015             230.04
2015-15   2-18-2015             1660.07
2015-31   4-20-2015             1044.05
2015-40   3-16-2015             TSO B
2015-76   4-6-2015              TSO B
2015-96A  6-1-2015              1046.041
2015-101  5-18-2015             TSO E
2015-102  5-18-2015             TSO E
2015-125  7-6-2015              234.07
2015-126  7-6-2015              1424.13,
                                1424.14
2015-139  6-15-2015             TSO B
2015-148  7-6-2015              260.02
2015-163  7-20-2015             240.16
2015-164  7-20-2015             452.09
2015-190  10-5-2015             1046.04
                                891.01 
2015-212  11-2-2015             891.26,
                                891.99
2015-214  10-5-2015             260.13
2015-215  10-5-2015             260.06
2015-254  12-21-2015            TSO D
2016-1    1-19-2016             259.02
2016-2    1-19-2016             258.03,
                                258.04
2016-15   2-1-2016              242.06
2016-16   2-1-2016              256.01
2016-17   2-1-2016              234.03
2016-52   3-21-2016             260.13
2016-55   3-21-2016             406.06
2016-123  7-18-2016             TSO I
2016-125  7-18-2016             TSO F
2016-130  6-20-2016             TSO E
                                1254.01 
2016-153  9-9-2016              1254.15,
                                1254.99
2016-160  9-19-2016             TSO B
2016-165  9-19-2016             406.06
2016-167  10-4-2016             254.03
2016-168  10-4-2016             260.13
2016-169  10-4-2016             244.01
2016-171  10-17-2016            TSO B
2016-177  10-17-2016            TSO E
2016-178  10-17-2016            TSO B
2016-179  10-17-2016            TSO E
2016-180  10-17-2016            TSO B
2016-193  11-7-2016             TSO E
2016-208  12-5-2016             TSO E
                                1257.01 
2016-208A 12-19-2016            1257.17,
                                1257.99
2016-209  12-19-2016            1046.04
2016-221  12-29-2016            TSO E
2017-05   1-17-2017             406.06
2017-38   2-21-2017             TSO E
2017-58   3-20-2017             TSO B
2017-75   4-17-2017             406.06
2017-82   5-1-2017              TSO E
2017-91   5-15-2017             406.06
2017-94   5-15-2017             TSO B
2017-95   5-15-2017             TSO B
2017-131  8-7-2017              1046.04
2017-150  8-21-2017             TSO E
2017-158  9-8-2017              238.04
2017-182  10-16-2017            TSO E
2017-193  5-8-2018 (adopted)    TSO I
2018-01   2-20-2018             1060.08
2018-02   1-16-2018             260.055
                                891.02,
                                891.04,
2018-03   1-16-2018             891.05,
                                891.07,
                                891.18
2018-26   2-20-2018             TSO F
2018-42   2-20-2018             TSO E
2018-55   3-5-2018              TSO B
2018-59   5-21-2018             253.01,
                                253.02
2018-60   3-19-2018             891.27
2018-134  7-16-2018             TSO E
2018-160  11-6-2018 (adopted)   TSO I
2018-176  8-6-2018              TSO B
2018-184  8-20-2018             406.06
2018-198  9-17-2018             TSO D
2018-218  10-15-2018            TSO E
2018-246  11-5-2018             TSO E
2018-251  12-17-2018            260.12
2018-252  12-17-2018            260.08
2018-253  12-17-2018            260.07
2018-254  12-17-2018            260.17
2018-277  11-19-2018            TSO E
2018-282  12-17-2018            1046.04
2019-70   3-18-2019             406.06
2019-59   4-15-2019             234.12
2019-108  6-17-2019             234.017
2019-116  6-17-2019             260.13
2019-115  7-15-2019             282.01 -
                                282.03
2019-119  7-15-2019             406.06
2019-127  11-5-2019             TSO I
2019-128  11-5-2019             TSO I
2019-136  7-15-2019             240.17
2019-160  8-19-2019             TSO B
2019-190  10-21-2019            406.06
2019-195  12-16-2019            260.13
2020-29   2-18-2020             TSO B
2020-049  3-2-2020              TSO I
2020-51   3-2-2020              TSO E
2020-52   4-20-2020             1424.11
2020-53   3-16-2020             259.02,
                                259.03
2020-103  6-1-2020              TSO C
2020-104  6-1-2020              TSO D
2020-105  6-1-2020              TSO B
2020-155  8-17-2020             TSO D
2020-170  11-16-2020            244.02
2020-171  11-16-2020            252.01
2020-172  11-16-2020            1046.04
2020-192  11-16-2020            TSO B
2020-210  12-21-2020            636.203,
                                636.207
2021-18   2-1-2021              253.01,
                                253.02
2021-20   2-16-2021             240.16
2021-59   3-15-2021             TSO E
2021-74   4-19-2021             634.08,
                                634.10
2021-75   4-19-2021             1046.04
2021-76   4-19-2021             253.03,
                                253.04
2021-77   4-19-2021             Repealed 254.01, 254.02; Renumbered 254.03 to
                                254.01
                                258.03,
2021-78   4-19-2021             258.05,
                                258.06
2021-79   4-19-2021             234.12
2021-83   4-19-2021             TSO E
2021-84   4-19-2021             TSO E
2021-85   4-19-2021             TSO E
2021-86   4-19-2021             TSO E
2021-87   4-19-2021             TSO E
2021-104  5-17-2021             TSO E
2021-105  5-17-2021             TSO E
2021-119  7-19-2021 (11-2-2021) TSO I
2021-122  6-7-2021              660.13
2021-124  6-7-2021              TSO E
2021-125  6-7-2021              TSO E
2021-126  6-7-2021              TSO E
2021-127  6-7-2021              TSO E
2021-133  6-7-2021              TSO E
2021-134  6-7-2021              TSO E
2021-147  7-19-2021             234.07
2021-148  7-19-2021             TSO E
2021-149  7-19-2021             TSO E
2021-150  7-19-2021             TSO E
2021-173  8-16-2021             Charter, Ed. Note
2021-177  8-16-2021             TSO E
2021-178  8-16-2021             TSO E
2021-180  8-16-2021             TSO E
2021-189  8-27-2021             TSO E
2021-193  9-9-2021              TSO E
2021-194  9-9-2021              TSO E
2021-197  9-9-2021              TSO F
2021-209  10-18-2021            253.05
2021-216  10-18-2021            TSO B
2021-226  11-1-2021             TSO E
2021-231  11-15-2021            TSO E
2021-249  12-6-2021             TSO E
2021-250  12-20-2021            TSO E
2022-10   1-18-2022             TSO E
2022-11   1-18-2022             TSO E
2022-12   1-18-2022             TSO E
2022-32   2-7-2022              260.07
2022-33   2-7-2022              260.09
2022-34   2-22-2022             TSO F
2022-45   2-7-2022              TSO E
                                1257.06,
                                1257.07,
2022-66   3-7-2022              1257.08,
                                1257.09,
                                1257.10,
                                1257.12
2022-67   3-7-2022              1482.09,
                                1482.10
2022-77   3-7-2022              TSO E
2022-78   3-7-2022              TSO E
2022-79   3-7-2022              TSO E
2022-87   3-21-2022             TSO E
2022-88   3-21-2022             TSO E
2022-89   3-21-2022             TSO E
2022-92   4-18-2022             1046.04
2022-122  5-2-2022              234.14
2022-124  5-16-2022             TSO B
2022-125  5-16-2022             TSO E
2022-129  5-16-2022             TSO E
2022-133  5-16-2022             TSO F
2022-137  5-16-2022             TSO F
2022-144  7-18-2022             206.01
2022-166  7-18-2022             672.10
2022-167  7-18-2022             294.01
2022-203  9-19-2022             1044.05,
                                1044.219
2022-220  12-15-2022            212.01 -
                                212.06
2022-254  12-19-2022            TSO B
2023-21   1-17-2023             TSO E
2023-38   2-6-2023              1046.04
2023-50   2-21-2023             234.07
2023-63   4-3-2023 (11-7-2023)  TSO I
2023-77   3-20-2023             259.02
2023-88   4-17-2023             1046.04
2023-89   4-17-2023             TSO I
2023-91   5-15-2023             234.03
2023-94   4-17-2023             TSO E
2023-125  5-15-2023             1660.11
2023-139  5-15-2023             TSO C
2023-140  5-15-2023             TSO B
2023-145  11-20-2023            891.01
2023-149  7-17-2023 (11-7-2023) TSO I
2023-150  7-17-2023 (11-7-2023) TSO I
2023-153  6-20-2023             TSO B
2023-159  6-20-2023             TSO D
2023-165  7-17-2023             TSO E
2023-176  8-7-2023              TSO B
2023-184  8-7-2023              TSO E
2023-185  8-7-2023              TSO E
2023-186  8-7-2023              TSO E
2023-187  8-7-2023              TSO B
2023-188  8-7-2023              TSO B
2023-191  8-23-2023             406.06
2023-197  8-23-2023             TSO B
2023-208  9-18-2023             TSO B
2023-209  9-18-2023             TSO B
2023-217  9-18-2023             TSO B
2023-218  9-18-2023             TSO B
2023-237  11-6-2023             TSO B
2023-269  12-18-2023            TSO F
                                891.02,
2023-275  12-18-2023            891.03,
                                891.05,
                                891.18
2024-2    1-16-2024             234.03
2024-3    1-16-2024             234.07
                                1046.041,
                                1046.06,
2024-30   2-20-2024             1046.07,
                                1046.09,
                                1046.12
2024-57   3-18-2024             242.01
2024-73   4-15-2024             234.035
2024-92   5-6-2024              TSO F
2024-104  5-20-2024             234.12
2024-113  6-17-2024             1072.01
2024-131  7-15-2024             TSO F
2024-160  10-21-2024            TSO E
2024-161  10-21-2024            TSO F
2024-163  9-16-2024             TSO B
2024-203  11-18-2024            1046.04
2024-204  11-18-2024            240.16
2024-205  11-18-2024            1424.11
2024-206  11-18-2024            1430.01
2024-215  11-18-2024            TSO E
2024-216  11-18-2024            TSO E
2024-237  12-16-2024            TSO D
2025-1    1-21-2025             242.01
2025-2    1-21-2025             TSO E
2025-21   2-18-2025             1046.04
2025-52   3-3-2025              TSO E
2025-68   3-17-2025             TSO B
2025-83   4-21-2025             260.02
2025-85   4-21-2025             TSO B
2025-86   4-21-2025             TSO D
2025-112  6-2-2025              804.01
2025-126  6-16-2025             TSO E
2025-139  7-7-2025              1046.04
2025-152  8-18-2025             TSO I
2025-169  9-15-2025             240.01
2025-170  9-15-2025             260.06
2025-197  10-20-2025            TSO F
2025-214  11-17-2025            TSO B
2025-228  12-1-2025             TSO E
2025-231  12-15-2025            TSO B
2025-238  12-15-2025            TSO B
2025-239  12-15-2025            TSO F
                               
 
 
